---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qT0veYof0LQ
---

# Video
#36 How corporate media helped steer leftist uprisings right with Vincent Bevins
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qT0veYof0LQ)

## Transcript:
hey guys today we're talking with
Vincent bevans he's a journalist and
author his latest book is called if we
burn the mass protest decade and the
missing Revolution it's really good um
both AR and I are fans of his work in
general his last book his first book
called The Jakarta method is an awesome
book about us interventions abroad
centered on Indonesia in the 1960s his
new book that we're going to discuss
today is about the much more modern era
he took some time traveling to the
ridiculous number of countries we're
going to ask him about that um traveling
around to understand what exactly
happened from the period of around 2010
to 2020 when Mass protests broke out in
different countries across the world so
he ties them all together in his book
and tries to try to give us a sense of
of what the hell was going on um so with
that said um thank you Vincent for
taking some time to talk with us today
hi Vincent yeah no thank you thank you
so much for having me can you first give
us a sense of the scope of the book can
you tell us a little bit about what was
the big question uh that you were trying
to answer when you when you began this
this incredibly ambitious project um it
is ambitious so what I did is I set
myself a task which is necessarily
impossible we'll never you can never do
it fully and you can never do it fully
correctly but what I try to do is to
tell the history of the world from 2010
to 2020 but obviously you can't do that
I tried to build the history around one
very specific phenomenon which I think
really drove a lot of events in the
2010s which is mass protests that got so
big they either overthrew or
fundamentally destabilized countries so
I try to build a history of the world as
if that's the most important thing that
happened in the 2010s and I think I
think it makes as much sense to claim
that that is the most important thing
that happened as anything else right so
like any work of history I have to
include and exclude based around a
Central concern and the whole history is
built around that phenomenon and it's
built around a I think
a mysterious but important question
which is how is it that so many of those
Mass protests apparently led to the
opposite of what they asked for so to
carry that out to try to like to do this
make this attempt at this first draft of
History um of this very important but I
think confounding set of phenomena I
spent four years doing 250 interviews in
12 countries so I tried to talk to the
people that were either at the very
beginning of these Mass protests um that
organized or put together the things
that became the explosions people that
lived through them uh the governments
that tried to or had to respond to them
in some way and then everybody wherever
they are now looking back um I asked
them to tell me what they thought
happened what they wish had gone
differently what they think they learned
uh and and and and how they answered
that question themselves how is it that
so many of these these Mass uprisings
didn't lead to what they asked for even
led to the opposite yeah and often it's
the case that they get an even more
repressive uh regime uh than the one
they're trying to over overturn so it's
not even just the Opposites it's just
much worse so for the sake of the
audience um what were the countries you
looked at for the book yeah so I did 10
to I outlined 13 cases and I ultimately
decided that 10 of them were actually
the kind of type of mass protest event
that I think is um that I that I chose
to analyze uh so that's Tunisia Egypt
Yemen Bahrain turkey Brazil Ukraine Hong
Kong South Korea Chile so you have the
first wave you have the first wave the
so-called Arab Spring in North Africa
2011 you have wave two where you have
three
quite strangely similar uprisings in
Turkey Brazil and Ukraine so like wave
two is is 2013 uh then you get Hong Kong
in 2014 I also talk briefly about Libya
and Syria but I I kind of decide that it
is not actually the same dynamic as
Egypt or Tunisia where it is a protest
that that that gets large enough to
really Drive things it ends up being um
military uh a military conflict um um
pretty early um and then I also talked
about Indonesia uh but again which is an
important part of the book in 201 uh 16
but doesn't overthrow or or destabilize
that country so that's what it is and
then the the decade rounds out with
really the pandemic and this is
forgotten because the news cycle in late
2019 and early 2020 understandably is
all about the impending
covid-19 uh pandemic like what's
happening with this virus but as the
decade ends you had huge explosions all
over uh North Africa Latin America uh uh
uh and many other parts of the world but
I I end the book on on Chile in South
Korea so those are the final two cases
was there something um like uniting all
the protests that was happening at this
time in the world that triggered all of
them some kind of common common factor
that explains why they were happening
then so that is something that
is a hard question to answer um and
attempts are made and when those
attempts are made I think some theories
end up being more credible than others
um but you really are kind of doing it
afterwards so a really Cal
story is that all of this is a reaction
to the 2008 financial crisis um the
decimation of many countries under
neoliberalism and the failure of
Representative Elites to respond to the
crisis in the right way I think that's
part of the story I think that's that's
a that's a coherent answer um another
part of the story which I think is
overstated is that it's all about social
media so I think social media is a part
of the story um so in every case that I
chose as I said the protest got so big
that they either overthrew or
fundamentally destabilized a government
and when that happens you have to have
more than just two causes you have to
have five six seven causes um so I would
add those as the Deep background to a
lot of them the crisis of representation
in in global politics the feeling which
is more true in in certain places that
it is in others that uh the governments
that are supposed to represent the
people don't um and so Mass protest
becomes a a an obvious response to that
but then you but then in each individual
case you have to look at the local
causes that interact with those other
three to make add up to four five six
seven eight you might have Elites are
are fighting amongst themselves you
might have um a case of viral repression
this is very common a case of police
brutality that that access a trigger you
might get a case of a leader responding
in a very stupid way to a small set of
protests causing cusing them to get much
bigger so there's always a lot of um
answers but those first three are the
ones that are common I think across the
decade and one thing that we see in the
2010s is some parts and this is common
in other periods of revolutionary
Outburst throughout history um is you
see Co countries being inspired by
things that happen in other places and
even copying what they were doing um so
you get so you get like a certain
response to real problems being kind of
copying copied and pasted around the
world very quickly even in in
circumstances where the conditions
really different and then often you got
the media who play a really big role I
think in in making any protest effective
or ineffective often looking at one
country and because it like at first
glance looks like this other one being
interpreted as as if it's the exact same
thing even though the actual real
reasons for the Revolt are very very
different and you know this might be a
democracy where this is a dictatorship
this might be a country which is quite
Rich whereas this the one that's quite
poor um so you have this weird this
weird overlap of a lot of commonalities
but also a lot of differences that are
ignored um um at times which I think in
ways they become important yeah that's
super interesting um can you can you
give us an example of that like of one
of the countries you studied or looked
into like where the actual result was
distorted in in the way that you're
talking about yeah so talk really is
really the main one here um you could if
you wanted to you could I mean my focus
in the book ends up being more on Brazil
than any other country because this is
the this is where I lived from 2010 to
2016 this is the the case that I know
best but you could really call this the
T your decade right like you could
really cause call this the decade in
which the images coming out of Cairo in
late 2011 and early 2012 are so
inspiring and I think undeniably
inspiring that you get attempts to
create this all around around the world
but this starts even before that right
because in Tunisia in late 2010 you get
an uprising which proceeds along a
trajectory which is a little bit easier
to um it's a little easier to
differentiate the actors like okay you
have this Union that joins the Revolt
you have this Civil Society group that
joins the Revolt you have um this
political party that's doing this this
political party that's doing that and of
course I think that is one of many
things one of you know you probably
would come up with more but um the
example of Tunisia is added into this
mix of three four five other things that
makes January 25th happen that makes
January 28th happen right is the is the
is the is the in addition to social
media in addition to all the problems
that have been happening in the country
the inspiration of of Tunisia is one
more that adds to this um mix but then
after when you get the square when you
get the whole world looking what's
happening um in the center of Cairo this
inspires quite a lot of other people in
other countries to try to do the exact
same thing um so the most famous one in
the United States is Occupy Wall Street
which is adbusters magazine which is
like a magazine that I remember from I
remember from the 90s and the 2000s days
of the alter globalization movement
they're trying to do talk Square in New
York like that's explicitly the goal
which like you know the inspiration of
Egypt is obvious I said it's like so
easy to understand why this is such a
powerful image but like if you think
exactly about the US political system
it's like
well would you want like the military to
overthrow Obama and then promise to do
new elections you know like that was
that that was the outcome in Egypt like
would you want essentially the military
to seize power and then say okay just
trust us we're going to do a better job
you I think in Egypt a lot of people
celebrated as that as that as better
than what had come before in the US this
was strange but then this goes on and on
and on what I find is really interesting
and as you go further into the decade
you still get this process of copying
and pasting after the ccq after things
don't go the way that people wanted them
to in 2011 in 2014 in Hong
Kong you get the Occupy Central movement
uh what ends up becoming the called the
umbrella movement but this is an attempt
to copy Occupy Wall Street which was a
copy of T Square which was inspired by
Tunisia and when this happens in 2014
it's already clear that 2011 didn't go
the way that the original organizers
wanted it to be but yet but yet but yet
this process of repetition keeps
happening and I think part of this is
the m is the can be blamed on people
like in my class foreign correspondents
in the big Global media that show up
broadcast the euphoric images don't
explain really what's happening and
often even toer Square itself was
interpreted I think in strange Ways by
people in my class as if it was the fall
of the Berlin Wall you got this
narrative all the time oh it's like the
Brin it's follow the Brin ball just
because there's a lot of crowds in the
street right just because that you know
that means it's the same thing um but
then then they go away then you don't
get the global media actually really
explaining what happens in in the long
term you get you get the the the The
Shining inspiring example that continues
to serve as an example deep deep you
know further and further into the decade
even in like either even after it didn't
work or in cases like Brazil
uh which I lived through in 2013 some
commentators called the uh uh the mass
protest in Brazil you know the Brazilian
spring but this was really strange they
didn't know what to do with this energy
in the streets because there was a
democratically elected very popular
president um and so if you take this to
its logical conclusion then you have to
overthrow her which they did three years
later and it was quite traumatic uh in
the Brazilian context so really yeah
really a different way to write this
book if I if I were more knowledgeable
in Arab on on on on the Arab world and
spoke Arabic would be to call it the T
decade so what actually happened in
Brazil yeah it's a really strange
and it's a really strange
and tragic story like it's really really
weird what happens and the weirdness of
that story is what drove my interest in
this topic in general like I lived
through it very close I mean like it I
was you know I was hit in the repression
whatever I don't care but I was like in
the in the Crackdown that caused the
explosion there's tear gas outside of my
apartment for all of
2013 and just like many other people
that lived through it what happened over
the next few years like made no sense it
makes no sense how was it possible that
in early June
2013 a group of dedicated hardworking
idealistic leftists and anarchists put
together a protest against the rise in
the bus Fair how is it that by the end
of the month millions of people join
their struggle millions of
people enter the
streets behind them but then just a few
days later after
that the beginning of a far-right
movement actually throws them out of the
streets how is that possible and then
how is it possible that Mo movements
born in June 2013 groups that formed in
that weird pressure cooker of June 2013
end
up pretending to be I mean this is
something that I don't know if you agree
this something that kind of reminded me
a little bit of of what happens before
June 2013 in in Egypt is that you get
groups pretending to be the same kind of
deal you get a group that emerges that
is actually get receiving financing from
outside of the country but pretends to
be the same kind of a Grassroots
idealistic Lo youth Le revolutionary
movement and they put together a new
protest uh movement that is calling for
the impeachment of the president they
put a new Pro protest movement um that
pretends to be all the things that the
first one was but it wasn't and this one
of the things that really reminded me of
June 2013 and I and uh uh uh uh uh
you'll tell me how much this you find
this convincing is that with this new
protest movement that was pretending to
be Grassroots and
revolutionary people entered the streets
and it's like oh no like the cops aren't
fighting us the cops are like with us
the mil like everyone's with the protest
like the military is with the protest
the media is with what's going on um and
then that what actually happens is they
remove the president yeah exactly and
then and then you find out later that it
was funded by some uh by some foreign
power yeah which is precisely the case
with how do you pronounce it tomod what
is it yeah exactly Tomar yeah it was um
it was funded by the UAE yeah exactly
and this is so this was something that I
found was quite the that analog between
that analogy between Brazil and Egypt
was quite fascinating to me because we
found out way later we found out
later that the group that formed in June
2013 as an intentional copy of the
original Anarchist and leftist the
original Anarchist and leftist group was
called MPL the group that was formed in
their at this like right afterwards like
they realized oh the whole country loves
this thing this big protest thing the
whole country loves the MPL so they
formed a group called The MPL and in
Brazil they only it was only discovered
much much later um not only did this
group receive funding in this case from
the United States of course tomato was
the UAE um that the laaj anti-corruption
Crusade which also grew out of this
strange explosion in 2013 had been
working behind the scenes with the US
government the whole time and ultimately
after the removal of um um dma rusth in
2016 a lot of these actors join a new
more extremee farri movement and end up
helping to elect Gyer bolaro in 2018 and
actually entering entering the
government so that I'm happy to go into
like how that flip happened in June
because it was like dayto day hour to
hour things just became very strange and
I think media had a lot to do with it
without even really trying to which was
a really another strange thing is that
even though powerful forces took
advantage of what exploded I don't think
anybody knew what they were doing while
it was
unfolding um but just like June
2013 yeah I mean people told me in in in
June 20 203 people told me in June uh
2013 in Egypt that they didn't exactly
know or they were surprised by what they
ended up having Taken part in like Oh I
thought I was taking part in this and it
turned out that I was taking part in
that yeah so I'd be super curious to
know uh whether the US knew that uh
Egypt Was preparing for aoup or the
military was um before June 2013 or even
green lit it uh because we know
that the US and Egyptian militaries have
very close ties so that for me would be
the big uh the big thing that we'd still
want to know yeah I mean I think that is
a big question so like a lot of what
happens in the book is that
initially
successful movements revolutionary
movements or uprisings face like an
imperialist Counterattack and sometimes
that imperialist Counterattack is like
really obvious like Saudi Arabia es
Bin's Uprising they just they drive over
the bridge and they Crush bakar's
Uprising and in other cases it comes
more slowly and the foreign funding or
the foreign support for whatever is
happening uh only becomes clear later
it's more subtle and so I think yeah
this is a big question I don't know the
answer I'm really interested to know
okay to what extent did the US
government know in May
2013 what the Gulf States were cooking
what they were what they were pushing
for and did did they know that they were
probably pushing for that and then they
decided that that would be that they
were going to go along with it or did
they find out that they were pushing for
it and decide well if it's that's what
we're going to get that's what we were
gonna get because that's because that's
the official narrative eventually right
is that after the actual CC C that the
Obama Administration goes well you
know this new government promises to be
good on
fighting islamism right which is often
even like also about like a government
that not support like uh that will not
be Pro Palestine right that will be that
that that will play the traditional role
post Camp David of a Egyptian ruler that
plays by the rules plays by the rules of
Israel and in us and gmany in the in in
in the region and so yeah I think that's
really interesting like because you know
the CIA like the CIA note like even when
you're not accusing the CIA of being an
agency that plots behind the scenes
which they always have been they are
quite good at like collecting
intelligence that's their that's what
they're supposed to be doing so um I
think I'm I'm yeah I I'm again I'm not
an expert on this and I looked hard to
try to find who are the people that
really have the best evidence and I
think it's not clear yet I mean but um
but those are those are big questions I
think at the very least like we we do
know that the uh the Obama
Administration basically
supported to some degree what was going
on um with the coup in 2013 because
right afterwards uh they refused to use
the word coup because if they did they
would have to cut us AIDS Egypt so they
basically just danced around the issue
and and and let it happen oh yeah they
definitely they ultimately went along
with it so like that's even the official
narrative is that it happens and they're
like oh I don't know I guess we'll go
along with it the other uh question is
well did they know beforehand did they
say okay yes you can do this because
Gulf States as far as I know have just
like Israel have at some points in
recent history done things without the
US really wanting them to and then the
US goes I guess we'll go along with that
there you know whatever right um but I'd
be interested to know who who knew what
was planned in May
2013 uh and how much there was sort of a
green light given or or because you know
the traditional us Allies won right like
you know even though the US government
always always supports in theory in
general democracy more concretely it has
supported us and Israel or the US has
supported Saudi and Israeli power in in
in in the Middle East since you know the
60s so yeah I think that's a really
interesting question in Brazil what you
H happened what happens which is really
interesting is that in June
2013 the Brazilian government
believes because the Brazilian
government dma Rusev is somebody that
came up in the struggle against the
dictatorship she used to be a dissident
she used to be a revolutionary she was
tortured by the dictatorship she beli
believes in protest she believes in
trying to give the people what they want
right she gets a call from Aron in
Turkey who's who has his own GUI Park
Uprising and Aron says we're all being
we're all the victims of foreign
intervention right now there's there's a
push around the world to destabilize and
topple and D was like no come on no the
people the people want more and that's
it's their right to want more I'm going
to give it to them by the end of the
decade by the end of the book she comes
to a different conclus she's like well I
don't know exactly what was happening
but I do believe that in that moment
there was the beginning of an ultimately
foreign
backed um uh movement to remove or a
foreign back movement that resulted in
in in my removal in a coup and and I
think a lot of the stuff in Brazil it is
more reactive like I think June 2013
explodes in a way that really nobody
could understand no one could predict
but then when it does explode the groups
that are already there that are already
relatively well financed that already
kind of know how to play this game
they're willing to rush into the the
vacuum they're really they're willing to
rush into the chaos and to try to shape
it according to their will and the the
original punks and anarchists don't
believe in shaping reality according to
their will they believe that they're
supposed to cause the revolt and then go
away they don't they don't believe in
leadership um and and the groups that
are already well prepared some being
funded by Brazilian Elites some being
funded by us think tanks they end up
kind of I think winning the battle to
Define what's happening on the streets
in June
2013 um and yeah and then then they like
actually throw the original organizers
off the
street so as you mentioned in the case
of Brazil that there was us financing
involved so what what did that look like
what was the like what was the nature of
that financing so it was so the group
that the original group The
M um was fully autonomous fully fully
Grassroots fully like
they were they acted really on their own
they were and then the group that was
formed in June
2013 after the everything kicked off
after the whole country started to love
the MPL the MBL was receiving funding
from uh libertarian right-wing think
tanks based in the United States so not
the US government um uh Affiliates of
the atlas Network which is this this
Global Network of of right-wing think
tanks and one of the kids had studied
under one of the kids had done a
training program under the Koch brothers
you know the who who were famously
responsible for like funding tea party
protests back in in the US so was in the
states and then one of the things that
emerged out of the June 2013 protests is
a focus on corruption which is of course
a problem almost everywhere especially
in the global South but really actually
everywhere but the question is how are
you actually going to combat corruption
and the very specific way that
corruption was combed from 2013 to 2018
was this or this operation called
laatu which presented itself as
apolitical presented itself as very
heroically standing up to corruption but
we found out later two things after Zyer
bolaro was
elected um the most probably the most
extreme right president in the El in the
in the Democratic world uh at the time
after he's elected these the major
figures in the laaj OR Car Wash
anti-corruption
Crusade reveal themselves to actually be
political actors the whole time go I
made political they the main guy joins
the farri government he reveals that he
is also on the far right and then we
find out soon afterwards that these guys
had been working behind the scenes with
the US government the whole time the
state department and the justice
department now are uh sorry the justice
department in the FBI are the justice
department in the
FBI working behind the scenes because
for a particular ideological or
geopolitical reason or are they just
like they just believe that they're
helping to fight corruption in Brazil we
don't know Lula speculates that they
wanted to crush that the United States
government wanted to crush powerful
Brazilian firms that were that uh uh
that were uh uh posing a problem to US
economic interests around the world but
we do know that behind the scenes and we
find out later the laato uh
anti-corruption Crusade which has now
been revealed to be incredibly corrupt
itself like they broke all kinds of laws
the Supreme Court has thrown the ruling
against Lula the Supreme Court has ruled
that this main judge um acted
impartially which like in judicial
language that mean like that's really
that's a quite a bad thing to do when
you're a judge right uh he failed to act
impartially which means that he was he
was um pushing for his own so it's all
been proved proven that they were
actually quite corrupt themselves but
that movement did interact with the US
government so these are ways that like
subtly you get the Counterattack to
these Mass protest explosions um that
come in ways which are less visible than
for example like Libya where NATO bombs
the country or Bahrain where Saudi
Arabia comes over comes over the uh over
the bridge oh so so given that you
looked at all these different um
cases uh what which ones for you or is
there one that still has the biggest
question marks over it uh in the sense
that we still don't really know what
actually happened or whether there was a
much bigger foreign component to local
protests or the outcome than than we
know now what what what for you where
are the where are the big question marks
still no that's a really good question
um there are cases so there are cases
that you know the
my the Criterion that I employed for
choosing the cases in this book is
purely quantitative like I I didn't pick
them based on how real they are or how
much I like the politics of the movement
or or how much I think that they were
inspiring Etc I just chose them based on
how big they got so the ones they got
big enough to fundamentally destabilize
an existing government uh or overthrow
it that's it um so there are a couple
cases where we know that people from
that were there either at the like the
whole time that were fundamental to the
thing from the very beginning not
responding but actually there from the
very beginning uh we getting foreign
funding uh that's Ukraine and Hong Kong
and that's and that's not like and
that's not
uh that's not like uh a conspiracy like
I I talked to them I talked to those
people about this you know the people in
Ukraine said yeah yeah yeah you know we
were funded by either Soros or or or
Western backed NOS or our NOS get
Western Funding and like we wish we
didn't have to but you know that's
that's how these things works that's how
these things work so the the like the a
lot of the first people on the street in
Ukraine in 2013 were getting money from
uh the west but then a lot of other
normal people joined the protests um and
then in Ukraine or sorry in Hong Kong we
do know about Ned funding for this one
um uh uh labor union there's two labor
unions in Hong Kong like one's prob
Beijing one's more Pro uh uh autonomy or
democracy and so again we know that they
got funding so that those things aren't
really Mysteries as much as they are
just parts of the story and like again I
asked the people like oh is that sh like
yeah yeah we did some people in Hong
Kong say it was a mistake to take that
money some people in Hong Kong say well
it's all right Etc but what is more
interesting is in Hong Kong is that a
lot of the the actual organizers
a lot of the people who put together the
first big rallies which you know like a
lot of countries things change but the
media treats it like it's all one thing
in Hong Kong you get like some really
big marches in the middle of the country
in sorry you get some really big marches
in the middle of the the year which
demonstrate there's quite a lot of
people that that are behind whatever
this particular cause is at this moment
but then you get things going on in a
more radical and decentralized and and
and diffuse way which a lot of people
withdraw support for they think have
either goes too far or changes the focus
but anyways what I find interesting is
that that a lot of the people that I
spoke to that put together these big
popular initial
marches came to the conclusion in 2021
2022 as we're doing interviews that
actually the US used us we were kind of
tricked by the US the US didn't care
about us winning they cared about
screwing with
Beijing and we
were whether we knew it or not at the
time
kind of
um uh we were kind of we were under
Illusions about what the US was trying
to do and then I I went back to one of
these guys and I said I was just like
doing all the fact checking because we
had you know peer review fact checking
on this book like I said like it's
really ambitious and like there's going
to be failures but I wanted to get as
right as possible so I go I went back in
factchecking in Ukraine and I told one
of this main uh I I showed the quotes
back to one of these main Hong Kong
organizers and he's like oh I did I do I
do believe that but I can't believe I
told you that I didn't know that I was
that honest with you like that was
something that I kept to myself I uh I I
do think that now but I I hadn't I
wasn't I didn't know that I had gone
public with that thought so I think in
every case but in every single case and
I say this at the end of the book you
know this is the nature ironically it's
the nature of the really imperfect
global system that we do have that big
powerful self-interested states do bad
stuff secretly and it's the you know
it's what we have to deal with as
journalists or historians or whatever in
this particular kind of imperfect system
that we're not going to find out the
full truth until later so I'm I look
forward to being surprised and shocked
or maybe not surprised but still shocked
by revelations in the future but that's
what you get when you have a a world of
often imperialist self-interested states
that that use covert action as a matter
of course yeah and and you can even um
interpret the
the Egyptian revolution in 2011 as a
sort of rejection of of the western
neoliberal policies because Mubarak
really was um the Arab face of a lot of
these policies he um you know under
under Mubarak there was more and in the
2000s particularly there was more
privatization deals than anywhere else
in the in the Middle East and so you
know Egypt really was uh sort of darling
of the IMF and the World Bank and and
the whole Washington consensus so when
people go out and protest uh calling for
you know bread freedom and social
justice this really was a rejection of
of those of those policies even though
that's not how the Revolution was framed
when it was happening yeah yeah and the
only the only thing I would add that
makes it even more in your face is the
other storyline that was going on in the
2011 protest which was just that there
was this rejection of gal Mubarak husy
mubarak's son taking over um and he
really was the the face of of neoliberal
policies he's an investment banker
involved in private equity in the 2000s
and um you know a regular World economic
Forum attendee type um so the fact that
the protests were also rejecting this is
another another element of it being a
rejection of neoliberalism so can you
tell us a little more about the role
that the media played in distorting The
Narrative during the protests in places
like Egypt and Brazil yeah great and
that's good I'm glad you asked that
because that allows you to that allows
me to finish actually answering the
first question you asked that I didn't
really finish
so I already outlined the like the big
big story in Brazil but I want to I'll
do this little bit um that I left out
before on the morning of June
13th 2013 Brazil's mainstream media
which is all oligarch owned perhaps
liberal on social uh issues but um
center right on economic issues they
demanded police Crackdown they said that
the military police need to get out
there and get these kids off the streets
now Brazilian journalists in the big
mainstream Outlets are not from the part
of society that usually actually
receives the violence of police
repression and police in Brazil are
military police and that's a legacy of
the us-backed
dictatorship um so when the Crackdown
comes it really shocks them and when the
Crackdown comes it hits people like me
and people that work in the Brazilian
mainstream media it hits white
middleclass journalists photogenic young
young women who in a way which is
probably um reminiscent of the North
African uprisings become kind of the
face of the thing for a couple days it's
like this was that this was that person
who's in you know if you look really
really closely you know the the the
degree to which these are innocent
perfect representatives of the country
kind of is like doesn't make perfect
sense all the time but there is the
image of a young Italian Brazilian woman
who almost loses her eye that goes viral
and this really shocks the country not
only because it's violence because but
it's a violence against the kind of
person that usually doesn't get
repressed in Brazil so from the morning
to the evening of that day Brazilian
media flip their
narrative they go from saying and you
can watch it happen in real time it's
really strange you could watch it happen
on YouTube like the guy realizing that
the whole that the whole country is kind
of changing their narrative and that
this is looking really bad you can watch
them sort of like the wheels turning in
their head as they come up with a new
story but from the morning to the
evening they go from saying these punks
and anarchists need to be cleared off
the streets to actually this is uh this
is we need to defend freedom from
expression this is actually a patriotic
Uprising in defense
of the right to uprise to rise up in
defense of the the freedom of expression
like they're trying to figure out why
it's good and so between the 13th and
the 17th which is the day of the next
protest you get huge media
coverage of what is the next planned
protest and you get a media which has
going has has been calling everyone
these like troublemakers and punks and
vandals now saying the people are coming
out to stand up to Injustice or whatever
and in those four days the media is not
going to say the same thing as the MPL
the anarchist and punk
like the mainstream media in Brazil
isn't going to
say all public transportation fees
should be
abolished re the Revolutionary battle
with the police is the beginning of an
Insurrection which like obviously that
that obviously that can't be their
reasoning so they have their own kind of
framing they have their own reasons for
why the country is rising up they have
their own reasons for why this is a good
thing and I don't think there's a
conspiracy to like change the narrative
but they're just looking for something
that they can say which is compatible
with their worldview and so these new
narratives tend to be a little bit more
center right they tend to be more a
little bit more anti-political they tend
to be a little bit more anti-corruption
they tend to be more about opposing the
Workers Party government the left the
central left government which is a
government that the original protesters
would have criticized in wanting to
radicalize but not overthrow with a
right-wing response so what you get this
is really fascinating and I watch it
happen in real life and I like like it
happens before my eyes and like the
transformation is really strange is that
on Monday people show up who look really
different than the people who were there
four days before and they they're
wearing instead of like dressing like
punks in black and like you know kind of
typical you know left-wing protester out
outfits they're wearing the Brazilian
national colors they're wearing the
yellow Jersey they're wrapped in the
flag and you see this weird like these
two sides like confronting each other
and looking at each other and not
knowing what to do with each other and
the original protesters say oh no no no
no they're trying to help they they
believe the original protesters believe
that it's their job to like bring them
into this movement they say oh no no no
no actually this is a protest about
social services if you just bring in
flags and empty nationalist slogans
that's actually quite dangerous um the
way that we're do they like started to
explain like hey guys thanks for coming
but here's how to do here's here's what
you're joining and these new guys are
like shut up I don't care about you you
skinny left-wing punks from the the the
poor periphery of this of of the city
I'm here for this reason and I don't
care I don't want a lesson from you shut
up and as you can see and then that
night even though that night even though
the people in the yellow and green kind
of protest performance
outfit to my eyes were only a small
percentage of the people on the streets
when I got home that night and watched
globo which which is the super powerful
television channel which is like
arguably responsible for like to the
extent that Brazil is represented as
like a sexy Beach Country it's because
of this this channel like they're the
Rio based they make all the noas it's a
really powerful television channel when
I get home that night the people in the
yellow and green patriotic gear that's
all they're showing and I'm like well I
guess they just were looking at a
different part of it than I was uh I
only saw a few of those guys and they
were new and it was weird but then this
is all the country is seeing and then
the president goes on television soon
afterwards and
she interprets the protest as if the
green and yellow costume is the one that
is everyone's wearing because she can't
do what I'm doing which is walk around
the streets right she has to watch from
the presidential Palace and then the
next day after those images are
transmitted showing that actually this
is more of a patriotic thing the next
day it actually really is by the next
day the more majority of the people are
in a more patriotic gear
until by the
20th the Patriotic more anti-political
and there's like this weird slippage
where they're like this weird confusion
where the original protest were
nonpartisan the the the new arrivals are
anti-party so anybody that is Vis
visibly from any kind of a political
tendency is like they're they're not
you're not supposed to be doing that so
by the 20th just you know seven day you
know six seven days after the original
Crackdown the yellow and green bulkier
whiter more conservative people on the
streets throw out the original
protesters and
again that
is that is one more piece of evidence
for what I argue in the book I think
like most real Scholars of protest agree
on is that they protest always exist in
some kind of back and forth with media
like um some kind of media whether it's
social media or traditional media like
the vast majority of people are going to
find out about a protest because of some
kind of media they're not going to hear
about it firsthand you know from someone
on the
streets and and it was only because of
the the you would have never gotten that
new type of arrival with that new type
of understanding without the narrative
that was given to regular people that of
course weren weren't there the first day
they don't know these Anarchist they
don't they're not members of their
Facebook group which is where a lot of
the the original invitations were were
um Extended and so like that's one of
the things that I come the conclusions I
come to in the book is the media the
media representation of these events of
these movements not only changed the way
that the rest of the world saw them but
they actually changed the thing they
actually re re reconfigure the real
movement and then just to go back to
Egypt I think like this won't be so I
mean maybe you'll have memories or or or
or or um accounts that
uh are similar but like what I found was
that a lot of the people that had put
together that had been like really
fighting behind the scenes from 2008 to
2001 to put together the protest
movement they necessarily you know they
came often out of pro Palestine um
movements they they came out of they
they like got to know each other
protesting the war in Iraq um they
thought that necessarily this would be
kind of an anti yeah exactly and that's
why um like protests for Palestine are
banned in in in a place like Egypt
because um the government's worried that
if they if they allow these kind of
protests they'll be used as a
springboard for for other sort of
demonstrations against against the state
here so yeah and then and then a lot of
those people those people who had been
you know work you know fighting for
years to put together the beginnings of
a protest movement were really shocked
to see sort of you like Global media
show up and act like this was a pro
Western uprising like this was a
movement where Egypt wants to join
America Egypt wants to like become
Junior America whereas these people like
no no we we a real real democracy in
Egypt would challenge the the allies of
the United States in this region um but
you know you know that but uh uh uh with
something like T Square there was nobody
that you could there was nobody in t
square that could say let me explain to
you what this is all about you had a
multiplicity of ideas of what it was all
about which was you know I think a
strength and a weakness of the type of
uprisings we saw in the 2010s the
problem is that leftists here like
elsewhere don't tend to have a lot of
money so they don't go to private
schools they don't speak English so um
that makes it so that the Foreign Press
often just goes to these Elites to
interview them and of course they tend
to have more Pro Wester views I I know
the Egyptian case less well but yeah but
yeah like hopefully to the extent that
that's I've reproduced that it's all
based on interviews but uh but um yeah
but I think that you know what I can
speak as is a member of the class of
international correspondents that have
the biggest microphone and I think we
shouldn't have the biggest microphone
and we repeatedly failed to use it
responsibly covering a lot of the mass
protests that that are in the book I'm
really interested he both of yeah what
you say on that cuz like yeah that last
element too cuz like earlier when when
you asked me like okay well what were
the you know causes and like each
country had their own individual set of
causes that was a really important one
in the Egyptian context like the ruling
class and the
military upset with that decision to
pass the the country over to uh Mubarak
sun and this is something that like does
come up often when there are successful
revolutions is like splits in the ruling
class and yeah and he was like it was
like people that are definitely not on
the far left that were saying that this
guy is a p like he's a pure creature of
like the worlds of Davos like this is
like a military position you know the
mil Egyptian Military is not like you
know communist so
um this Dynamic was really pronounced
also in Ukraine because like as you said
like
um the people that they can get to come
on TV in Egypt tended to be people that
were speaking English with a nice accent
saying nice things that um would would
be pleasing or comforting to the viewer
of CNN rather than something like we
need to reject us uh usback
neoliberalism and and imperialism in the
Arab world right um and in in in the
case of in the case of Ukraine where
things things are a little bit more
complex in the sense that the country is
more divided there is the
there is because this this narrative
that I'm about to explain the group of
people that I'm about to identify as
being given the largest microphones they
do represent a
real um tendency within Ukrainian
society and they do represent a real
cause around which a lot of people
protested but it but the people that
worked in Civil Society in the capital
of Ukraine in late
2013 tended to
liberals of the type that you would find
in Berlin or or New York they kind of
want the same stuff that or even live
kind of the way that someone in Berlin
lives and not only they speak English
very well and not only do they
um want the same thing that a reader of
the Guardian would want um they work in
these very well-funded and professional
organizations that have like they like
train their people how to speak with the
media they like they know exactly how to
get the right message to the right
people they're good at what they're
doing and again like I'm not trying to
cast aspersion on those people like I
know a lot of them and
like it is relevant that a lot of them
are like friends of my friends because
they come from the same social world as
a lot of foreign correspondents which
means that when foreign correspondents
move to Ukraine that's who they're
hanging out with right and
so that the things that they believe in
are not like wild imperialist positions
a lot of ukrainians want that but all of
the other
ukrainians that don't speak English at
all live very far from the capital maybe
would have thought that yanukovich the
president that was being overthrown
actually sucks but they voted for him
anyways because they thought that he was
better than the other team that
narrative is also one that exists but
doesn't get it's not as easy to has a
very hard time making it onto Western
media and then it's obviously after
Russia starts to infiltrate those parts
of the country they just really get IGN
whatsoever ignored entirely and so this
Dynamic comes up all over the what I
call the mass protest decade even when
it seem even when like kind of I think
like the Egyptian revolution
like a like a lot of the country is
behind January and February uh uh um
2011 whereas Ukraine's kind of really
split and then in Brazil it's like kind
of like it's very it's all over the
place but yet the media including me I
did this me and my friends did this I
remember in June
2013 we had this really strange
explosion that wasn't led by anybody
wasn't really about bus fees anymore
people fighting in the streets and so
our job and this was again this is a
task that is handed to us which I think
we don't
deserve that we play too big of a role
than we should too big of a role a
bigger role than we should we had to go
into the streets and come back with some
kind of an explanation as to what this
thing is about and yeah okay I know
Portuguese I know been in the country
for long enough but even then I found
that the answers we me and my friends I
know the other four or five
correspondents that all did the same
thing on the same day I found that we
all exited the streets or the
squares I think without trying to lie
really we all came with narratives that
were slightly different in ways that
combined that that were compatible with
our own ideological biases so like I I I
was there longer I know I I I knew about
the original demands I sort of already
believed that Brazil needed better
social services so I came back having
talking to a bunch of having spoken to a
bunch of people that did actually say
that um and that was maybe it jumped out
to me and then other colleagues of mine
that that were are more center right or
more they believe this or that they come
back with something that reflects their
own biases and I don't even think that
they were trying to lie I wasn't trying
to lie it's just that like you end up
seeing what you want in an explosion
which is so difficult to interpret and
this is something with the that the
book many of the interviewees came to
this
conclusion many of the
interviewees in Egypt Brazil Ukraine
Hong
Kong Chile came to the conclusion that
this particular type of response to
Injustice the Apparently spontaneous
leaderless digitally coordinated social
media driven
horizontally structured Mass protests
ends up relying too much on people like
me to interpret it it ends up because
there's nobody in there is no there is
nobody in the Square that can say well
actually it's about this and that person
over there that's doing that thing that
no one agrees with you know don't don't
listen to them because there's no one to
say there's no one that can
be professing what it's about meaning
gets imposed from the outside so that's
one part one side of the media coin the
other side of the media coin is that
journalism is really like underfunded
and imperfect and the people that are
running around the world don't really
know what they're doing they're just
often like Rich Americans that just see
what they want to see and those things I
think ended up in uh really like um um
shaping the outcomes in a lot of
countries so in your book you really
urge um other journalists to take
responsibility and be more cautious when
when uh when covering an event outside
of you know their country um and and of
course I agree and I I I respect that
but
um you know can the media be
reformed well this is again I get I I
mean I guess it's
my job to Hope and that media can be
better like I think that
journalism is really like in crisis and
it's getting worse and I hope and like
my wish is to stop that process as much
as possible but I I I think I I think
I'm I think I sympathize with your
cynicism like if there was you know
imagine like because again a lot of this
these kind of explosions rely on the
sympathetic coverage to get the the word
out right because what you can the flip
side of this coin like the one side of
the coin is that if CNN thinks what
you're doing is great they're going to
see what they want to see in the protest
the flip side of that coin is that if
the media doesn't like what's going on
if the media does not sympathize with
the streets then they can also go and
pick Elements which are there and use
that to tell the story and this is what
you saw like at the end of The George
Floyd Uprising in the United States is
that as things gone went on longer and
longer and Uprising which had the
support of the vast majority of the
American people at the beginning as it
goes on longer and longer more
conservative Outlets can find the one or
two or three three incidents of the
craziest or stupid people out of you
know millions and millions and be like
that's what it's all about see that's
what it's all about um and I'm I think
you ask a really good question like H
you ask a really good question like how
would have Global media portrayed the
Egyptian Uprising if it was obvious what
it was really about if there was
somebody that was saying like if there
was an MLK that was
saying uh
uh this is about democracy but also
about imp which did end up saying by the
end of the 60s and this caused quite a
lot of people in the media in America to
hate him and lie about him after he was
killed they like pretended that they
loved him the whole time but when he
actually connected poverty in the United
States uh with us militarism around the
country around the world people got
really mad at him and media lied about
him so I'm really I am sympathetic to
your cynicism so I guess one answer to
that question is
to um one to answer that question that
other people come to at the end of the
book is
try as much as possible and there's no
way out of this because the world is so
mediatized like we're so mediated is to
try to
add forms of struggle which don't rely
on CNN because they're you know they're
not they might be your you could maybe
use them as your friends for a while but
if you really really want to do
something revolutionary they won't be
your friends forever so other forms of
struggle that don't rely on
representation are like Union activity
uh uh strikes
boycotts um um like organized concerted
action on particular Elites but again
like that's easier said than done like
anyone that was that remember you know
Egypt in 2010 there's a reason there
wasn't like strong Civil Society
organizations that could put that kind
of organized pressure because it had
they had been decimated right so um it
like I totally sympathize with your
cynicism like that's there there was no
e easy way out of the situation that
most of these countries were in um in in
this decade and that kind of explains
why the revolts took the form that they
did what's so interesting and so
frustrating is that it seems like in the
2000s you have these protests which are
successful initially in overthrowing
their local dictator but there there's
almost this inability to do anything
with that because these local for forces
quickly discover or maybe they don't
discover but they're kind of thwarted by
the larger the larger Global forces of
imperialism or no I totally agree that
that is a process that I think we
watched play out
often tragically in different countries
that an old lesson was relearned and an
old lesson that was known quite well in
the 20th century is that a a successful
Revolution that actually challenges
larger Power Systems that actually takes
power away from Elites will engender
engender a counter Revolution there will
be a counterrevolutionary reaction so
one conclusion that I come to one
version of the talk that I've been
giving about this book at universities
is that the particular form of Uprising
that we saw in t Square you know as I
already said earlier apparently
leaderless spontaneous digitally
coordinated horizontally
structured Mass prot
test turned out to be way more effective
than we expected at getting people in
the streets and creating revolutionary
situations at creating power Vacuums at
destabilizing existing Elites but it
proved poorly suited to taking advantage
of those power vacuums often you just
whoever was waiting already in the wings
whoever was already was organized uh and
ready to move took took power and then
this particular form is really bad at
defending itself against the
counterrevolution that will come like a
protest of people with different reasons
for being there that don't agree about
what it's all about they don't have a
structure or an organizational Network
that allows them to act collectively
ends up really being vulnerable to to to
counter Revolution so like that's why
that analogy with the Berlin Wall is so
interesting because like if it was like
the Berlin Wall if if it was just kind
of East German
saying we give up
the West we just want you to like pour
into our country and do whatever you
want here which is not exactly what East
Germans were asking for what's it's what
they got um and and it kind of worked
out okay you know at least now they're
German right um but if you're gonna if
you have a movement which is actually
challenging lar larger power structures
if you know and like a democratic Egypt
always will right because like for a
very long time you know the US has been
very afraid of the power of
Arab nationalism Arab socialism what it
means to have an Anti-Imperialist Egypt
I mean us support for both Israel in
Saudi Arabia in the 20th century was
about countering this really powerful
draw of nism right and so if you're if
you end up actually challenging larger
structures if you break out of that
bubble then there is the the
Counterattack and and I think yeah I
I the the structures of that the
very the unjust global system that we
inhabit that will become violent if
necessary to to to maintain
itself became visible as people broke
out of that bubble or like pushed up
against the the real the real nature of
it because people always ask me like how
do my second book relate to my first
book my first book is about like us
violence us backed violence against the
left and the construction of a global
system through imperialist intervention
and I often say that it's an indirect
sequel because in the first book that
system is established and in the second
book at the beginning of each Uprising
you could can kind of forget that you're
still living in it but then horrifying
in horrifying ways it you could start to
see on the horizon oh no we still do
live in that same system we really loved
your first book thank you so much that
yeah shout out to jart Method that's a
it's an incredibly good book um it's
interesting that you you call um this
latest book a sequel to that one yeah
it's like an indirect sequel just to be
clear just for my uh my own
self-interested purposes the first book
is out in Arabic but I really hope the
second one can come out in Arabic like
the people that have the best re this
has like really been nice to me it's
been really really gratifying because
like I know Brazil I don't know North
Africa that well my my like chapter on
um 2010 2011 is like pretty like quick
like it's like pretty basic but like the
nicest responses that I've gotten like
the nicest emails
emails have been people from North
Africa people who were like lived
through Libya lived through Syria live
through Egypt um so I I really hope that
this one can come out in Arabic as well
if anybody knows a publisher get in
touch with me because I'm like actively
looking yeah so we should take this
podcast as a chance to say if there is
any Arabic uh Publishers out there who
wants to take this book it's a huge
opportunity take it while it's hot um
you should get in contact with Vincent
and bring this awesome book to the
Arabic language did you already get a
translated it no no no no no the way
that it works is like and this is this
is a funny thing because like speaking
of the imperialist world system even
though this book is not about the United
States and I'm not in my head I'm not
thinking about a US audience in order to
be viable in order to stay in this world
and keep writing books like this I have
to market the book in the US first like
for like they care so much about the US
audience that I have to kind of pretend
for a while that it's about like that
I'm well not pretend but I have to like
really promote it in the US and only
after it get some amount of success in
the US do they begin to sell translation
rights to different countries around the
world um so uh yeah but like again these
books are not only about the imperialist
world system they also are published
into the imperialist world system so I
have to do I have to do like all America
promotion at first before I can get to
the audiences which I hope to connect
with more which is like
audiences in other
countries yeah well thank you so much
for your time Vincent um and again we
recommend your books to everybody all
our
listeners no I think this was great I
think we've uh this is a good hopefully
this is a good like teaser because
there's so much in the book and as I
said before we started recording like
I've been really like gratified to see
people coming to me
finding things in there that I you know
find like finding their own pieces of uh
little little items that jump out at
them throughout the entire narrative
because it's really put together like a
history that is kind of a story and and
uh yeah so I think we've given
hopefully uh quite a lot of a a sneak
peek and you know any interest in
actually checking out the book or
getting it translated to any language
any language in the entire world is
truly appreciated but for me for for me
I'm really good and I thank you for for
having me on and for your interest yeah
go byy the book Vincent's work is
awesome thank you so much

man


## Keywords:
