---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gifg8cO5Dpc
---

# Video
'Manufacturing Consent' in 2018 (TMBS 58 ft. Matt Taibbi)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gifg8cO5Dpc)

## Transcript:

Matt Taibbi Rolling Stone magazine new
book coming out the fairway we explained
how people get that man yeah you have to
go to Taibbi dotsub STATCOM sort of my
subscriber site and you get access to my
new thing is i'm serializing books
online so I wrote I wrote a co wrote a
book with a drug dealer called the
business secrets of drug dealing that's
on there so if you subscribe I will I
will that basically that's about it yeah
that's about 1/4 of my reading habits I
figured I'd follow that up by doing
something I've been wanting to do for
like 10 years now which is sort of like
a sequel to manufacturing consent you
know sort of the classic Chomsky book
about the media right having grown up in
the media
that book blew my mind when I was when I
was really young and but I think a lot
of sort of change in the media landscape
so I wanted to sort of take a whack at
what is the what does the model look
like now and I actually went out and
talked to Chomsky about it and how to
sit down with him in an interview and
and so that's gonna be the next big
project and I'm just just starting that
now and I yeah I was I read the
introduction and no it's it's it's
really interesting to read it because in
some ways like any cuz even by the time
I don't remember when I read
manufacturing consent but I read it
already when it was like part of this is
dated like it still makes total sense
but like they're writing a but this Rush
Limbaugh doesn't exist and Fox News
doesn't exist and all this like drive TV
channel there isn't right and they're
sort of like the guys in the grey suits
saying like we need to be measured about
our breasts and killing nuns in
Nicaragua exact right yeah maybe we
should maybe think we're in communist
yeah no I mean yeah his core idea was
it's still true right is the this idea
that you know people in America have
this illusion that we have a propaganda
free society because we see this sort of
vibrant looking debate going on in the
media all the time but what people don't
grasp is that you know kind of the
parameters of that discussion have been
narrowed artificially and that's that's
kind of the operating metaphor of this
what I'm talking about with the fairway
in the book is that you know you got to
land your thought on the fairway in the
media it's got to be between two pretty
distinct poles in order to get on the
air and people don't they just don't see
those borders that's that's the idea but
but a lot has changed as well since
since you wrote that book and especially
with the idea of you know with the with
the internet and the the whole concept
of feeding people news that they agree
with in an individualized way that
didn't exist back back in when Chomsky
did this in a way where it's like
whatever your micro prejudice right yeah
exactly yeah that we got you yeah seek
you out and they find that so that's new
to well it's funny I was thinking of the
law I was reading it because it's like I
go and do these like you know they're
well I don't want to diss the places but
I'm not you know I'm not on CNN or
whatever but I go on like al-jazeera
sometimes or i-24 these like you know
global whatever and and even there where
I would say they probably are it's just
true I just don't really watch cable
news so I'm assuming that maybe those
places are a bit more you know I see
some of the segments they do there is
certainly aljazeera is more rigorous
more intellectual but it's like if you
do like a four-minute hit especially if
you're paired up against somebody it's
so hard even if you you know don't
particularly care if you ever get
invited back on right you don't have an
agenda for any party or consulting firm
that you need to peddle but it's just
like even just by being polite right
like all right well that's the parameter
is a question I'm not I don't you know
it's not my style me ma'am wrong but I'm
not the one be like well you know that's
not exactly here's this really happening
and find yourself being like well I
think Republicans need to think about
this because yeah yeah really the way
it's set up thoughtfulness doesn't
really fit the format for the most part
you know yeah we like we like things to
be really clear we like the you know the
the classic setup is crossfire right
it's like one person on one side one
person on the other side we know who
we're rooting for they're yelling and
screaming at each other like there's
anything that's not that people just
can't compute you know yeah and I think
that's that's an increasing problem with
our media landscape is this idea that
there's this whole other universe of
opinions and beliefs that are just kind
of they don't fit in that you know and
where are they you know and are they
like out ahead or they before and behind
like it's like hey there's a lot of
really important you know talk about
Ally design the economy and having an
empire and then it's like yeah and
there's all this other that's just
flooding at us now right yeah you know
it's like yeah it's like Chomsky's out
but so's alex jones right right and like
all right well just everything except
but now it's just in your phone mm-hmm
exactly and it's individually delivered
to you and and you know the you know now
you can't even really choose to turn off
the news like now now your phone
literally beeps at you when it's gotten
alert people get addicted to like
literally it to the dopamine rush of of
seeing a news clip and you know they
we've learned to Train media consumers
you know basically in the same way that
tobacco companies train their their
customer base you know we we get them
addicted to the product and then after
that it's just a question of marketing
and hurting them in and you know keep
keeping them in the pen you know the
corporate media you know the sort of
business model has has really turned
into something that's very very much
like Big Tobacco in the last three or
four decades and and that's oh that's a
pretty weird and messed up thing that we
we really don't think about often enough
I don't think no yeah no I mean I've
heard that's a really interesting I
I went to some what I used to do like
sort of like not any super in-depth way
but in my 20s when I was just sort of
bouncing around and doing various things
I did some stuff like more like in the
brand strategy kind of space they would
call it the Brad stretch yeah now I'm in
the YouTube DIC comments base strategy
that's how you view is in the goldman
sachs exposure space and and i went to
some presentation I had some conference
or something and it was on and it was on
gamification and I just remember like
any and I'm not you know it was
definitely not like oh and I saw how
this was gonna make you know you know
it's like 2011 or something it wasn't
like I I didn't like see the future the
only difference was and how I saw that I
was a little out of that space was this
guy was basically explaining how like
you can have emotional relationships
with all of your gadgets and you could
constantly want to catch them you know
interact with them through various
signals and feedback loops and and he's
totally doing the like so it's actually
like a really emotional process they're
like he's he's seen it's like it's like
I'm giving a spiritual talk about how
you know if your sink became smart you
could you know get sports cars on it and
that would be amazing right and I'm
sitting there like that sounds
exhausting like that was just like I
didn't I didn't see a head I didn't it
was none of that but I did have at least
some like why is everybody smiling at
this like right I find my early version
of the iPhone at that point all the
that I needed to keep track of then with
not nearly as much to do exhausting
right and they're just like stoked yeah
exactly yeah going for it yeah yeah I
know it's freaky it's freaky atomization
of the media landscape and you know and
I think if people in the business and
again I I grew up in the media my dad
was reporter my earliest memories are
from
this this world you know that the way
that the job has changed over the years
you know we used to just mmm when I
first started we didn't really think
about retaining audience share or
anything like that it was there was this
really kind of sort of sub intellectual
concept of what is and what isn't a good
story and we just sort of promiscuously
went after anything that sounded
interesting now you you consciously
think when you when you do any kind of
you know produce any kind of content you
put it out there you think about you
know am I gonna lose this demographic
right by making this comment and and
people very very carefully tailor what
they say what they report and what
topics they choose to cover the stations
do that you know the line up to the of
the topics they choose they choose to
take on as opposed to what they choose
not to take on it's not just as crude as
it used to be where you know the you
know the main division was we didn't
show poverty on TV because it bum people
out cuz they wouldn't buy Chevy super
boomer right right but now it's also
like we can't show this because you know
our our conservative audience won't like
this or our liberal audience won't like
this and and you know it's become this
very very specified process where we're
really not reporting what we're really
doing is marketing and and that that's
pretty pretty pretty weird and it's a
big difference and in the business and I
think a lot of us a lot of reporters
aren't even conscious of it yet you know
yeah yeah and you also you toss to talk
about their concept of flack and how
that shows up right which is super
interesting yeah I mean just that yeah
Chomsky's whole take on that was in the
in the old sort of 1988
you know arena with the media or pre
1988 if you stepped outside the confines
of what you know the sort of typical
anti-communist religion right you'd get
letters from think tanks you'd get sort
of artificially generated astroturf
campaigns against your your TV report
and then that would trickle down
you the reporter and you would learn you
know sort of almost like a dog does like
not to do that next time right and it
just becomes internalized but now it's
not that complicated now it's instant
you do something that that that falls
outside the line of your demographic and
it's Twitter and Instagram and a
gazillion people are on you in a second
and they're even paid trolls who do that
and that's so that whole part of his
theory I think is very true and probably
even more so than it was but yeah just
amplify it I I also I did think of your
financial coverage with the
anti-communism stuff and will pivot to
that in a second because I do think like
I mean obviously I mean you know I'm I'm
a materialist so I think that mostly
it's just like you know power baguettes
power money baguettes money but there
isn't a there is an ideology and it does
seem like you know the through line of
everything from like whoa and maybe that
they had to mix it up and kill some nuns
in El Salvador and boy they were
communist is the same through line as if
you just deregulate like like I
got like I remember really becoming
aware of politics like that late 90s
right like and and honestly and seeing
people like Thomas Friedman before he
was a joke right you you made him thank
you and to a joke 1999 when I was like
16 17 years old being like I don't know
these WTO protests makes sense to me
right that guy was trotted out on every
show to be like you know to get it
because it's like a giant Azir yeah
you're right


## Keywords:
