---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L17ACOxE6dw
---

# Video
136 - Quarantine Wisdom ft. Dr. Cornel West
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L17ACOxE6dw)

## Transcript:

welcome to the Michael Brooks show on
Michael Brooks we're broadcasting from
our quarantine zones with super producer
Matt luck yo chief economist the man in
the shadows
David Griscom how's it going on this
week's program dr. Cornel West we begin
the year with President Lula marched
into spring with dr. West regular
regular visits from Adolph reading high
quality folks high quality we're talking
about spiritual sustenance in this time
politics of the moment the prophetic
voice where we go from here and dialogue
and Quarantine with Professor West on
the gem we're talking about Argentina's
creditors they were letting Argentina
off a little bit when there was a
right-wing government now there's a
center-left government they're back to
pure vulture ism and of course in the
postgame we're talking about the heating
up of rhetoric against China and how to
actually forge a coherent position with
regards to the most important rising
power in the world but also remembering
that Asia is a continent not a country
as we assess the geostrategic fall out a
Cold War politics here even as we are
completely dependent on China for the
entirety of our supply chain got a
debunk we're also talking about
organizing at Harvard in the postgame
Joshua Cahn is here for a ruffle music
history these Trump ads hit hard
although Biden might have a stronger
chance than we realize and Caribbean
continues to resist US imperialism and
piracy and the age of Corona all that
and much much more on the Michael Brooks
show continuing with our enhanced
schedule on Thursday evening we're
talking with Brian Mayer about Corona in
Brazil and Latin America and we're also
talking with Steve cook about the
geopolitics of the oil shock oil prices
in I mean they're not in freefall
anymore cuz they've hit they smash
through the ploy have connected that the
velocity has connected all that and much
much more on this week's Michael Brooks
show but first let's talk about the
global South and Corona I mentioned
earlier the appalling stories of the
United States using its naval vessels
and ships to divert vital resources
headed to the Caribbean including
ventilators to Barbados and Jamaica
even as the Venezuelan government under
siege from the United States provides
testing kits to several of its Caribbean
neighbors let's go across some of the
wider world and how this is playing out
in Mexico border factories have
continued to stay open despite the
crisis and Juarez US owned factories
that make car seat textiles when worker
had workers report to the infirmary with
coughs and fevers they were given pain
relief and told to get painkillers and
told to go back to work Mexico who was
not properly prepared after decades of
austerity and significant cuts to the
hospital system now there's conflicting
reports on how on low is responding
no question that on low is attempting to
restore and build an actual safety net
in Mexico and that the again the same US
and reactionary forces are circling on
low however has refused of course to
shut down the country and we will see
how those consequences play out in
Brasil j√∫nior bolson ro
Donald Trump really should thank him
because there's always the one person in
the world doing doing a worse more above
foolish ridiculous protest job then
Trump he's been fighting with governor's
he fired his own Health Minister and
just yesterday he appeared hacking and
extremely unhealthy looking at a protest
against the quarantine I'm sure all of
us will swear to give our lives for our
country one day we will do everything
possible to exchange to change Brazil's
destiny
he said meanwhile president Lula in
quarantine who of course led by double
digits in 2018 would be the president
today without the us-backed
lava jato operation in the continent of
Africa we've seen a variety of responses
and the Paul Kagame the President of
Rwanda said it could take a decade to
recover if there's not an international
response to covin 19 the World Bank
predicts a continent-wide depression in
Africa in South Africa President Cyril
Ramaphosa has won international credit
and plaudits for international praise
rather for shutting down the country and
enforcing a strict quarantine however
police brutality reports have been
rampant and just like in the United
States and elsewhere there has not been
a serious plan to protect workers and
the poor during the shutdown in India
the state of Kerala has won
international praise we've talked about
it on this show the communist-run state
of Kerala has along with South Korea
Taiwan and others actually been credited
with incredible responses to the
pandemic they've instituted social
distancing they've mobilized community
networks to help with monitoring the
virus but also delivering food and utter
other vital necessities to people in
vulnerable communities and throughout
Kerala stands out Modi like Orban and
other Authority authoritarians is using
this crisis to try to consolidate his
power after inside
chorim's against the Muslim population
and stripping the Indian Constitution to
occupy Kashmir the government has of
course targeted Muslims the Health
Minister has regularly blamed the
Islamic seminaries for spreading the
virus and the BJP officials the party of
Prime Minister Modi have used phrases
like corona jihad coronavirus is
bringing down is adding to an already
deeply divided deeply unequal world it's
wrecking health systems it's adding to
debt burdens and further jeopardizing
economies dependent on the Western
system remittance which are a major
factor in poorer countries are down as
the economy went into lockdown in the
global north international organisations
are going to need to step up and provide
a normos debt relief global bailouts and
this also must be another opportunity
for a serious rethink about how the
global economy works and can we at last
have a world that centers workers and
not predatory transnational capital the
consequences will live with us for
decades if we don't act now and demand
international debt Jubilees and support
the extraordinary bravery of governments
and activists in the global south
whether they be at a regional or
national levels that are resisting and
providing dynamic alternatives and paths
forward do you guys have anything you
want add to that just briefly I just
wanted to highlight that example about a
war as you know that's one of the things
that's so frightening about the the
coronaviruses it really is laying bare
the inequity is obviously in the United
States but across the entire global
supply chain so you know those are
workers working in an American owned
corporation the corporation that
basically is profiting off of the hyper
exploitation of those people and they
cut that factory open and allow people
to work even though they clearly had
symptoms for a very long time then now
the core it has actually spread from
that factory across the entire city of
warrants that was where it began in the
area and then that's not an isolated
story we're seeing across the globe
this kind of like squeeze for profit is
putting people who are very marginalized
in the first place in the in the way of
this barreling train of coronavirus so
you know when we're talking about relief
we desperately need to be you know
focusing on those stories as well and
recognizing that all of these struggles
are very much connected to this
fundamental political and economic
inequity of global capitalism totally
yeah
and they synchronize with what we see
here obviously and not keep talking
about the interview of Chris smalls and
next week we're gonna be talking with a
couple of organizers including a
Teamsters organizer in Philadelphia I
think it's very very important to take
this opportunity to really think and
really even just refer miliar your
Miller eyes ourselves very specifically
with the state of organized labor in
this country and elsewhere
what is union density in this country
it's very small obviously and it's
obviously much more represented in the
public sector versus the private sector
we need to understand exactly where we
are and exactly where there are
opportunities with regards to labor
mobilization because ultimately there's
no prospects for a left without masks
organized labor and I also do think
because of the unique obscenity and
pressure of this moment and we're gonna
also talk more about those reopen
protests in the postgame and you know
the smart way of handling it which
disaggregates the astroturf element of
people like the DeVos family and
obviously the Nazi and neo-fascist
elements but also the reality that
there's plenty of people that need of
course they feel a need to go back to
work because there has been no proper
bailout and protection for normal people
and this is the context we're in if you
don't speak directly to that politically
and with an actual plan then it will
just get recycled into more basically
death and waste yeah and you know and
we're very much exposed to not only to
the
these kind of crisis be you know be
they've through disease when natural
disasters have operated in the same way
especially in the United States and how
they're affecting different communities
and it's not it's not an accident
basically that it's like the the poor in
the working-class communities that are
bearing the brunt of this kind of global
plots that were shaped both in the
environment and in our global health so
yeah and you know just speaking to the
u.s. it's true that our density is low
and which is which means we're a weak
position but it also means that we have
a lot of potential to grow out to so we
should think about it in that way as
well that we aren't as like constrained
when it comes to building out labor
organizations as people in other
countries are right and there is no sign
instead of having to fight only with
like a union bureaucracy like you have
to in a lot of other countries right
right and it's also really you know
another really interesting question and
thing to look at arising out of the
1990s with the completement where there
was the rhetoric of international law
the rhetoric of international
institutions which really have very
little power I mean obviously there's
countless examples of this but you know
the Bush administration very consciously
spitting in the face of the United
Nations before the invasion of Iraq as
an example and the fascinating and
really disturbing thing is is that in
contrast to all these other kind of
global efforts that which fell short on
the environment on Labor Standards and
even on you know to some extent uh you
know full funding for global health
responses and pandemic aware of
preparedness and so on the international
trade architecture has actually been
really vigorously enforced and it has
been an international mechanism that has
really remapped the world and has had
incredibly low you know huge
consequences like the factories in
Juarez which would not be there on the
way they are without NAFTA as an example
and so this is actually a really great
example of how the sort of relationship
between global trade and the
institutions built up around
that the corollaries you need with as an
example global health infrastructure
have never been caught up and they have
not run in parallel and so that's
another thing on obviously to bear in
mind and you know and ultimately again I
think we'll talk with chuka a Jackman
about this hopefully soon but what is a
grounded real way of talking about how
these labor movements can actually link
up internationally does the
international labor organization which
already exist does that have mechanisms
that can be reoccupied are that you know
how is communication infrastructure used
what what does that actually look like
concretely it's really important but it
can't just be slotted as like you know
again another sort of utopian project it
needs to be something that we actually
really think about and to the extent
people like us have any role attempt to
facilitate if we can yeah and and just
like recognizing to day like I'm gonna
talk about this in the generally are the
opposing force has a very good
consciousness of themselves like there's
a reason for example that workers in the
United States are so fragmented from
their suppliers in Mexico so that they
can't build that kind of solidarity and
you know so we have to do a lot of work
on our hand to actually be able to build
that and in the first place while our
own is recognize that they need to keep
people as far away from each other as
possible to be able to maintain their
their supremacy right exactly yeah now
and that's actually we had another thing
I'll teased in the postgame is we have
this great Alexander Coburn clip where
he talks at the height of the Tea Party
nonsense and you know the height of this
sort of epic phase of Glenn
Beck but he already has a very very
strong critique of what should the left
actually be doing with regards to that
and you know he's and he has this great
line about basically like people
becoming dupes and essentially becoming
like foot soldiers of HMOs through some
kind of you know through the kind of
garbage that's peddled to them through
the Glenn Beck's of the world
and again it's just the same dynamic
condemnation is not going to get us
anywhere
mmm and at the very least when you come
with a compelling alternative then you
can disaggregate between you know the
people who are looking for something
versus the people who are like no no man
it it's the Constitution whatever the
I want to do a little patreon pitch
I'll also say if you're watching this
and you haven't yet welcome to the show
hit subscribe hit the bell so you get
the notifications for our live streams
if you want we won't we don't get to any
we only do questions um during me during
other live streams but if you want to
obviously feel free to hit the super
chat and welcome aboard
but Griscom and matt you guys are gonna
have the patreon pitch pleasantries of
today because I'm gonna sit here and
meditate get ready to talk to Professor
West well I mean I guess I'll begin I'm
gonna queue up the music just slightly
so please some accompaniment I mean
we're really flexing lately I think we
had slavo on live from his couch and it
was great one of the just amazing
conversation
Adolphe Reed becoming a crew member
through and all three describe asically
and yeah Cornel West I mean we were kind
of talking I don't feel shy Michael
enough but I mean Michaels bucket list
is getting really crossed off yeah and
it's all because of the people who were
the first you know first couple thousand
people who helped us fund this and I can
imagine where we're gonna go in another
couple of years so I mean it was just
when the old email say like 2017 was
when this thing launched 2017 yeah not
that long but so long ago and so close
seriously
yeah and I'm you know so I thanks for
putting it that way two men I'm really
honored by the community and appreciate
it so much David well you know Matt sort
of laid down the vision I'll put out
some specifics you know you really
honestly not the first year anyone else
who's doing this kind of show but I
don't think
when else is really putting out as much
content as we do each week you're
getting the full postgame which these
postgame shows we've been in quarantine
after going on significantly longer
right really really giving you you know
two to one for your money bottom was
filled up here you know we have that
right after after this show but we're
also doing bonus interviews with you
know really fascinating fascinating
guests
you know this deep dog that we just did
with Adolph read was another thing that
was incredible - is there another
podcast out there that has something
like a doll to read regularly as a guest
making content for them no I mean we're
really you know we're really feeding you
for your for your subscription we also
do theory reading groups every Monday I
put together a few pieces this week we
took a dive into Cuba and what is
significance is what some of the issues
are with it and you know but other than
that you know we'll do sometimes pieces
you know reading France went on are
reading some of the early Soviet
literature before like the Revolution I
mean we're really giving you a
comprehensive look at all the different
theories and ideas on the left and you
know again as matt said you're really
helping support something that is
continuing to grow and we were looking
at a few different options places that
we're going to move out to in the near
future and you're really supporting a
you know a growing group of people that
are out there really trying to make the
world a little bit of a better place
yeah and helping us grow and evolve
while we do it it's uh yeah it's an
amazing process and it's a it's a great
honor and you know if you can go to
patreon.com/scishow sout and also if
you're in a position um you know where
you don't need that help and you want to
join at a higher level go for it i want
to be really clear those that an eight
dollar level get every single show we do
and a lot of the shows we're doing now
are public but in addition to that you
know if you go to 21 dollar level I do
those you know do kind of monthly
conference calls with folks and also you
get the elicit history Doc's first which
we do unlock because again we want as
much content out there for people but
those Doc's are amazing
Forrest's - dick vienna work on with
mean the next one which will be being
released soon is on thomas sankara
featuring the great milton all ahmadi
folks what you say quick break we're
gonna take a quick break and we will be
right back with dr. Cornel West

welcome back to the Michael Brooks show
I am Michael Brooks joining us now is
dr. Cornel West he is a professor of the
practice of public philosophy at Harvard
University he's the author of many many
books including race matters democracy
matters and as people have been pointing
out to me a lot today you also have
probably seen him in the matrix in
addition to all of his enormous
contributions to activism and moral
consciousness in this country and across
the globe dr. Wes thank you so much for
doing this
brother I'm the one who's blessed and I
want to salute you not just for the work
you do here on the radio with Joe recent
text against the web dealing with some
of these right-wing and electrifying to
keep them accountable and you do a
marvelous job and there's just a
blessing to be in conversation with you
tell Doug indeed indeed
we met at Harvard a couple of months ago
and oh yeah we're actually gonna have on
Piper later to talk about some of the
work that the Harvard students are doing
to try to protect the workers there
during this time and I just wanted to
start with the sort of timeline of what
some of us thought maybe naively a
couple of months ago was a real
opportunity for an enormous change at
that time represented in the Bernie
Sanders momentum and here we are I
remember flying back from LA at an event
I was doing the night of Super Tuesday
when Bernie you know it didn't go so
well and and Yuri and I realized that
corona was a was a real thing and I
remember sitting on the plane going wow
Bernie's out and we've got a pandemic
okay about that shift and where we are
now and how to fortify ourselves in that
context
well I have very precious memories of
that dialogue we had there with brother
Phil Agnew it's just crystal and I but
all the students were marvelous they
were magnificent there that's the sister
who took off with that first speech when
she stopped something oh my god she was
powerful her mother was there too but no
I don't wanna first judge you know that
is sister Piper oh yeah yeah and I think
I knew about first name yeah but but I
must say that I think it's important to
situate ourselves before we even jump
into that particular moment because the
in crucial thing is is that you know the
Bernie Sanders campaign comes along as
an attempt to engage in some kind of
fight all be generating of progressive
possibilities in the midst of an
American Empire in profound decay and
deterioration and so when you got the
the agreed at the top of a predatory
capitalist civilization and then you've
got the denial of its Imperial tentacles
then you've got the vicious legacies of
white supremacy that sit at the very
center of the american pharoah project
we use of the indigenous peoples black
people's brown but especially of course
the weight of slavery and and yellow
clue and then you've got the vicious
kinds of patriarchy yet and what happens
in the last old
12 months is one of the last gaps one of
the last effort to try to accent the
best of the progressive legacy of a
decaying Empire hmm and they're those
moments where looked as if lo and behold
the milquetoast neoliberals tied to Wall
Street try to try to the
military-industrial complex with their
own forms of captivity to light male
supremacy it looked as if they work in a
situation where they could not stop the
Bernie campaign and there was a moment
of elation you know we we were fired up
we move toward Nevada Oh
even the corporate media had to say oh
now we must take Bernie seriously they
had been treating him so so viciously in
such an ugly way and this is true for
MSNBC especially but voices on CNN as
well for Fox News you just take for
granted the the mean-spiritedness and
the unfairness visa big brother Bernie
calling him a communist and a Bolshevik
and so forth and so on but that was a
moment in which especially young voters
because as you know opee the only folk
who could vote in America won 240 Bernie
would have been been in the White House
five five years ago and he would win
again yes but my generation comes in
with all of our cowardliness and all of
our I hope you shortsightedness and
selfish mission what have you that
serves as a kind of encompass around I
mean just like a weight around the neck
of the Empire that doesn't allow the
best of the Empire to come forward and
so where are we now where now and one
folks grim and M and bleak moment in the
history of the Empire in the history of
the nation the history of the country
and the democratic experiment that's
always been trying to come the fuller
burst against the backdrop of the
Imperial corruption the backdrop of the
capitalist greed the backdrop of the
vicious white supremacy the ugly male
supremacy and so forth it's very hard
now to discern real possibilities real
potentialities that can be actualized at
this moment so we just got to fight we
just fight against against the grain you
know it's gonna be blues like all the
way down you know what I mean
wooden Valley down don't worry no more
therefore I got to keep all fight
because it just looks bleak Billy it it
does look bleak and it feels bleep
absolute by it and it is bleak
it is
what is the relationship between I guess
I want to ask you is there a liberation
in that realism though because I've been
trying to push the idea and maybe this
is me just doing some spin I don't know
but that if you can be really honest
about where we are and that includes
that that you have this grotesque
president and everything that he
represents it also includes that you
have a Democratic Party that
consolidates more effectively to stop
Bernie Sanders basic decency agenda than
anything else they've considered around
in decades and that correct yeah yeah so
that this is that and all of the
accelerating crises were but that this
is really really bleak and we we don't
have to sanitize that we don't have to
say oh well I don't know maybe Biden
will turn out to be great or maybe you
know maybe some this or that will happen
that if we sit in that real discomfort
and we really are real that in a way
that opens up some space for us to see a
bigger horizon and maybe on the other
hand there are these countervailing
forces there are Amazon workers going on
strike there are a whole new sets of
people tragically getting exposed to
conditions that they haven't been
exposed to before and maybe that
awakened something else you know the
favor the favorite word of the great
Samuel Beckett the great poet and
playwright was perhaps and I like that I
like that because perhaps what you're
saying is indeed true so that I would
never want to put any kind of negative
closure and say that it's all bleak and
it's all grim that sometimes a certain
kind of realism has been said that
romanticism is really a realism so
realism of the romanticism on all-fours
so that you got your feet on the ground
all of them on the ground and we've got
all the layers on the ground connected
to the suffering connected to the misery
connected
the despair connected to the despondency
and yet you can still feel the rumblings
with those feet on the ground of some
folk trying to break through the calls
for general strike may one the calls for
the various kinds of resistances across
the board
some are socialists some of my liberals
of my communism there's a whole vast
array of people who are fighting the
fascism of the Trump administration and
we need that kind of anti-fascist
coalition this is what makes it
difficult the coalition was Tokyo deep
disagreements but one thing you agree on
you must push back not just Trump in the
White House but the forces behind him
because if it were just a matter of the
gangster in the White House you just be
able to push the gangs out lo and behold
we got some Democratic awakening figure
please no it's not that at all there's a
lot of forces behind Trump some of the
forces behind Trump are outright
right-wing some of the forces do have
certainly liberal connections we know
they're there with certainty liberals in
the Democratic Party who prefer Trump
over my dear brother Bernie Sanders and
that's precisely the reason that we had
to be very honest and candid about the
truth teller what does it mean to have a
male fascist right-wing tied to Wall
Street wipe the military-industrial
complex with its captivity the white
male supremacy and so forth and then
have a neoliberal wing of that same
ruling class it which is a democratic
establishment right nor the salesmen and
Democratic Party you see and they still
have very deep connections even though
they are different and I would never say
that they are equivalent you know people
oftentimes like a characterized
left-wing folk I like myself another
saying where do you say there's no
different nobody fit there's a there's a
difference between a neo-fascist
catastrophe and the deal they're both is
ask there is a difference there's a big
thing the minute never tell on the Cali
cartel operated very differently they're
both still operate very differently and
it comes to you know certain kind of
concerns our rights and liberties when
it comes to certain kind of confessions
to to working people and poor people
those concessions are important and
that's what ideal it was like a harp on
but those same neo liberals are willing
to unfairly oftentimes of marginalized
and outright trash or lie on even a soft
leftist like Bernie Sanders because we
know Bernie Sanders was not running on
the democratic socialist platform at all
he was running on a progressive Neal
populist platform he was running on an
FDR like robust progressive liberal
old-style liberal platform and he still
was pushed to the side in the name of a
neoliberal unity and you saw them all
come together goodbye
the Clintons just to a me and Bella P
then of course Obama is the political
Pope in the background of speech
supposedly is untouchable for those in a
Democratic Party but those of us who
want to tell the truth know that he
remains the Godfather of contemporary
neoliberalism and the American Empire
but but that they have a black person as
that Godfather makes it almost
impossible for neo liberals to talk
honestly about the connection between
white supremacy and predatory capitalism
that's why I'm so glad you you have my
dear potato free hmm on he he is the
greatest a political theorist that we
have who understands a relation between
race predatory capitalism and Empire and
he writes about and of course he's had
to cut so radically against the gray
because it is a powerful indictment at
the black political class the black
professional class and the worst of the
black bourgeoisie and that black
bourgeoisie is now leading not just
black people not just America but the
Empire are helping lead it off a cliff
because even when we push push above
push drop out and we must push jump on I
do believe in anti-fascist coalition but
I don't believe in
anyway holding my tongue when it comes
to the neoliberal captivity to capital
the captivity to Empire than the
captivity to white supremacist forms
that supposedly are anti-racist which
becomes just diversity within the class
hierarchy diversity within the Imperial
hierarchy we've got to be able to tell
those truths in the name of WB Dubois
and Victoria Garvin and Ella Baker and
Fannie Lou Hamer and the later Martin
Luther King jr. we need got the Malcolm
X I want to get to those voices actually
intimidated and bad for nothing my
brother they did bad for nothing I will
always I want to get to those but before
we get to those ancestors and better
things I want to talk a little bit more
about Trump and I want to ask you
specifically when you use the word
fascist and when you also talk about him
being a gangster can you explain because
those words are very kind of like
neoliberal actually these words are very
thrown around and I know that if I hear
and read you correctly that you actually
have a when you talk about gangsterism
that's a spiritual state that could
affect all of us who you all gotta
wrestle with that and then when you say
he's a fascist could you explain what
that means in terms of the specific
historical moment we're in and how it
all rep how it does all intersect in
Trump right now in 2020 yeah I
appreciate that well one is you know the
difference between a gangster and a
hypocrite a hypocrite still has certain
standards and recognizes he or she falls
radically short you see so that vice
becomes the tribute to virtue by
acknowledging we know there's Vice we
notice virtue were opting for vice a
gangster has no standards at all the
gangster will do anything it's just
survival of the slickest usually tied to
money status and type deeply to
insecurity anxiety and oftentimes even a
sense of inferiority which takes the
form of inflated
claims about superiority so that all of
us have ganks inside of us you see so
that when I call Trump a gangster you
know I'm not just just engaging in
name-calling you see Foucault has this
wonderful introduction to one of the
losses books we talked about the
spiritual fascists inside of all of us
hmm and that's just another way I'm a
revolutionary Christian so I got
different language right that's just a
devil inside of us that's just our
proclivities toward egoism selfishness
contempt hatred and so forth
now fascism is a much more complicated
dangerous phenomenon because it is an
ideology that puts a primacy on the rule
of big money so elites can be attracted
to it
it's a rule of militarism and a
military-industrial complex
so this narrow forms of patriotism allow
a militarization of a society to take
place and the militarization often has
to do with scapegoating the most
vulnerable so there could be Mexicans
they can be Muslims we know and only
Hitler it was press Jewish brothers and
sisters you see and but it's also tie to
this sense of catastrophe we are the
only one who can come to your rescue
your society is collapsing and the big
military big-money
narrow Patriots scapegoating the most
vulnerable become the only option of
some kind of escape or some kind of
salvation and fascism comes in a number
of different form the American fascist
is going to be different than Italian it
did portugee going to be different than
Brazilians is going to be different than
than French and so forth an American
fascism will come usually comes in the
form
we can be successful we can be number
one because America has always been an
adolescent civilization the great mo
Malthus and who taught here at Harvard
for over 35 years used to say America's
unique among nations to move from
innocence to corruption without a
mediating stage of maturity and what he
meant by that was America understands
itself as a city on the hill as the
innocent people don't have to take
responsibility for what it does
indigenous people don't have to take
responsibility what it does to enslaved
African folk we don't have to take
responsibility for the working people
it's all about liberty the city on the
hill the moral example in the eyes of
the whole world we are in their sense
and we got our frontier myths that says
that we innocent civilized people must
expand these are the best savages look
at 1877 withdraw the troops black folk
under plan like military rule and you
got the railroad strike workers are
being crushed by a Capitol and you got
the Sioux war indigenous peoples are
being pushed back and treated like
they're cockroaches 1877 that particular
historical moments where you can see how
the innocent tie to the frontier myth
allows for more regeneration of a nation
through violence and that's what the
myth is about Richard slot can lays this
out in his trilogy more regeneration
through violence that's also a form of
American fascism and that's worse
quickman we're seeing that more and more
especially now with this stuff there's
coronavirus situation of other people on
lockdown where did the forms of violence
that goes forth inward in terms of
psychic violence or the domestic
violence within the home and and the
increasing gangster ization of the
society in terms of the willingness if
we got folk now out marching with
automatic weapons right I mean this is
this is this is a well you know we're at
a precipice in terms of what happens
when an empire begins to implode when it
begins to the forms of internal decay
become undeniable I mean we saw in
Katrina to a certain degree there's
certain moments would you
have to see it for what it is but most
Americans are taught in schools media to
live in a world of denial
that's where innocence is Darren's
Baldwin says about America innocence
itself is the crime the refusal to see
the refusal to come to terms to wrestle
with history reality mortality not just
the individual mortality of our lives
but the mortality of an empire the
mortality of a civilization so they go
we're always coming going empires come
and go and we're like oh yes Trump's
doctor in a way like I think like I
don't know if you remember this but when
you're talking IIIi think of how and
when Trump was running for president he
had some let's just say eccentric doctor
put out a report saying that oh you know
Donald Trump he's in fantastic health
you know don't don't worry about it
right away you see in front of your face
or how he eats or how he's always having
an emotional meltdown this guy is in
global world-class health and as you're
talking I'm almost is okay so that's so
there's the echo throughout history if
we want to understand fascism in
American context the connection between
innocence adolescents and domestic and
international imperialism and then Trump
is I mean yeah he's the sales guy
there's no problem here we can all go
back to sleep the stock market's going
great the virus is gonna be over it's
gonna be unbelievable it's gonna be
great is that the kind of psychological
retreat you're talking about that
correlates with the violence that we see
in in the state policy I think that
that's a fascinating and in some ways a
compelling interpretation brother I mean
one way of looking at it is looking at
our present moments through the lens of
the greatest American play written by
the one and only Eugene O'Neill and the
Iceman Cometh we just had our dear
brothers Denzel Washington love playing
Hickey
if the major figure in that play on
Broadway just a few years ago it's the
the most grim and bleak of All American
plays going all the way back the team on
of Athens or King Lear of the one and
only Shakespeare himself and what does
he say he says well Hickey is a seller
of Dreams is very different than death
sales who has a dream but he's selling
something else Hickey sales dreams just
like Trump and Hickey appears to be so
naive and happy all the time
but in fact he's a gangster and we turn
out it turns out in a later play that he
has killed his wife and and and and I
think the real analogy there would be
the ways in which Trump is killing
American democracy wasn't a whole lot
left but he's killing American democracy
and he doesn't mind and he doesn't mind
because he'll do anything for his own
personal gain he'll do anything for his
ratings he'll do anything for his status
its narcissus on steroids so any when he
looks at anything he sees like narcissus
just a mirror and himself in the mirror
and he's all up he's preoccupied with
himself now the sad thing is my brother
is not just him but it's the forces
behind him and it's the opposition
because you see the corporate media
which is very much much more of a
neoliberal a set of institutions with
the exception of course the Fox which is
the propaganda machine for for Trump and
let's keep in mind you see an MSNBC and
to some degree CNN is propaganda machine
for Obama and it was you know it was
more humane and so forth because the
neoliberal disaster is more humane
didn't heal fast a speech but there's
feel both in human and that other way
but the corporate media has played so
thoroughly into the Trump selling of
Dreams the Hickey like that it makes a
difficult call to conceive of our
position so when the Iceman Cometh
you know Eugene O'Neill can't conceive
he was an anarchist he was the stairs
leftist but he can't conceive of any
credible
left this project or politics
he says the nation itself has become so
saturated with the lies saturated with
what they call these days misinformation
saturated saturated with the lack of
truth-telling
that there's nobody there in hairy hopes
alone and keep in mind the name of the
saloon is hope
see how hope gets colonized hope gets
commodify hope gets captured by the lies
so the people are looking for some
concrete grand genuine hope but they get
paddled this superficial Hope but
siblings evoke a simulacra of hope and
and and and that's where we are now and
see what Bernie was doing was providing
some kind of way out and the way out my
brother's not just a matter of a
campaign but it's a matter of getting
people to see to seed to get out of
fantasy use their imaginations and most
importantly this is the thing I really
want to stress so this is always a
benchmark of the decline in drug and
decay of civilization is a lack of
courage the lack of courage you see that
you can't you can't learn to see unless
you have the courage to look at things
differently and courage means you have
to take risk care which means you have
to cut against the grain courage means
you have to call into question what is
conventional what the mainstream is
doing and in part of the u.s. culture is
that it hasn't provided enough spaces
for people who want to get some kind of
serious critique and resistance to the
very mainstream conceptions of status
and success that money and celebrities
of stature and so forth and so on you
see
Herbert Marcos I call it a
one-dimensional society that the forms
of resistance are so weak and when they
get stronger they get
incorporated within the mainstream that
end there reproducing the very hierarchy
and structure it was opposing and we're
in that particular moment and that's why
is blues like because I mean you know
the Blues of courses though it's tied to
a kind of a defeat let's hope that the
hope can never be crushed but you know
you're gonna get pushed back and
probably lose anyway but you keep coming
that's a different kind of thing yes
even different than sister for stuff but
you got to go with a more rainy a BB
King to understand that you know I will
say it reminded me of a very different
kind of hope and I was thinking of this
was dole Clinton beam from hope and
Barack Obama but uh Fernando Flores was
a Chilean writer he said hope is the raw
material of losers well that goes back
to two cities in the million dialogue
where he talks about hope actually can
disarm you and leave you naked so that
you're headed toward self-destruction
hmm and and in it that's true that's
true but it's but hopefuls always
contextual you know hope is always
contextual which is to say that there
are certain kinds of Hope that are naive
at an adolescent and what have you
you see defeat let's hope I mean that's
kind of hope that the Palestinian
brothers has yeah that's not even
struggling for so long and look as if
they can't find any option they see it
looks as if nobody wants to see their
humanity see their suffering as always
through the lens of those who occupy
them rather than through the lens of
their humanity so that yes they have a
despair but it's not King Lear like
despair at the end whether it's just how
it's a despair that leads toward being
defeatist in your energy in your
resistance even though it looks as if
you have little chance of triumph at the
moment and that's the kind of spiritual
that's
it's very much a spiritual crisis bang
that's the kind of spiritual dimension
we have to stress and fear is the very
thing that allows folks to uh what fear
overtakes folk and pushes them in the
direction of selling out this is why
this is the age of the sell out you got
you have so many progressives and
liberals like somehow neo Liberals are
some highly progressive folk and just
telling lies about it right but that's
just a form of intellectual sellout tell
the people the truth or people here love
to say I'm just going private I'm not
concerned about public life anymore
I'm not concerned about common good
anymore I'm just living my own
individual private life when you just
give it up or you just cave in and you
just in order to crack house or some
form of self-medication and there's
nothing to do with transformation of
self and society and it's understandable
but it's cowardly in the end and there's
a lot come back to the issue of courage
to me that's why when we talk about you
know the Norman Thomas's and Rabbi
Abraham Joshua Heschel Zinn Edwards
ieads at the Dorothy days you know her
daughter of going is going to be a put
up for a conviction now in may going to
jail for two years a sister modulus
standing up in that great tradition it
takes courage hmm unbelievable
unbelievable courage and it's just hard
to keep track of them though when I
think of what I'll say this clip if you
haven't seen it but uh I think of when
you talked about that undaunted we play
this a lot on the show but president
Lula before he he brought himself to
prison in 2018 on this politically
trumped-up charges he he said first he
said I could leave the country but I'm
not going to I'm gonna go to their face
and then he said and you know he ended
with the quote of how the rich can and
the powerful can kill one two three a
hundred roses but they can't stop the
coming of spring and our politics is the
fight for the
search for spring wow that's beautiful
yeah it's very very very powerful but as
you know though even brother Lula
himself though it as heroic as he's
being I go with him all the way back to
the Workers Party when they translated
the race matters of 1993 I went down
there to work closely with them I have
great respect for brother Lula in the
Workers Party and so forth but once you
get in power brother you still have the
challenge of greed and corruption among
your cronies and you have to tell the
truth to them because you are working on
behalf of the people and I talk about
purity when I talk about people being
pristine you see but even brother Lula
himself given all of his heroic work and
his historically unprecedented
breakthroughs and so forth that the
challenge of fighting off corruption and
greed is a perennial one that's why it's
a spiritual question and a moral
question as well as the political and
ideological and I know I don't want to
get into an analysis of Brazil the
gangster who runs Brazil now even in
fascist - I use like the mill faster who
runs our India right now or hungry right
we go on and on and on you know what I
think yeah we're an amazing week in a
moment I was just talking through a
newspaper in Norway yesterday the great
land of its and and and Camilla Camilla
Colette one of the great leftist and
feminists their love and henryka
partisan and so forth all that rich
left-wing tradition in Norway now they
got a right wing here a woman so I mean
it's it's it's a neo-fascist right wing
moment it reminds us of you know I can't
happen here the Sinclair Lewis novel
about American fascism or the great
Philip Roth plot against America
what fastest takeover when as I eat
favorite books because I II was quite a
fan of the Jewish Philip Roth
from now for that conversation on
courage and where we are with you you
say a lot that you're a revolutionary
Christian what does that mean mm-hmm
that means that I'm in the world but not
of the world I've recognized that the
dominant ways of the world are
domination exploitation and oppression
and inside of the souls of men and women
the dominant orientations tend to be
those of cowardliness those of
Conformity those of complacency and at
worst
indifference or callousness toward the
suffering of others though the question
becomes how do you engage in change and
transformation of world and themselves
and the Christian story of course is the
Christian er is a story around a
particular Palestinian Jew who tried to
convince persons that they ought to be
committed to something that is
profoundly absurd in the world of
domination and hatred which was love
that the self ought to be committed to
something that is absurd when you look
deep in the dark corners of your own
soul and you see complacency
cowardliness and a conformity and he's
be not conformed to the world be
committed to justice he comes right out
of prophetic Judaism which is English
let justice roll down like waters and
righteousness like a mighty stream he's
not talking about philanthropy not
combust charity needs how much justice
it's structural and institutional
arrangement of a society name√≠s was not
just talking to Israel he was talking to
all nations who was an indictment of
Israel as an embankment of every nation
and I also come from the chocolate side
of town my brother sold my revolutionary
Christianity comes out of the struggles
of a black peoples who have been hated
chronically viciously for 400 years but
speak batik dishing out love warriors
like John Coltrane and Curtis Mayfield
mr. Franklin Martin Luther King jr. so
that I have to be true to what has been
put into me and recognize no matter how
dim my moment is I am still one who must
be true to a calling that says you bear
mr. truth-telling and justice seeking
truth the condition of truth is to allow
suffering to speak justice love
manifests in public you were there for
you know sorry you know just say it but
the important thing is being being
faithful unto death
you see if people recognize you don't be
faithful unto death but they can buy you
off you'll sell your soul for a mess of
pottage any second
you got to be faithful unto death not
just in life but in to death do we have
to think about our mortality to help us
do that we have to think about how death
is coming oh absolutely but not only
that but you got to learn how to die
daily so that when your physical death
comes you can use your physical death as
a way of promoting a love and justice
absolutely very much so and learning how
to die daily is to kill that fear to
kill that cowardliness to kill that
hatred to kill that conformity
destructions of domination and to kill
the indifference inside of ourselves
that allow structures of domination to
go on and that's the history of movement
that we know Christians have no monopoly
on that's Mike Christians have been some
of the biggest gangsters in the history
of the species but but it's true for
every religion every religion you know
that the Buddhists and Hindus with great
a tree right salat brothers or sisters
you see Judaism that is not prophetic
Judaism that has not been truth the aim
as an ester can be accommodating two
forms of domination and occupation as we
have right now you've got Islam my god
Islam when it's not tied to prophetic
Islam that the kind of Islam you see in
a Malcolm X for example can be can be
just as just as accommodating to hatred
and domination and so forth but not just
religion secular traditions to my
brother yeah can you explain because a
lot of people think that secular
traditions will let us escape that if we
just let go of these beliefs that are
quote-unquote wrong
that that is some a neat move of
liberation but I don't it seems to me
they replicate the same patterns well I
mean we know that I mean we can go back
to pagan one of the dist Stoics and the
Epicureans and others and there's some
wonderful things about those traditions
and there's some ugly things about them
Stoics actually gave us conceptions of
the universality of humanity that's
where it reached that echoes that a
prophetic Judaism infiltrated
Christianity prophetic Islam but the but
the secular moves usually are so tied to
science that science itself can become
an idol and see there's a difference
between a scientific temper and
scientific dogma a scientific temper is
so crucial and we need that the
unleashing of human curiosity the
concern of evidence the eternal
conclusions being based on evidence and
so forth but we know in the name of
science
they argued that women were less
intelligent than men in the name of
science white supremacy flowered and
flourished in the name of science
imperialism was promoted in the name of
science capitalism was affirmed so
science itself is not monolithic you
have to have scientific tempers that are
critical of the dog was in science and
so when we talk about secularism
secularism is not a monolithic thing
there's some wonderful things about it
in terms of being open-minded
self-critical and recognizing that we're
finite it recognizes that we ought to
listen to other people who we disagree
with and there's some arrogance and
condescension in the secular culture
visa vie non-secular folk that
reinforced the worst of human things
look at look at liberalism which is a
magnificent movable secular and
religious folk but liberalism had it's
worse with what deeply imperialistic
secular liberals still around in a very
deep way secular neoliberals very much
hegemonic among the professional classes
in the universities
what kind of dogmas are at work in the
university do we have any critiques of
empire coming out of Harvard Yale
Princeton University
go Berkeley Morehouse Howard University
good students really go to go to those
institutions and understand the ways in
which America was an empire from the
very beginning oh man I mean you got
some some some wonderful voices I was
just looking at brother Hema works up
work on how to hide in empires a
wonderful book of but he cuts against
the grain there's few but not too many
not too many at all because of
institutions of higher learning and in
empires don't want to tell the truth
about the imply that they inhabit hmm
and that's just one that's just one
example you know we we've got ecological
crisis we catastrophe coming we got
nuclear catastrophe coming the wealth
inequality economic catastrophe
unbelievable loneliness isolation
alienation of persons who have
tremendous time even muscular mastering
any forms of intimacy which is a
precondition of love vulnerability which
is a precondition of love so what
happens in a more and more loveless
society what happens in a society that's
obsessed with pleasure but has
tremendous difficulty gaining access to
joy mmm these are deep spiritual issues
that go hand in hand with the decadence
of a late capitalist civilization and
our poets have been talking about this
for a long long time the musicians have
been talking about this for a long
that's why the artists and especially
musicians of the vanguard of the species
that's why we live in a moment where we
must look very much to our courageous
visionary artists now we've got a whole
wave of artists who are just mediocre
who look at artists who just sell their
souls to but I'm talking about the deep
genuine artists and that's been a
history of black people you see black
people we could never have made it
without our art without our artists and
especially our musicians they have
preserved black dignity and sanity
hooya I was like music black people
would have been gone long time ago I'm
living the Dorothy love coats in the
gospel tradition and Curtis Mayfield who
comes out of gospel but very much is a
rhythm and blues but I listen to
uh-uh-uh ooh there's a brother that got
a serious single his name is Jay I said
you know - I'm telling about Jean Jay
come mama cut - jr. I can't remember Jay
Electronica no yeah all right oh yeah he
got stuff going on and he and jay-z
jay-z the genius but I'm critical a lot
of staging politics but jay-z's art
informs me in a very profound and
wonderful way but the but when it comes
to hip-hop what about our chronic you
listen any crime Theory X and tempo now
I haven't got too much the chronic I got
this I got this I got jumped up reggae
reggae I'm on the ring order a Bob
Marley Marcus Garvey and company yes and
land Barnett silk yes yeah yeah so you
teaching me mine let me ask you
something what I'm saying that that
makes sense to you because I respect
your mine and your judgment does it make
sense to you what I'm trying to say
tonight it makes a lot of sense to me
and what I don't and and I mean you've
influenced me you know and also remember
you when you've talked about the cult of
smartness and let's all rather be wise
and let our phones be smart what I
wonder about and and what I am really
curious about and I talk with a really
really good friend of mine how people
know from the show Joshua John Russell
I'll bring him into the conversation is
is what is the bridge in terms of like
I'm I'm reading Peter slaughter dykes
book called you must change your life
right now and he's mala tics are very
different than our politics but I love
this idea that he's reworking religion
is just an idea of practices that it's
about your own Olympian journey and what
I'm wondering is is because it seems to
me that the left is is and this is one
of the reasons I do I will say I love
and admire Lula so much is that there's
so much heart there and so one Matt
Ritter
but how do we a politics that comes from
so much empathy but also doesn't
necessarily generate the power and the
Machiavelli and sense to take on power
or have the kind of like spiritual
nourishment for a less of the war you
know for you know I sometimes when I
talk about this stuff people look at me
with a side I know there is a spiritual
dimension to this what does that mean
that people have to meditate that people
have to listen to to great music I don't
know what is the bridge to engage it
because I know that there's a whole
emotional landscape that you speak to
where a week if we don't access that we
cannot get to our destination and I want
to know what that bridges so it does
make sense to me but I want to know how
it's actually created and in in people's
actions and practices every day well I
think it's got to go back to you know
the formation of the children in terms
of the socialization of young people
through civic institutions from family
mosque synagogues churches schools
temples sports connections music
connections all of those things when
they get weak then there's no doubt it's
going to be difficult you can call it so
craft the institutional mechanisms are
so crammed how are the souls of people
shape out their personality shape how
their characters shake what kind of
values and virtues and visions do they
have access to now again you know the
history of black folk is something that
I think it's quite instructive any time
the whole nation has the Blues that mean
wouldn't that nation can learn a whole
lot from a blues people in in its mists
and the history of black people is one
in which it looked
we have no way out I mean that's with
him inhaling Garnett's in 1836 black
folk never confuse your situation
without the isrealites of the Hebrew
Scripture
for us Pharaoh is on both sides of the
bloody red sheets what you're gonna do
when you live in a life in which
Pharaoh's on both sides of the bloody
red sheet but that's probably what a
full person is about that's what I dear
brother Frank wildest and others are
talking about right black folks lives
just cows waiting to be slaughtered
well there's a sense in which that's
true but that's not the last word and I
think brother Frank would agree with
that even though his Paul Taylor's
review of his recent book in The
Washington Post is a fascinating start
for conversation but what a black people
done well we had to create on the
margins structures of feeling structures
of value that were in America but not of
America and politically when it came to
the contestation for power the best of
the black tradition has recognized that
both parties has never spoken in any
serious way to our plight into our
predicament so that either we had to hit
the streets we had to go to jail that
most of our leaders who told the truth
knew they were going to be assassinated
literally or their character
assassinated
they knew that field leaders would be
crucify lied on misunderstood but people
still were not fearful they were not
fearful brother Martin used to say I'd
rather be dead then afraid marcus garvey
always had a folk at the beginning of
every rally the Negro is not afraid has
no fear and Oliver that's fear but
courage is are working through fear so
do you have to have courageous folk who
are willing to cut against that grain
and the music and the literature and the
painting provides some alternative
vision of the reality here in the great
August Wilson you know the great
playwright with his ten cycle plays
offenses and so forth he used to say
every time a artist especially a black
artist
produces their authorizing an
alternative reality and you can't
sustain a left movement without
authorizing an alternative reality that
is not just contra what's in place but
actually is the positive constructive
vision analysis and most importantly
courage of willing to live and die
that's what I love about a don't worry
that brother is gonna die
anti-capitalist also called constancy I
don't agree with everything a don't put
forth my plan he and I fight like dogs
thirty years ago but he's always been my
brother and he is a intellectual who's
committed to getting us to see with
different analysis getting us to discern
with different lens through which to
view the world and that's what serious
folk do and of course you're a great
that's what precisely with great great
poets bill shell it says poets are the
unacknowledged legislators of the world
as the last line in in defense of poetry
that pasta ballistics that he published
after he is after he died in his young
life he's absolutely right how do we see
differently and it's hard to see
differently if it is locked in the
corporate media that's why we love
sister Amy Goodman so that's why we love
Michael Brooks show you know what I mean
that's why we love to Michael Moore show
that we have some alternative lens to
look at the world no none of us have a
monopoly on truth we all in this jazz
orchestra together we're raising our
voices trying to empower others all with
a partial view none of us having the
full truth but together we come closer
to reality with more love commitment to
justice more courage and then go down
swinging before the worms get our body
so as if I'm hearing you correctly you
it almost seems to me like if you take
time to read something that does
necessarily you you can't quantify
reading an opera you can't always a
value on it but when you step and you
reclaim time to do that you're actually
in a very small way prototyping or
enacting a very different reality that's
exactly right
that's exactly right that's why Socratic
legacy of Athens it's so important
Socrates says look I'm going to examine
myself and society critically and I'm
going to be faithful unto death and that
example itself will serve as a catalyst
for other people to see themselves
differently it will provide a process to
see themselves differently through self
criticism and I would say the same thing
about the prophetic legacy of truth
that's precisely what with with Esther
in English and in Jesus and Mohammed
about I want you to see the world
differently I want you to be able to
keep track of the suffering keep track
of the misery and to respond to it in
such a way that is takuna alone you can
change it you can amend it but then you
have to have the scientific legacy of
the Enlightenment which is to say you're
gonna need some analytical tools you
have to understand what cathlin is all
about going to understand what these
forms of imperialism are all about got
to understand gender not in terms of
some abstract category but ways in which
male supremacy have been shot through
pre-capitalist and capitalist and white
supremacist practices and the same is
true until the transfer will be a
homophobe and what-have-you and but in
the end it's going to be a way of life
and this is this is something that is
very difficult I think in our
civilization most people have a
lifestyle rather than a beep serious way
of life for the lifestyle comes from the
market the totalization the carrots the
status the money that's dangled in front
of us and we're obsessed with success
and we lose out on moral and spiritual
greatness but moral and spiritual
greatness comes from a way of life and
that has to do with a calling to do with
location
and and and that's why you can just read
anybody I mean good god of mine it could
be the highest level of a Shakespeare or
a Beethoven or a very Luke Williams or a
John Coltrane
or it could be medium you know you could
be listening to some of the popular
groups around who are wonderful but if
they ain't baked oh you know they
wonderful put it not very Luke Oh
Coltrane that's all right here by a
palette I left but Dignam it from their
souls that they coming from the sauce it
just plans for money and it's a
different kind of thing and you can feel
it deep can you come up yeah as well to
a book that you write very or that you
wrote early called the ethical
dimensions of Marxist thought where you
actually said that Marx and and I love I
actually really love that Marx gives us
a materialistic angle like hey this
isn't because you know people are being
grumpy or whatever there's actually
economies in place and interests in
place I love that but then at the same
time we try to buy oh yeah operated the
power instructors at institutions
absolutely and then there's a yeah you
know me Marxist last name was was
Mordecai he comes from six generations
and rabbis his father changed his name
when his father converted to Protestant
so Karl Marx is a profoundly Jewish
brother who grew up Protestant Lutheran
in a jew-hating pressure who then
becomes atheist because he sees the ways
of which churches accommodate themselves
the vicious forms of oppression and his
day and ups in our day but he has a deep
commitment to oppressed people
so he's looking for scientific tools
that will help provide illumination to
get people to see what's really going on
to get beyond the commodity form and see
commodity is not just as things but as
relations you see working people not
just as employees
but in power relations in the workplace
asymmetric power relations in the
workplace feasibly capital and why it is
the capital doesn't want them to
organize why it is the capital will
crush them when they possess any kind of
threat to the profits of capital Karl
Marx has an ethical dimension but it's
not an abstract ethics it's a deep
concern tied to freedom it gets it from
Schiller's letters on the static
education he gets it from from Hegel he
gets it from himself with the poet he
wrote magnificent volumes of poetry to
sister Jenny who was his his wife who
was a upper-class and he had the Mary
across class lines as her family never
wanted to come close to him and so forth
so he's got this romantic sense tied to
vision imagination transformation and he
thought that the only way you do that
has overcome the forms of alienation and
capital society and alienation for him
was a power relation in which working
people being exploited were unable to be
able to see enough and be unable to
organize strong enough that have their
dignity affirmed and to live lives that
flower and flourish so horse is one of
the greatest prophets of the last 250
years though there's no doubt about that
Marx has his own you know limitations in
terms he was still European and so he
didn't have fundamental understandings
of white supremacy he was still a man
and didn't have deep understandings of
male supremacy at all and he had he
didn't see religion having the real
possibilities for prophetic and
progressive possibility when he looked
at religion he just saw opiate of the
people he said when he looked at
religion he didn't see Daniel Baer he
didn't see Dorothy Day he didn't see
Martin Luther King jr. he didn't say
rabbi Haskell what he saw was
institutional forms of Christianity
Judaism and so forth and most of those
institutional forms are accommodated to
oppression and he's right about that
we sign regular science and I want to
just also mention another big influence
on me the mismeasure of man by Steven
Jake oh brother to you yes my colleague
here at Harvard he's a wonderful brother
we miss it we miss very very much so
very much so I'm sorry to go on and on
like no other no he should you allow
what we want no indeed appreciate I mean
it's the kind of engagement that you
have with the right-wing brothers it's
your marvelous text that just recently
appearing that you want to you want to
take people on based on argument
evidence ideology their own myopia their
own cowardliness their own caricatures
strong men and women that they could
talk in order to think they've put
forward strong arguments and then think
that they're not accountable that
they're not answerable you say no I'm
gonna be Socratic listen to these kind
of arguments and by the end of the text
is clear who wins but you have won
now granted that means so many those
right we brothers are not the most
profound right-wing bubbles around let's
just be honest I said yeah well they're
not in whisper phones and I'm not
everywhere and in our late oh I mean
there's been stuff profile conservative
of folks out there who we do we have to
confront because the world is full of a
variety of different forms of insight
and wisdom they come from a number of
different ideologies we have to just be
clear where we take a stance but I do
appreciate that service that you
rendered because I think after your text
oh brother
it's gonna be about over from almost all
of that's a great let me just say let me
just say could you really I wanted I
hope that you will join us again I will
send you chronics and could you leave us
with and I know that you want to be very
clear that that Trump has got to go and
I think I'd all right let though the
folks that have any ambiguity about that
at least hear what you know I want to be
clear in Rutgers
dr. Weston saying but what can you leave
us with one one daily dying note
something we could take with us in our
own daily death oh no it would be a blue
nose and the blue nun was always held
the truth at any cost
bear witness to love with all the risk
and then intervene in a situation not of
your making where you have to work with
what you got
you see that's what Bessie Smith dear
and that's what Howlin wolf did they
always told the truth they bore witness
to the love inside of them they always
knew they had to work with what they got
no matter what kind of guitar they had
no matter what club they were they could
still be true to themselves they're not
gonna pose and posture I was just
talking to my dear brother Bootsy caller
loved that brother we worked on album
together from capitol of the world he
got a new album coming out either he's
one of our great geniuses I want to hear
it and the fundamental thing is you
can't spank the song we can't have
owning people posing and posturing they
one thing and that's not now that's what
we love about blues for better we love
about Malcolm and Fannie Lou and Mark
they said what they meant they meant
what they thought and that's what we
have to have and so even in this moment
in which we have to have anti-fascist
coalition anti-fascist a practice and
that Thai fascist tech that fascist
sensibilities and what have you just
don't lie to the people don't lie to
yourself and we're both different but
we're not all gangsters well as long as
you got standards that's exactly right
that does that see I'm even a little
more grim than that as a revolutionary
Chris because I know I got gangster
proclivities and me brother
Oh telling you I was a gangster former
Jesus and I'm a redeemed revolutionary
Christian with gangster proclivity but
what it allows me to do is steal you
know recognize that I've got to be
humble enough to try to learn from
others and humble enough to try to
understand people's situation but I
still come down strong in terms of the
truth that I try to tell jump to the
witness that I try to bear and the
justice I try to seek and in that sense
I want to be a blues man in the life of
the mind
and that's one of the highest highest
compliments one can ever have somebody
called you brother Michael books man
you'd like the blues man oh wow
am i fat for real even given my
hypocritical proclivity
you show our brother Brooks and you're
gonna do your thing they have your radio
show read your books and keep fighting
before people and oppress people around
the world and pay any cost
yeah that's the kind of Michael Brooks I
am on the vanilla side of town blues is
not in any way tie the skin pigmentation
my presence do Lulu Lulu no no blues is
that is a way of life open to every
party and that's the American democracy
we can redeem if we ever get our way out
of this that's the best of the American
project but it's the best of I think
projects all around the world
definitely definitely doctor welcome
brother love you respect your man and
you stay strong thank you so much I hope
you'll return and stay safe and be well
all right don't make it big god bless
all your loved ones in this moment
though I don't let oh you too take care
all right folks we are gonna take a
brief break and we will be right back
with the gem with David Griscom
we'll be right back

alright guys I'm taking the rest of the
evening off anyways thanks for everybody
for making that possible obviously and I
think we will
I think dr. West was happy yeah so I
think we'll do more i but now it's time
for another incredibly important part of
the show the gym yeah if they have a
Gris come please they'll go for it yeah
well just you know talking and that kind
of international tradition and
orientation that we're trying to build I
wanted to talk about specifically what's
been going on in Argentina over the past
couple of weeks because it's a very
important story for us in our interval
project of fighting against this
horrible system of exploitation so in
Argentina for people who don't know
there's a new president who was recently
elected president Fernandez who took
over after one of just a horrendous kind
of right-wing neoliberal institution
under President Macri who very much
devastated all the social programs you
know did the kind of classic neoliberal
policies destroyed this welfare state
destroyed the health care system and
obviously at a time like this
those things are desperately needed and
they weren't standing on on good footing
to face this coronavirus crisis so the
response in Argentina though under the
new government under Fernandez this
government has been quite heroic
especially for South America which has
been you know really taken over with
this horrible right-wing wave and you
know the coronavirus just really it's
just really starting to sprout up there
and it's looking you know very dangerous
for a lot of folks so anyways when
Fernandez's response has been a massive
stimulus it's around 2% of the GDP of
Argentina which is huge it's much larger
than pretty much any of the g20
countries he's ensuring that there are
no cuts to essential services for folks
he's making sure that domestic workers
and this is actually a really great
proposal domestic workers are getting
direct payments because those
people are usually the first ones to be
let go in situations like this all in
all around 8 million people receive
subsidies in Argentina and you know he's
provided funding to business much like
many other countries have done but
there's been one a simple demand with it
you will not fire your employees if the
government comes in to help you out
you must retain your workers now you
know I mean it's just like a you know 90
day kind of situation first is the
United States he also has asked Congress
to tax the super-rich and he told the
rich in Argentina boys it's time for you
to earn less such a good one that's a
good Latin American left like that's
very Lula that's very that's very Google
Shabbos like boys basically I mean you
know this is such a light story in a way
because it's a good humane response to a
crisis right this isn't some kind of you
know a Soviet government some kind of
radical workers state I mean this is
just kind of Stalin
human politics in the middle of a crisis
and the second part of of this of this
story is hitting on one of the
fundamental inequities of the time that
we're living in that is the system of
capitalist exploitation so while this is
all going on there's been a fight going
on behind the scenes with the bond
holders so Argentina has a significant
amount of debt a significant amount of
this debt by the way it was picked up
under McCree and you know they took in
like really horrendous IMF bailout
before and those come with all of these
rules okay you need to cut spending you
know cut social services all those kind
of neoliberal policies but there's also
the bond holders right and these
bondholders
just so you understand the vast majority
of them are American people
super wealthy American organizations
these are a Blackrock fidelity to zero
price right these are American
institutions you know some of their
headquarters I can you know are just
down the road in New York City and they
are basically saying to the Argentinians
who have come Argentinians have come
forward and say we cannot make these
debt payments at a period of crisis we
need to give the money that we have to
the people directly and to go into an
emergency
spending program to support Argentinean
people well the debt holders have come
back and they have refused to accept
these these cuts so you know obviously
these are negotiations and obviously
Argentina wants to pay as you know as
little as possible in this time and
obviously the bondholders want to
extract as much as they can but any kind
of rational humane system would
recognize that you can't do the
necessary stimulus spending to make sure
that the entire country doesn't fall
into a great depression and pay massive
amounts of debts back debts that were
incurred under a previous administration
you know so like the the debt agreement
that Argentina put forward was saying
that they will continue to make the
payments just had a smaller rate their
only pay 0.5% interest rates that will
eventually raise up to the 5% interest
rates which are very high by global
standards by the way and the bondholders
have all come together coalesce together
and they said no we will not accept this
so there's a potential that Argentina
you know could have another debt crisis
where they default and that comes with
all these financial penalties
Argentina's had this happen in the past
and basically the blame is being put on
the Fernandez government for you know
not coming to the table to look out for
the poor bondholders while their country
is struggling and I I wanted to hit this
because obviously it's a very
frustrating story we'll see what happens
you know it doesn't just happen just I
just want to say they haven't even
straight up default they're just saying
let's go at a lower rate while we deal
with the global pandemic and protect our
people because if you want them to not
default to if you're like a rational
actor you don't does burdened because
you want them to have an economy
five-year because these are long bonds
right these bonds pay off for years and
years and years that's why you invest in
them because you're gonna get payments
back in the long term if you want to get
payments back from Argentina ten years
from now
you should want them to recover their
economy right now in the short term I
mean it's just the constant struggle
that we see where capitalists they
cannot never look towards the future as
always what's right in front of them and
what's what will happen for example is
if they were to get their way it would
be like
going back to the original you know
history of Argentina and Latin America
to that rate where they just turned the
entire continent into an open pit mine
to mind silver and they didn't care
about the damage that was being done to
the people who live there and the
environmental damage either right this
is the kind of mindset of financial
capital right extraction extraction
extraction they've been wearing all kind
of political inhuman circumstances and I
was thinking about this when you know
you were talking to Cornel West - I
think it's very important that we make
this point - it's not just a quick look
it's evil but they're doing is
absolutely evil right
but they're not doing waking up in the
moist that you know today I'm just gonna
do some evil stuff that some
Argentinians they're saying I want to
make as much money as possible in the
shortest amount of time right and I'm
going to leverage as much as I can and
and the system that we live in the
people who have money and the people who
are trying to extract from the rest of
the world have tremendous amounts of
power so for countries like Argentina
and also for example what's going to be
happening in Africa over the next few
years with with this kind of the debt
crisis that's bubbling up there as well
they have a lot of power to enact
capital strikes these countries need
funding from the from the west from the
global north they can make them pay
outrageous interest rates they have a
lot of leverage and power over these
systems and that's something too that we
need to be watching out for as
organizations like the IMF and these
international organizations start giving
loan you know for giving some debt
offering loans at very low interest
rates we need to make sure as an
international community has left-wingers
that those forgive that forgiveness
that's coming from the international
community isn't just going to pay back
the bondholders because it's very likely
will happen we need to have everybody at
the table but you know what these people
basically want to do with the
bondholders interest is is they have
this class unity they understand that
they can leverage this kind of
extraction domestically in Argentina
what would that mean that would mean
further cuts of social safety nets so
that more people capitalist can come in
and privatize as much as possible and
for capitalists providing service to
people is a secondary aspect right what
matters more is extracting as much
profit as possible that's the worst kind
model to have during a pandemic source
kind of model to have during the you
know a global health crisis so you know
this endless search for profit it's it's
the grease of the wheels of some of the
most destructive and an inhumane system
that we've seen in in in human history
but until we tamed that motivation until
we've create systems that don't run on
the profit motive we are going to
continue to see these crises come up
over and over and over despite our very
human feelings of wanting to help our
neighbor help our communities the kind
of democratic feeling that that
Fernandez is representing here is being
completely be you know it's facing this
this economic logic that is completely
out of touch with the reality and the
human society that we want to live them
yeah that's perfect then I want to just
also note that uh when you go back to
the beginning of the pink tide and we've
covered the pink tide a fair amount on
this show and will only do so more I
mean pretty soon we're gonna have to do
some pretty significant coverage on
these new convictions thankfully in a
absentia least a president correa the
foreign president of Ecuador which in
some ways follow a similar script to the
the charges against Lula and Cristina de
Kirchner who is Alberto Fernandez's vice
president you know it's very important
to note that she and her husband came
into power and a genuine political
partnership Nestor is no longer alive
and really did reverse Argentina's
dependence on World Bank and IMF back in
the Bush era and they really did try to
reorient the economy and some pretty
important ways and they would probably
be you know as the sort of left
per√≥nists not probably the most
rightward part of the entire pink tie
and you know I would just say that you
know cristina kirchner like plenty of
these other leaders have just been
relentlessly demagogued and smeared in
the Western press yeah and it doesn't
mean I think this is you know there's a
countervailing tendency
where you know if somebody's opposed to
US interests we have to sanitize them we
can't have an intellectually rigorous
conversation I think that doesn't work
because I actually mainly even just
frankly for if you wanted to look at in
terms of propaganda purposes I don't
think that kind of bullshitting about
everything works on and I would actually
make a really hard and fast distinction
frankly between the enormous complexity
of something like China which we just
need to learn how to be adults about
which is gonna push back against the new
Cold War fear mongering war mongering
attempt also combined the fact that that
push against China's delusional I mean
how are you gonna how much you really
gonna bully a rising power where your
entire supply chain relies on them and
that it is very important to understand
how China looks the world how they
conduct their foreign policy and then at
the same time I think it's ridiculous
and foolhardy to make excuses of where
China you know abuses rights or whatever
else I just again I just think it's
silly and also you have to look at the
entirety of Asia in the Middle East
you know there's big variance here in
terms of Iran Syria wherever else but
and again abuse is committed by these
various governments and leaders like
Assad but the main story is pushing away
u.s. interventionism US imperialism
which is extraordinarily aggressive in
the Middle East obviously and I would
say particularly in Latin America the
distinction I would make is that these
governments are not perfect no
government is perfect but these are
still states that are struggling on the
periphery to do various forms of social
democracy or in Cuba's case more full
communism and that has to be a neatly
that that has to be something we're
really aligned with you know again I
think we could be politically and
ideologically intellectually coherent
and again China's very hard to figure
out obviously we'll do more coverage on
China I think in the Middle East I think
Iran is fascinating has a lot of iving
certainly offended plenty of people with
some of my defenses with Iran but Iran
is not a left Project
it's delusional Assad is not a left
project in Latin America these are left
projects and we really need to make that
distinction if we're looking from the
perspective of any government in the
periphery subject the US imperialism
trying to work out delivery and that
goes for Argentina it goes for Cuba goes
for Venezuela yeah I mean I would just
add specifically to the Latin America
dimension to is look it's like it's not
necessarily saying for example that you
know Fernandez I think I said that
during the gem to that you know this is
not necessarily some kind of like super
radical you know socialist project but
what this is very simply is as a nation
is a group of people who are being
exploited on the international scale
fighting back against that system and
not having the ability democratically to
make those kind of fundamental decisions
that you should be able to make in a
democracy right if you want to say that
we live in a democracy we want to put
people first we want to make sure that
those are people getting the funds first
you should be able to do that but is
really important when you start to take
this zoom out and you start to look at
the trajectory of history especially
over you know at the end of the the post
Cold War era is that global finance and
international capitalism really have
veto power over democracy and lost very
well and specifically - in latin america
i just in the same way that there are so
many debts just due to colonization and
the wickedness i think it's really
important that people understand how
severe a colonization and the extraction
of the continent latin america was
there's a really great book open veins
of Latin America they should definitely
check out I really opened my eyes up not
only just how brutal the colonization
was but actually how integral it was to
European capitalism
European capitalism that became the most
dominant mode of production in the world
could not have existed if it wasn't for
the exploitation of the natural
resources and indigenous people in the
Americas the same with new African
people and
Africa and with extraction in Asia I
mean but these things are very much tied
to the success success of the capitalist
project in Europe and in the United
States and when we're talking it well
when we're analyzing what's going on
today it's very important that we can
thread those things because those wounds
are so deep and it's not just
psychological it's just that these it's
not just psychological these are still
material relationships that continue
today and this exploitation still
continues in a very material way
absolutely and the reason that they
would have to crush and reverse the pink
tide generally is that all of these
leaders across the ideological from kind
of center left to soft nationalist
populist to much more socialistic
from you know Ortega to Lula they want
independence and that is fundamentally
unacceptable to u.s. foreign policy into
US corporate interests and also one of
the reasons why Venezuela was targeted
so aggressively from the beginning is
that Chavez with things like the CARICOM
initiative which implicate the 2010 coup
in Haiti and half implication for the
movement that was taking place you know
a year ago and ongoing in Haiti in terms
of basically you know Venezuelan next to
nothing interest loans that were there
to provide poverty relief and
development getting you know misdirected
by certain members of the government
that what Chavez did and what Dennis
whele is even still doing today when
they get test kits to their neighbors in
the Caribbean was say not only are we
going to use our oil revenues like you
know people don't know that as well
actually already had state oil companies
well before shabbos so wasn't even just
a question of nationalization it was a
question of using it geo-strategically
to try to create democratic and
development alternatives in the
Caribbean and Latin America and that is
and that is you know the geostrategic
reason of the u.s. pressure against
those states and it's also another
reason by the way when people don't like
this but I mean you know
the to the extent China and Russia
present in Latin America it's extremely
beneficial to counteracting us hegemony
and pressure their states in Asia like I
you know I don't look should we have a
war over Taiwan of course not but I'm
quite sympathetic to the Taiwanese
position in terms of their present
reality and you know and that's where
some of these complexities come in yeah
guys we're gonna take a break we're
gonna go to the postgame if you're
watching this and you have the ability
go become a patron a picture an
accomplished EMBs an enormous amount of
content and if you're watching this on
YouTube and your patron let everybody
know how great it is to be one we have a
jam-packed postgame of course we have
been Burgess of course we have Joshua
Kahn Russell we also have an organizer
from Harvard who's basically talking
about how to actually hold their
university accountable Piper Winkler is
gonna be joining us at the top half of
the postgame obviously you know we
arrived in another destination with
tonight's show we keep going we'll keep
developing we appreciate everybody who
helps make this possible upcoming guests
in the coming weeks
Judah free lands coming on that's gonna
be fun
Tory Reed is coming on and a bunch of
other amazing guests Tuesday's streams
Brian Mayer and Steven cook and Tuesday
it's excusable mark life two o'clock on
the global bailout we need if you
haven't yet hit subscribe and all the
rest of it but most importantly if you
can't go to picture and accomplished
EMBs thanks a million guys we'll see you
all in the postgame

you


## Keywords:
