---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ECPPI-5XRxc
---

# Video
147 -  Hybrid Wars w/ Vijay Prashad & Missing Basketball w/ Stavros Halkias
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ECPPI-5XRxc)

## Transcript:

welcome to the Michael Brooks show we're
broadcasting live from multiple
quarantine zones Brooklyn and New York
City it's super producer Matt lab hello
theoretician David Griscom a young on
this week's program Stone all right on
this week's program Vijay Prashad of the
Tri Continental Institute we're talking
about the global picture hybrid war is
the state of the non-aligned movement in
2020 what does that mean in u.s. hyper
empire the uprisings the relation
between them and capital corporate
hegemony and also why Vijay deeply
admires Ho Chi Minh and the success of
Kerala in dealing with the kovat crisis
potentially lessons for the globe then
Stavros how pious am i right in that
Matt Stavros our buddy from and I'll
just say CT no I'm just playing I
apologize I'm gonna ask him how his
parents felt when it came out that he
was hosting a show called Kong town but
he's a very very very funny man and we
are gonna be talking about why we are
missing basketball but at least I am
totally sketched out about how
basketball is reopening that's insane
I've been listening to that on hoops
adjacent with Waze and what David
Aldridge yeah also does oh I just had it
when I was gonna say soggy solves your
problems on Twitch well that's what
we're yes Dalek CI stop he solves your
problems on Twitch so we're actually in
the postgame he's gonna stick around for
some of the postgame we have some advice
questions from some TMDs patrons so
we're gonna do that we're gonna have a
lot of fun with stop people need some
looking forward to that of course you
got a Jim David what's cooking on the
Jim so I'm going to be talking about the
upcoming addiction crisis of why we need
more time on rent and bread assistance
right now absolutely way past due in the
postgame the movement for socialism is
surging in the polls in Bolivia but will
the coup regime allow a proper election
to take place plus other political
warfare taking place in pool Bolivia
leaders from Latin America sign a letter
condemning Israel's apartheid moves
Ronnie Kasrils on the Freedom Charter
and the antsy lessons for our moment
John McDonald puts out a statement in
solidarity with Ruger population and
China will talk about that and share his
solidarity plus a debunk with Ben
Burgess the ein Rand Institute is very
cozy some bailout funds we've also got
some news from Greece the return of the
technocracy or no and so many of you
even though I admit to being pretty sick
of it although I always end up getting
amused when we do it but so many of you
have said that a little bit of Dave
Rubin comedies is helping you in these
pandemic depression times and when Dave
Rubin says that he wants to be treated
like an adult and then illustrates he
wants to be treated like an adult by
talking about GI Joe
it's gonna make the cut and we're gonna
talk about in the postgame also Donald
Trump's Negus stupid re-election
campaign why beating him matters all
that and much much more on the Michael
Brooks show but first let's talk about
the Middle East where Israel is
continuing its plans to moving forward
with annexation in the West Bank now
historically and it has been the case
since of course the late 60s since the
67 war Israel has engaged in an ongoing
occupation in the West Bank they
withdrew from Gaza and the sharone area
but of course that was not substantive
in fact they maintained a brutal siege
on Gaza and with periodic high intensity
bombing campaigns that were condemned
almost uniformly across the world
besides the United States even former
Tory Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom David Cameron correctly called
Gaza an open-air prison and even as the
repression has continued and the
so-called peace process has been
discredited the closest that Israel
actually came to making any type of
legitimate two-state solution deal was
in the waning days of the a who'd Ulmer
administration not the 2000 negotiations
with Arafat was incorrectly solely
blamed for and smeared by US leaders so
even as that has happened
Israel internally has progressed further
and further to the extreme right under
the Netanyahu government and various
coalition's with parties that are said
to represent the center but of course
just representing more polite face of
Israeli repression of Palestinians as
well as other extreme right-wing settler
and religious parties and now Netanyahu
is moving forward formally with annexing
30% of the West Bank and this is in
accordance don't forget with the Trump
plan Mike Pompeo stated last year that
the Trump administration does not find
any Israeli settlements to be in
violation of international law now the
United States of course
always no matter what firmly install a
supported Israel but previous
administration's both Republican and
Democrat had actually politely made
clear that of course these settlements
are a violation of international law and
make it physically logistical IAM
possible for any type of equitable peace
settlement this has been the geographic
reality for some time and even as the
brutality has continued now Netanyahu
has found renewed political life even
under serious corruption investigations
and an erosion of the already profoundly
limited Israeli democracy under his
leadership in fully embracing an overt
apartheid a regimen
not only will annexation meaning
increase in Israeli controlled land but
the proposed maps would sequester
Palestinian communities so that they're
surrounded by Israeli controlled lands
meaning travel from place to place will
be completely controlled by Israel which
of course it already is in many parts of
the West Bank including things that
could come out of another error entirely
such as racially segregated or
ethnically segregated roads here is a
brief excerpt from a film the truth
about annexation put out by the
pro-peace Israeli fund a new Israel fund
what happens to private Palestinian land
sounds off what happens to private
Palestinian lands in the annexed area
are they expropriated and what about the
Palestinians that live in communities
that Israel doesn't recognize did they
become illegal aliens on their lines but
the sipoc colony lay the kohlrabi
monchita the commercial hot falestine in
Changsha who bets an acoustic am super
eval and you woke a finical of them be
silent upon it there are a development
skill not
midi neutral dome Africa to fight
apartheid lead hawkish female ever
smooth Villa get lumps Amenti no tell me
something some denote a leaking at the
Palestinian laser love doing slam Medina
laryngeal apartheid the law
kanakam apartheid em quick by the way
just if you're listening to some podcast
that's an analyst making clear the very
overt parallels between South Africa and
2012 apartheid South Africa and 2020
Israel Palestine those analogies if you
don't like them it should be clear were
originally made by people like Nelson
Mandela and Desmond Tutu who explicitly
connected those struggles this is former
Israeli prime minister a who Tomer
asking a more practical and political
question why now on Fareed Zakaria on
CNN does this have something to do with
his relationship with Trump with the
November elections what what are your
thoughts
I think quite frankly that if he does
this what it reflects in my mind is
growing concern on the side of Netanyahu
that Trump will not be reelected
everyone says that this is an
opportunity for us because Trump
supports Israel but if Netanyahu is
confident that Trump will be reelected
why hurry up now why not wait until
after the elections and then while Trump
is president and being reelected he can
coordinate it with the Americans the
feeling that he hurries up is because he
may not be confident that Trump will be
reelected I think that this is
unfortunately you know in 2012 the
Israeli prime minister was very much
involved in what appeared to be an
attempt to a support there then a
Republican candidate Mitt Romney so what
you have there as the former Prime
Minister Olmert who in addition to
committing significant war crimes in
Gaza was the last and maybe actually
only Prime Minister that at least
proposal wise and consistently rhetoric
wise has been serious about not a full
binational democracy but a genuine
two-state 67 borders solution which no
other including Barak if you look at the
substance of what he ordered yes he did
make withdrawals in the late 90s but the
ultimate deal that was presented to
Arafat in the waning days of the Clinton
administration would not be tenable for
any Palestinian leadership than Omer it
has coupled this criticism with an
increasingly harsh attack on Netanyahu's
leadership but in many respects Olmert
is sort of a man of another time when
Israel was concerned about bipartisan
support and presenting a brand of
liberalism
even as it repressed Palestinians now
there's been attempts to confuse the
issue
Netanyahu's claim that annexation could
begin on July 1st apparently has not
begun yet but the date went without
policy announcement from the government
leading to speculation about possible
pressure against this move from the
United States Boris Johnson the UK prime
minister among others have expressed
their opposition to annexation however
just because annexations anata P did not
occur on July 1st does not mean it's
going away the forces have that have
kept Netanyahu in power are still
politically strong and the slow ebbing
of Palestinian land may be easier to
achieve than a large-scale annexation in
fact this would reflect decades of land
theft from the Palestinian people or so
much of this plan depends on this Trump
administration and it is very likely
that Netanyahu will try to assert and
secure as much of that as possible as
Omar pointed before a potential Joe
Biden administration however we expect
any type of real shift from Biden very
unlikely I think it's really important
you know we're all you know pushing it
and making is clear you know what's
happening with annexation and you know
the slow Abbas you were just mentioning
I think it's really important for people
to understand too how serious the
division of land being basically
separating communities from one another
it was devastated to family as a
community ously dozen states your
economic opportunities if you can't
leave your village or your town without
getting permission from Israel to do so
but people really do get stranded in you
know in a country that's their own
they're unable to be able to see family
members for years at the time you know I
cannot remember the young boy's name but
there's plenty of stories of families
who have a child born in one area who's
not able to come back and live with
their parents and another just because
they were born in the wrong part of
Palestine and you know it's something
that is absolutely tragic and I think
that it's 100 percent
right - to use the words that Desmond
Tutu and Nelson Mandela does you know
apartheid when you were separating
people based on their their background
you know that 100% is our part time when
you have different rules and laws and
regulations for different people
different religions and different
ethnicities that's a part time and you
know we'd have to want to pose it but
also in our context to really push back
against the Trump administration because
Trump has really opened up the door for
Netanyahu to pursue a very very
aggressive policy that he might not have
been able to you know before so what I
think is interesting just as an outsider
looking in is how Israel chose this path
especially been really recently with
when Netanyahu came and spoke to the
Republican House like I I remember
having arguments about Israel and like
none obviously is formed as on this show
but about you know can you really are
they as right-wing as they look and
things like that and what he did that it
basically just confirmed right like is
like Netanyahu and the and like what he
represents is more in line with the
Republican Party know regardless of what
Obama tries to do I don't know it's it's
sort of frightening that they they threw
all in on a party that at that point it
looked like they were going to lose and
stay outside of the executive branch for
a long time I know it seems it's just
been very very strategic and I don't
know concerning not only is that true
but Israel is in some ways you could say
the global epicenter of the far-right
I mean Hungary is key at this point it's
globally periphery it's proliferating
globally but if you actually even look
at even some of the kind of early
intellectual architecture of the sort of
new ultra nationalism that we see some
of that definitely comes from Israeli
intellectuals the sort of you know
formal turning away and again it's
tricky because Israel was obviously you
know it was never a proper fully secular
democracy because there's idea you know
there's a
entity boundaries around this is one of
my core critiques of all identitarian
formations at the end of the day come
from growing up around at times of
horrific apologetics around Israel and
and and so on but definitely under
Netanyahu and accelerating indeed under
the Obama era there was a real emphasis
on sort of turning to this kind of
explicitly sort of national neo-nazi
listed politics and this tract with
Israel you know making common cause with
extreme far-right you know parties in
Europe who you know at least ancestrally
would have been profoundly anti-semitic
although of course now they're sort of
bigotry returns in Islam there's a book
it's cut it's by yo arm Hassan II and
it's called the virtue of nationalism
and this book is the sort of you know
this is the kind of intellectual the pop
version you get from people like Bannon
so it's very very important you can't
separate any variety of attacks on
essentially pluralistic democracies and
full substantive rights for minority
populations that are occurring
internationally without the very
specific contribution of the Israeli
right to again you know justify into
perpetuity governing millions of people
that are not under any form of
democratic legitimacy and that's just
the bottom line and you know the real
difference it rhetoric does matter so
even though you know Barack's deal was
ridiculous
there's obviously bigger claims that go
back to the Mokpo and 47 there's a lot
of complexities here but Omer and Barak
particularly Olmert consistently used
the word apartheid Israeli leaders used
the word apartheid before that came to
United States because the ones that had
at least a buy-in to some sense of
genuine in the positive sense liberal
democracy they saw this and they said
this isn't going to work
it's not even an ethical question and
what Netanyahu and others anticipated
was that actually between the Republican
Party between some of the currents
rising in Europe and elsewhere by
including some real synergies with BJP
in India why not why couldn't this work
and so that's that's uh that's a that's
a big question today and I and I
actually think you know we'll talk about
this more later but I I think one of the
other problems with this with the
identitarian turn that Adolph read
critiques is that there are there are
parallels coming from completely
different places but that there needs to
be some baseline fight in the political
realm about the idea of and practical
expression of full rights and equity for
all in a substantive way because it is
under siege and the right side of it a
major part of it is connected with
groundwork that was laid politically and
intellectually in Israel completely
inseparable from vicious seizures as on
Gaza and an apartheid situation them in
the West Bank I I agree completely just
wanted to add like on a personal sort of
there's a really amazing book by a
writer worried Bar Gotti that I highly
suggest called I was born there I was
born here and it's very much about he's
Palestinian and he's very much you know
it's about that kind of political
struggle on what life is like but it's
very powerful because for Americans who
are experiencing this sort of an
abstract way it's sometimes I don't know
it's like so many stories are sort of
decentered from that like full lives and
like when we talk about for example like
these people not being able to move from
town to town as if you hear that that's
horrible when you actually start to read
the stories and the actual like
emotional capacity there it becomes
something that's very visceral and
important so I highly suggest reading
his work bordbar Gotti is his name and
he's an amazing poet and I just I think
something is really important to dive
into if you have the ability awesome all
right guys let's do the pitch let me
just say real quick up top T mb/s
thought of them we're still doing our
pre-orders you can grab your no clue
your sacra and TMDs worldwide
shirts and long sleeves the orders are
coming in there American made and
teamster made to the full extent
possible go grab your shirts they help
and guys why should people become a
patron well you know the work that we do
are really able to touch on a lot of
different subjects and have incredible
guests and being a patriot really allows
us to do that that gives us the ability
to have a lot more creative controls
that we're not sort of stuck trying to
beat certain algorithms because our boss
is end up being y'all the patrons and
the listeners and then we're able to
create content that you all want to be
able to dive in to all the subjects and
you know educational materials that we
do you know on one hand we do these
shows for the public and then we do our
post games which is a whole second show
at the end of these which oftentimes
goes on just as long if not longer
so you're getting double the content on
the day on the Tuesday but then we're
also doing our Sunday shows we're doing
these illicit history documentaries
which were able to dive into really
interest in subjects the most recent one
was with Harvey can't believe and I was
you know a really important documentary
we were able to produce them because of
the support that we get from patrons
occasional every two weeks now we've
moved it to every two weeks I'm doing
theory readings we're jumping into
different subjects so you know we'll
take important questions on the left
like you know state theory and we'll say
okay let's read palance's Ralph Miliband
I'm going out who's there these
theorists who sort of you know are
laying out an entire you know mode of
thinking about the state right and we're
able to work through that together over
time so I was looking that that's
something that's very beneficial that
you're not getting other places you know
this kind of very curated reading list
of all these different ideas and
concepts on the left as well once a
month starting soon in addition for
patrons this is gonna happen once a
month but it will be really fun
Daniel bessner waz Neil hombre Nando
Vela and others we're gonna do a
Sopranos recap and that's just going to
be fun so in addition so all of the
other great extra content you get and
again just a platform for thinking
seriously and independent
the a variety of topics and issues we're
gonna be bringing in more themes more
topics and again not tethered to sort of
any small side of an argument hopefully
going bigger and trying to create some
real actual humanitarian politics here
and we do it on a base of you and we
work really hard and we're honored so
go-to pitch around accomplished EMBs get
the whole thing and if you're watching
you know make sure you go into our
archives there's a lot of great content
there including all of our elicit
histories you know as the men just
joined the meeting room himself the 121
episode of the for patrons money
Islamophobia and fascism in India that
you Vijay Prashad exactly there we go
and joining us now we get he's here yep
okay fantastic joining us now is Vijay
Prashad of the tri continental Institute
ok muted himself okay maybe yeah and he
knows that we're live and yeah I think
so so few right intro okay joining us
now is Vijay Prashad of the tri
continental Institute Vijay thanks so
much for being here how are you I'm
super so nice to see you how's the
pandemic doing for you well it's cooled
down in New York a little bit but it's
still I unfortunately I suspect it will
come back how are you doing with it no
first I'm not sure about this Michael
because I don't know you that well but
did you have a beard before the pandemic
or is this a pandemic beard this length
is a pandemic beard I mean it suits you
it's not a bad look all right this is
the second week in a row Bill Fletcher
jr. like the beard a lot as well right
and so I of course shave every day
because I think that my beard comes in
gray and I'm not necessarily a vain
person Michael but I would not like to
have a big gray beard to be the first
thing you see when you see me I guess it
would be of
but I could imagine that that would have
a lot of gravitas to it I'm not looking
for gravitas I'm looking for revolution
it's a big difference you know I'm a
resolutely I'm not a I'm not a wise
person absolutely and I think this beard
fits I think I'm actually VJ a lot of
Castro comparisons I gotta tell you
well when the when the revolutionaries
came from the Sierra Maestra into the
cities they were known as the bearded
ones because all of them you know they
none of them could shave and they all
came down with beards and that's the
term that was used by Buddha's the
bearded ones so there you are
the bearded and you'll be the you'll be
the clean-shaven one I am Che Guevara
when he shaved his beard and went off to
the Congo looking like a businessman if
you look at those photographs I model
myself after the Che of the businessman
look I love it we have a lot of time to
think about a lot of things in
quarantine is it okay there though I
mean as are things going okay it
definitely I mean a couple of months ago
you know people in my sort of not
immediate circles but one step removed
were dying I mean there was it was it
was it was very really horrible there
was a lot of action and now it's now in
a way it's kind of weirdly back to a
bizarre kind of normal in New York well
you know you're right in the initial
period of the pandemic I lost five
friends one of them in Tehran one in
Paris two in New York actually and it
looked like I thought you know I lose
friends on a regular basis and then that
has stopped and I'm not exactly sure why
I mean that's curious because you know I
have a lot of friends and comrades in
Brazil and I worry about them daily I
talked to my team in Brazil regularly I
worry about my team in Argentina where
the pandemic is again escalated it just
somehow
seemed that there was this initial burst
of people that I knew that got the
disease and died and now it seems that
other people that I don't know are
getting it but this is a very dangerous
situation Michael because well we know
it's a contagious disease we also know
it apparently is not so lethal and that
distinction is important mare's the
Middle East respiratory syndrome was far
more lethal
I do remember returning from Beirut
coming to see a doctor in the United
States and they said where have you
traveled and I said well I was in Cairo
in Beirut and they immediately put me in
isolation came in hazmat suits tested me
because you know with mare's the death
rate was 36% so one in three people who
contracted mayor's died that's
unbelievable that's a terrifying number
can we I want to talk in a few minutes
about Kerala and maybe Vietnam and kovat
but but first you know were several
weeks now into these uprisings that have
taken place across the United States
after the murder of George Floyd and
coming on the tail of the murder Brianna
Taylor and Achmed are buried and there's
been a lot that is shaken out it was
always going to be an uphill struggle to
connect the urgent crisis of defunding
and racism and policing and connected to
the broader distributional questions
that underline and are connected to it
or it would get pivoted into sort of
another round of kind of cultural
skirmishes and so on and I and I think
you know unfortunately we've been
trending in that direction but but what
are you what do you make of the
uprisings the intrinsic importance of
them and how they're playing out I mean
Michael honestly the United States has a
serious problem it has a kind of rot in
its soul this is a country that from its
inception was not able to handle the
crime of having human beings as property
I mean there's not many countries in the
world that from their inception
given the opportunity to walk away from
having human beings as property you know
none of the founding fathers stood up
and said that we think that human beings
should not be property I mean that's
that there's a cry there's a rot in the
soul of the American original story and
then right through there's never really
been an accounting of this and therefore
punctually every time there's a
particularly grotesque incident of
violence by the police there is a cycle
of uprisings you know this is a punctual
thing it's not between the death of
Michael Brown in Ferguson and George
Floyd I'm told that there were there
have been you know thousands of people
killed by the police department not all
African American not all Latinos but
thousands of people killed by the police
department that you know hurts me as a
human being that's something that should
actually hurt people that a police
department would kill so many people you
know you have a civilization and I'm
sorry I'm using the word civilization a
lot but you have a civilization that
believes that it's better to use social
resources to put a police officer
between food and a hungry person than to
just use those resources to feed the
hungry person I mean Eric Ghana was
killed because he was allegedly selling
loose cigarettes
George Floyd was killed because he was
allegedly passing a counterfeit $20 bill
these are two people hungry wanting to
feed their family why not is a
civilization find a way to feed the
family rather than hire people to stand
between food and the hungry this is a
choice that a civilization is made and
the United States needs to look this
choice in the eye and say that either we
accept this choice or we reject this
choice and it seems to me that when
young people when sensitive people say
defund the police what they're actually
saying Michael is they're saying I would
prefer to get George Floyd food then
hire a police officer to prevent him
from eating I'd prefer for Eric garner
and his children Erika and others I'd
prefer them to get resources to have a
dignified
find life then to hire police officers
to suffocate him on the street that's
what they're saying they're not saying
let's get rid of the police you know
they're not naive but they're they're
making an argument that the
civilizational choice made by the United
States is unacceptable and I tend to
agree with them it's an unacceptable
thing hungry people should never be
prevented from food by a police officer
I think that is a vulgarity and if
vulgarity particularly when it's so much
on racial grounds so in that sense the
United States is a decaying civilization
and the young sensitive people on the
streets they recognize that and I I
applaud them for that and and that's
right and so when you and we talked with
Cedric Johnson about this a couple of
weeks ago moving beyond the technical
fix and connecting police violence to
all of these other distributional and
power questions and then you know we see
the way kind of launches out and so all
of us and you you know you seal
regularly you'll see activists using
social media and they'll quote tweets a
new you know silly story like the Golden
Girls are gonna take get taken off the
air or some nonsense and it will and
they'll say okay can we get back to
defund the police please and so you know
going several weeks in as the powers
that be start to engage with it Cedric
Johnson called it black washing and a
piece in the Jacobin the further we get
to again a new kind of culture war
politics primarily of kind of elite
institutions in the upper middle class
away from the class dimension and the
basic humanity dimension of you should
not be a target of law enforcement and
violence because of the color of your
skin and we're you know people have
risked their lives we saw the incredible
brutality and viciousness of police
response but now you know a couple of
weeks out here we are back in another
sort of you know superficial culture war
cycle yeah but I don't see that Michael
I don't actually agree with that I feel
like I would I'd like to say two things
one is
I understand that there was frustration
over the deep violence and you know by
the way rioting does happen rioting is
not something that happens because it's
you know driven by somebody no it's a
direct reaction to a decayed system you
know people are frustrated they're angry
they they just come out that happens but
then there were these protests organized
by often young black women in many
cities they were the principal
organizers not from any political
organization and but they were helped by
other organizations and so on and those
took place that moved into I think a
very correct questioning of the things
that are celebrated in society statues
for instance confederate statues throw
them away Columbus and so on you see my
issue is not that then it goes into the
culture war I would like a conversation
to happen which is not disappointment
with the nature of the movement but to
try to deepen and further and advance
the movement so where the movement needs
to go now is it needs to come back to
the old question and I understand that
this old question eyeballs will roll
people will sigh but it's the old
question of reparations
I mean look reparations is it's a very
maybe antagonistic word it's a it's a
it's a fighting kind of word but this is
what it means it means forty acres and a
mule you know you promised after the
abolition of enslavement you promised
reconstruction you gave a slogan forty
acres in a mule if I calculate the price
of forty acres in a mule from 1865 to
2020 it amounts to reparations you know
what do you need you need the fat you
need to have a serious discussion about
the fact that there is enormous amount
of wealth in the United States and in
tax havens that should be brought into
productive use inside the United States
you cannot have a country the United
States such a rich country where
somebody is not able to feed themselves
in their family in fact I believe that
nobody on the planet Earth should be
hungry
I think hunger is the Great abomination
of 2020 but if we're talking
specifically
the United States Michael it is an
abomination you know people should be
able to go and eat food somewhere you
know that should just be a fact they
should be no need to commodify food okay
so let's talk about that let's advance
the conversation I'm more interested in
that then in saying oh the whole debate
you know the whole struggle has been
diverted by the elites and so on I don't
care about the elites I don't care about
Joe Biden I don't care about the
Democratic Party they they interest me
nothing because they are going to be
disappointing always you know that's not
the way to think I don't care about
their black washing I'm more interested
in how do we advance the movement how do
young people who have entered into a
movement often for the first time in
their lives have been politicized how do
we show them how do we you know give
them our sense of history and say you
know what's important get the statue
down I agree with you I don't have any
problem get Columbus down I have no
problem with that but now let's demand
that everybody get fed you know Columbus
one side food the other yeah
and that that yeah that statues of
course those statue should come down but
those can be the icing on the cake you
know not the the sole function um do you
actually let's go to Kerala I'm very I
was actually I'm gonna go on a slight
there version I'm tempted to ask you are
you actually surprised that you don't
see more things like rioting in the
United States yes I am surprised I mean
look the fact is that you know you were
going to ask me about Kerala and Vietnam
or things and and I would like to
actually bring that into to how I would
answer you when you create a society
where public action is de legit amazed
you know in the United States there's
been a hundred year almost hundred year
attack on trade unions on people's
organizations I mean you go back to the
raids in 1919 the Palmer Raids then
McCarthyism you know there's been a long
history of attacking trade units
gathering unions
breaking up people's organization
independent organizations of people you
atomized people you let them be on their
own you know then they join relatively
illegal in very disturbing type of
organizations that's what happens in
places like the United States where you
fragment society in a place like Kerala
almost everybody is a member of either a
trade union women's organization youth
organizations student organization
cooperatives and so on
it's a highly organized society people
don't see themselves as individuals and
by the way some of the organizations are
scripted in other words their church
groups or their religious groups or
whatever but people are organized so
that when a crisis hits a place like
Kerala public action kicks in
immediately
you know the trade unions come out there
they start feeding people they build
sinks in public they do all kinds of
things
in the United States when you have a
crisis the magnitude of this pandemic
you don't see the trade unions doing
anything I mean trade unions have sort
of taught themselves to be bargaining
units where have the trade unions been
to bring medicines to the elderly where
have the trade unions being to feed the
homeless feed the poor you just don't
see them anywhere Michael in Cuba 28,000
medical students walked out of their
dormitories and tested 11 million Cuban
citizens that's the totality of the
population of Cuba 28,000 medical
students I haven't seen a medical
student from any American University
public or private go out and test the
public in fact you're in New York I
doubt that any state official or quasi
state of vigilance rung your doorbell
and said can I stick this thing up your
nose to test you nobody because the
state has collapsed in the United States
and society is not available and this is
the reason why I believe that in a
country like the United States when
anything happens
the tendency to mass rioting is much
greater because there's no mediation
between the people and their
frustrations and the elites you know
there's no organizations unions and so
on
is go out then they're angry in other
societies there are mediations that
surprise you pay to destroy society
other kerala create that trajectory for
itself and in a global age how can
America at even me left in the United
States I know I'm being very critical
today but I wish that the left in the
United States and one of the goals of
this show is to have a much more
genuinely global perspective so that
even sometimes when we generate
movements there's this idea that we're
exporting them versus the sort of the
history that to me in many ways you
exemplify one of the reason I admire
your work so much that this really is a
global collaborative and endeavor and it
works east-west north-south there are
there is a you know a shared working
condition that's universal and there are
overlapping trajectories and aspirations
and we can learn from each other so and
I think you know Kerala to me is a very
striking example of that a Marxist State
or someone Marxist state in India that
has this extraordinary performance above
its own nation-state and very relevant
to not only the kind of immediate crisis
of covent but the underlying conditions
you're talking about I mean look it took
a hundred years for Kerala to build this
it's not just that there's a communist
government in power there you know this
is part of the history of the state
building public action into the culture
of Kerala into the Society of Kerala the
importance of public action and so on I
mean look the United States had the
importance of public action it was such
an important part of US history until
the early 20th century you know in a
sense until the Bolshevik Revolution in
the USSR there were very important
public institutions of people in the
United Stated unions you know whether
it's the old AFL or it's the IWW the
International Workers of the world and
let's not just stay with unions let's
talk about neighborhood organizations
and then let's talk about church groups
and so on but 20 years ago an American
political scientist by the name of
Robert Putnam wrote a book which had a
rather silly title and it seemed
anachronistic he wrote
a book called Bowling Alone and the
point of the book was that Americans
don't belong to things like bowling
leagues and you know various things that
where they're organized into groups now
Robert Robert Robert Robert the example
of bowling in the 21st century is
anachronistic I mean there's so many
Veejay look I don't mind bowling but to
pick bowling leagues in the decline of
bowling leagues somehow seemed a little
silly you know there are other ways of
gauging the lack of you know organized
you know activity no look it's let's not
exaggerate this because of course people
are organized friends have groups they
meet they party together they have have
a good time there are lots of ways in
which people continue to reproduce
Society it's not like you're sitting by
yourself alone you know untethered from
other people know there are friendship
groups people have they go play sports
together they play pickup games you know
there are knitting circles there are
lots of ways in which people are
organized but the issue is does this
social organization translate into
public action and I think that's the
real gap and and that gap has come
because of the actual quite deliberate
attack during the McCarthy period to
prevent social groups from public action
so you know you have now very sensitive
and decent people doing mutual aid in
this time of kovat you know going out
trying to help their neighbors and so on
but it's not at a big scale it's small
groups you the big organizations the
trade unions and so on they have had
their feet cut from under them they have
been reduced to bargaining units and one
of the things that I think one needs to
teach them is what unions used to do in
the United States they used to be a site
of working-class culture you know in a
community the Union Hall was the place
where you rented and you had your
marriage there it was the place where
you went on the weekend and heard music
it was the place you played bingo and
whatever those are anachronistic things
I get it there are modern ways to use it
you really you're gonna go after bowling
and then do that list I know but
that was in the past the issue is what
where is the Union Hall today you know
where is it I mean it doesn't exist the
working class culture is not being held
together by these organizations in other
countries they are and so that's what we
need to actually think about is the
translation of our social networks into
public action and you have to have the
experience of public action you can't
wait for an emergency when an emergency
happens we are paralyzed we don't know
what to do
and I think that's what's happened in
many of the advanced industrial
countries where there is a kind of
paralysis and the state is also useless
so nothing's happening so and and and
it's and it's an on its a right so then
there's a cycle to it the state is
useless people are atomized and then
they're reinforcing each other in terms
of lack of coordination in action and
everything and then and then when you do
that I mean I had a discussion recently
where it was like the only things that
really work in the United States just
functionally are the Fed and the
military I mean these are the kind of
prime institutions of government that
have you know the Fed knows how to pump
trillions into the financial system and
we still have they I mean we have an
empire I don't know how functioning it
is but it certainly is everywhere
functioning you know I just published a
book this week called Washington Bullets
which is about the CIA and
assassinations and so on and to write
this book I interviewed tons of ex-cia
people and I would also like to add that
you know not because I am I'm a fan of
the CIA but I know that they actually do
function and they work and it's all
terrible stuff that they do nothing that
the CIA does is good but they actually
are very functional and and in you know
so is the NSA very functional in fact
they're taping this conversation we're
having they'll analyze it later they'll
decide you know since you're talking to
me whether they should downgrade your
status as a human being and so on but
you know these are functional
institutions but what's not functional
in the state and I mean I'm saying this
not with any pleasure or the good side
of history you know where is the state
when it comes to pee
you know suffering from mental illness
so many stories come Michael of somebody
with schizophrenia in a public place you
know having an episode and the cop comes
and shoots them to death so I mean I can
list one after the other these stories
you know what kind of civilization is
that where you tolerate the execution of
a person with mental illness because the
police officer is not trained to deal
with them I'm not even blaming the cop
there you know I think they just don't
have any training they shouldn't be
dealing with that you need more social
workers you need more public health
people every street in the United States
needs a public health clinic you know
why should a person wait to see their
primary care doctor or if they have
insurance if they don't have insurance
go to an emergency room why can't they
go to a clinic public health clinic
funded by our taxes where you go in and
say you know I have a boil can you just
have a look at it oh the person looks at
and says that might be skin cancer
I need we need instead of waiting for me
to develop advanced skin cancer and then
you know the costs of that here they
look at is you know we can launch that
and the cancer is gone Wow let's do that
let's have a public health clinic you
don't have those things so the state has
become in a sense money as you said the
fed the state has become money and
violence you know it's become money in
the sense of the fed and Taxation
actually and violence the police and the
military you don't see the state as
compassionate and that's another reason
why this anti-state attitude develops
you know III don't think the state is
inherently dis compassionate you know
state can be a compassionate state I
would like that nothing wrong with a
nanny state you know they used to make a
joke nanny state well the Americans
don't get nanny because that's an elite
British thing elite British people like
Boris Johnson had nannies but nothing
wrong with a nanny this Mary Poppins you
know you've taken medicine with a
spoonful of sugar I do that I'd wear a
mask nanny if it came with sugar which
means I can live longer right and maybe
if they provided the mask to it at the
end of my interview with President Lula
he said he said the job of the Pres
see and it's very interesting the the
sort of dynamics here because there's
there's no woke naswinger but there's
also none of this other like residual
like patriarchal kind of stuff and
nonsense and each and he's sitting there
and he's like you know is Union guy no
bullshitter clear communicator and at
the end he goes you know being a
president is like being the mother of a
country and when you're a mother you
have to look out for the weakest kids
and I mean it was perfectly sensible as
beautifully connected it with the
anti-poverty program and I thought the
clarity of that expression is completely
missing here and exactly I think what
you're talking about and the question is
is I mean on this point I think we're in
such a state of certainly people
watching this know that and they have a
strong sense of it and I think they feel
either the physical threat of the
situation we're in or the very least
even if they're more materially
comfortable I I think we have to get
increasingly real about the psychic
distress that you're describing because
it really is just such a disgusting
situation um what where are the pressure
points what what can be done it could be
anything man it's got to be a little
generative yeah the first thing I would
say is I'm very glad you brought up Lula
because you know in the past 20 years
they haven't been many heads of
government that have put hunger front
and center in their policy you know they
haven't been many I mean it it it costs
a lot politically to say that the hungry
person is a primary focus of my
government it costs a lot politically
the rich are not interested in the
hungry let's be frank
okay so Lula is an extraordinary person
whatever limitations and you know I mean
you hear a lot of criticism on the left
of Lula which i think is really
uncharitable and bogus and I told he's a
terrific person and then there are
people on the right to say Lula this
Lula that in fact what they're afraid of
is this is a human being a genuine human
being who ran a
government in a sensitive way putting
the hungry people at the forefront and I
really think it's not only admirable
it's very unusual in this in this period
let's compare them to Donald Trump
compared Lula to Donald Trump and to Joe
Biden it's no comparison here's a human
being and these people are basically not
human beings in my opinion I don't mean
not human beings in and sympathy I mean
their humanity to me is in question
Donald Trump it's striking how much
disregard he seems to have for the basic
problems of human beings you know and I
haven't seen mr. Biden demonstrate a
great compassion you know apart from
some rhetorical flourishes to win over
the left so the United States is in a
particular kind of crisis long term
political crisis one of the things that
I've really enjoyed in this pandemic is
I've enjoyed interacting because of
these zoom meetings and so on with the
Democratic socialists of America with
the you know the PSL the the party for
socialism and liberation with the old
left groups and so on I've really
enjoyed interacting with the young
people in these movements why is that
because I think they come to politics
Michael out of a great sense of
compassion they don't come to politics
because they think you know they're
ideological or this or that or whatever
you know they are not angry they are
compassionate people I mean there's a
whole generation now that are on the
streets saying defund the police from an
extraordinarily compassionate place now
it's I'm a Marxist and I'm using the
word compassion over and over again and
that might sound odd but I don't believe
that you can have a politics a genuinely
Liberatore politics unless you feel for
other people if you don't feel for
people you just you can't enter left
politics out of a theory
you know theories are not enough you
have to actually feel for people
suffering for their struggles and you
have to enter their struggles in order
to change the world and I genuinely feel
and I genuinely believe that this
generation that's coming up not only in
the United States but around the
world they are struck by the immensity
of the contradictions climate
contradiction is a pandemic the disaster
of neoliberalism the impossibility of
capitalism the very fact that you have a
system now that says we'd prefer to burn
food then feeds the hungry all this
stuff it de-stresses entire generation
now others will say it's traumatizing
them I don't think so
I think it's clarifying for them that
the path is either you know barbarism
entirely or something utterly different
and I think they are choosing utterly
different and I'm very proud of these
people I think that they will
essentially walk the road to save the
world from barbarism people like Boris
Johnson balsan ro Trump even Biden all
these people they just want to take us
you know some of them would accelerate
the car to barbarism others want to ride
the brake to barbarism they don't have a
clue that there's a way to move to a
compassionate society I don't think they
have a clue you know I just don't think
they understand that that's possible but
I think these young people they have
seen look the world is going to be
destroyed by climate change the world is
destroyed by hunger the world is
destroyed by this system that eats
people alive we don't want this we
want something better and I feel that
that emotional that coming from the soul
politics is much more hopeful for me
than any theory that you'd read in a
book now I am again I am a person who
reads a lot who writes a lot who
believes in theory but I want to say
that if you don't feel for Humanity it's
not worth it you know it's not worth it
you have to feel and and the example you
gave of Lula here is a person Lula who
feels that the pain of a person is just
not tolerable and I think that's the
lesson for today you gotta just say it's
just intolerable that people are
suffering now I love that and I'm not
gonna let you go even though that was a
perfect summation because we put hybrid
war in the title so I need to ask you
about hybrid war it also
fascinates me can you when we go back to
the the global dimension of this and I
guess there's a variety of factors that
we could bring in the mix obviously
there's the consequences of kovat on
that's you know the periphery the
developing world whatever I I'm inspired
by you sometimes to reclaim the term
third world and you know the the
consequences distributionally and the
effects of kovat in a place like Brazil
obviously and then there's the attempt
whether it's Venezuela to fend for
itself from us interference Iran to for
that matter and I have much more
sympathy ideologically for where than as
well as coming from but the geopolitics
there are a lot of parallels and I I
want I'm wondering if you could it is
there any room left in today's world for
some type of non-aligned world is there
any type of alternative to the u.s.
emerging and what is this u.s. tactic of
hybrid war it's another it's in the term
that gets thrown around all over the
place now but you actually have a
precise explanation of it and I do want
to say no need to connect it but I think
this is the type of thing that people
need to become increasingly aware of if
as an example people do continue
protesting in the long term or thinking
of politics and broader ways you have to
have a sense of these strategies because
they they will be deployed domestically
if they aren't already yeah so you know
Michael this is a very long story but
just to put it quickly you know war you
know war escalates technologically there
was a time when Cavalry's met or people
met with pikes and so on and the moment
you could fly a plane above the front
line that changed the terms of war
because you could bomb industrial basis
you could bomb civilians and so on and
you change the character of war there's
always been a part of war which has been
information warfare
you know you'd fly above your the
frontline and you drop leaflets saying
you know you're going to
lose because we're sending there's
always been information war there's
always been economic war there's always
been a multi-faceted way in which people
have fought it's never just the Pyke's
you know there's we have God on our side
you are an infidel
that's an information war but as
technology increases and you enters
let's say a digital landscape where
things are you know for instance an
electricity grid is managed by a
computer which can get hacked the moment
you enter this digital landscape the the
sort of degrees of information war
economic war etc escalate into a
different kind of war it's a different
kind of wine tirely so what is a hybrid
war hybrid war is not a war which is
fought necessarily on a battlefield
anymore you can now take away the
battlefield instead of having to fly the
plane over the front line there is no
front line anymore what you have is you
have an information war where you can
utilize the mechanisms of media social
media satellite media to delete Itemizer
government you can suddenly say that
Nicolas Maduro is not the president of
Venezuela he is a dictator so that's
information war then you can do
diplomatic warfare you can say now we're
going to put pressure on the
Organization of American States which
basically is anywhere a u.s. puppet and
we'll say we're going to eject the
Maduro government and we'll welcome the
Guido government as the legitimate
government Wow how did you do that
you've now delegitimized the government
diplomatically then we're going to say
we're going to cut you off from
financial finances even your money and
our banks we won't let you access we
won't let you buy and sell things you
know those Iranian five Iranian oil
tankers that came and delivered all to
Venezuela
they didn't come for free you know the
Venezuelans paid them it's a normal
capitalist transaction which the United
States was blocking there's nothing out
of this world they were just selling and
buying oil you know it's capitalism
which was being blocked if you're a
libertarian you should be outraged by
that so that's an economic war then
there's sabotage you can hack into their
systems and destroy electricity grids
and various things you know you can go
in and
things we know these things happen so
it's a range of different kinds of
attacks on a country the so called
sanctions is only one piece of it and
the more of these new techniques you use
to suffocate a country
the pressure inside the country Rises
because the ordinary people will suffer
and the ideas they will then overthrow
the government that's the idea you'll
remember that when the United States
pursued a very harsh sanctions policy on
Iraq there was a UN report that said
half a million children had died on a
particular morning after the report came
out Madeleine Albright then UN
Ambassador to the US ambassador to the
United Nations was on Good Morning
America or 60 minutes or one of these
shows and she was asked there is this UN
report that says because of US sanctions
half a million Iraqi children have died
now Madeleine Albright Madame Allred
could have said many things one is the
report is lying she didn't say that she
could have said yes people are dying but
it's because of Saddam Hussein not
because of US sanctions she didn't say
that you know she could have said I
haven't looked at the report yet we have
to study it she could have said that she
didn't she said neither of these three
things instead she said it's a price
worth paying
she accepted that the United States
government had a policy that killed half
a million Iraqi children she didn't deny
it she said it's a price worth paying
later she said I regret the way I said
it but she didn't regret what she said
she said half a million that's worth it
so in all these hybrid wars a range of
techniques are utilized to suffocate a
country in order to change the
government now let's we have time I'd
like to just go back to say there should
be a standard for this in the United
Nations Charter which was written in
1945 there is a important part called
chapter six in Chapter seven you see
they were coming after the Holocaust one
of the most grotesque events that took
place in Europe I mean they were
Holocaust in the colonies but this was
grotesque it took place in your ass
industrial scale
murder genocide of people so what the
people who framed the Charter said what
happens if a government on its sovereign
territory is doing something horrendous
to its own people well this is not
actually the case of the Holocaust
because in fact the Nazis had gone into
Poland where they were doing a lot of
activities in occupied Poland many of
the concentration camps with the death
camps were in Poland not in German
territory but anyway the point is in
your sovereign territory if you're doing
something horrible to your people what
can the international community do under
Chapter 6 there are a series of things
you can do you can you know you can
publicly denounce it diplomatic pressure
you can have economic sanctions economic
pressure and so on that's under Chapter
six under Chapter seven you can use
armed force to stop it but you see the
UN Charter allows you to these do these
actions under 6 and 7 if you can
demonstrate that there's a standard met
of genocidal behavior by the government
see so that's the UN Charter you have to
the standard before you get to hybrid
war is genocide will behavior the United
States government has no standard its
people we don't like like have they had
to prove that the Venezuelan government
of Google Chavez was conducting genocide
against the people there is no proof of
that and they never even tried it they
just didn't like him why because he was
using oil wealth to help his people why
did they not like Evo Morales not
because he's conducting genocide against
his be the opposite Evo Morales was
lifting the standard of living of his
people I mean in each of these cases the
United States uses the kind of chapter 6
chapter 7 techniques in the UN Charter
without meeting the standard of the
Charter so they totally violate the
spirit of international law in a
gangster mafia ish way go after people
they just don't like I mean you don't
like Chavez you want to overthrow him
well if you want to overthrow Chavez why
don't you overthrow the kings of Saudi
Arabia it's like fair question it's a
very fair question so is this is this
the best framework for understanding in
2020 how the United States
engineers this type of war this attempt
to remove somebody that we could get to
a situation where a bank in England
could say you Venezuelan government
cannot access your own gold because some
guy and the Parliament has claimed he's
president and that doesn't strike
everybody's insane let me give you an
example of this right when the kovat 19
pandemic was coming into the Americas
the first case was actually in Brazil in
February around that time I mean to her
credit the head of the IMF announced
that there's a new facility any country
is allowed to apply for funds any
country and you'll get it I mean it's
not a problem so President Maduro of
Venezuela taking the IMF at its word
applied for emergency funding so that
they could buy equipment to tackle the
kovat 19 problem within two days the IMF
responded saying sorry we can't fund you
because there's a problem okay so I
called the IMF and I talked to the
spokesperson very nice person and I'd
spoken to him before and I said what's
the issue here and he said well I'm
sending you the statement so he sent the
statement the statement said that well
there is a problem because the the
actual government of when as well as
contested it's not clear that it's mr.
Maduro so he is applied we don't accept
him because there's Guido but because we
don't have confirmation that is Guido
and there's uncertainty we can't give
the money okay so I called the IMF back
and said but on your own website you
recognize the finance minister mr. Zaire
paw of the Maduro government as the
finance minister of Venezuela so on your
website you recognize him as the finance
minister he has signed a paper you know
he signed your staff reports and so on
so what's the confusion within 24 hours
he disappeared from the website
interesting the United Kingdom has
recently had a judge a single judge in
the UK High Court declare after the
Venezuelan government approached the
High Court that the Bank of England
cannot turn over 1.3 billion dollars of
gold which the Venezuela
want to sell to the United Nations
Development Program to raise funds for
kovat 19 the Venezuelan government
doesn't want the goal to be shipped to
the Swiss bank they want to sell it to
the UNDP let's be clear about that
that's what they have said they're going
to do judge says sorry you're not the
legitimate government it's mr. Guido now
interestingly in London the accredited
ambassador of Venezuela to the US UK
government is the Ambassador sent by
President Maduro that means government
of the United Kingdom despite what they
keep saying verbally Boris Johnson
totally believable person it seems by
some people not by me they still
recognize ambassador that's sent by the
Maduro government so what is going on
here I mean what we have is we have a
very dangerous game afoot where the
United States and its allies like Great
Britain are essentially running a
lawless mafia campaign in the world
whoever they don't like they say we
don't like you but it's contradictory
how can you say you are not the
government and yet you accept the
Ambassador you see they'll continue to
have problems with this like in Israel
for instance Israeli government says we
are going to annex the West Bank the
hard right is very angry because the
annexation of the West Bank means that
you'll have to recognize the existence
of Palestine so they don't want to
expect so you see these are the
contradictions that they keep trying
themselves into we are in favor of
international law we are not in favor of
mafia annexations of Palestinians or
mafia annexation of 1.3 billion
venezuelan money we are in favor of
international law they are in favor of
some sort of mafia order
I'm afraid this gammy Eugene Prashad
will you join us again soon and talk
about Ho Chi Minh I love coming on your
show because it's basically like sitting
in your lovely living room and I'm
enjoying seeing it behind you anytime
you ask me I'll be back thank you so
much Vijay and you could see actually
you got the book a picture of me with
our Lula and our colleague
yes nice viva Lula Evo Lula okay thank
you so much stay safe be well it's
always so good talking to you bye
likewise bye take care guys read Vijay
Prashad I just like so many articles in
so many books including like I think
it's red star over the third world it's
like the Soviet relationship with
revolutionaries of Mexico Japan the
Congo I mean he's just oh yeah
he's just a wonderful guy and a really
really really brilliant thinker as you
could see and a really serious non-audio
like he's a very serious Marxist who I
always appreciate that in his work that
he gets down to the nitty-gritty and
doesn't really get fixated so much on
like particular labels and no absolutely
absolutely no he's just a wonderful guy
I'm and brilliant all right so I think
what we're gonna do now David is we're
gonna do the gem and then we're gonna
have on Stavros
how do I print I get I don't know yes
how pious should talk about that for 15
minutes all right I'll be right back you
get started brother all right yeah well
you know there's been essentially an
important story that's been going on
since the beginning of the crisis but
it's starting to hit a head as some
basic protections are expiring but also
because of some illicit activities of
landlords but we're facing and are going
to see a much worse addiction crisis
going on in the United States the cares
Act was supposed to protect people from
from evictions from from evictions if
their landlord benefited from federal
subsidies and all across the country but
I know specifically in Texas it seems
like a lot of landlords are just filing
evictions against people regardless so
there's a piece of texas observer by a
megan Kimble which found that one there
was no real enforcement behind that
provision in cares
and now landlords are going forward
pursuing evictions against people who
have not been able to pay the rent since
the crisis that started so in Harris
County 10% of the evictions actually in
Harris County
were found to be in violation if the
cares Act but so they're just going
forward and people are going into court
they don't know their rights because
there's been such a backlog of cases you
know judges are essentially just rubber
stamping things at the moment and this
is an isolated Texas this is a
fundamental problem across the country
you know people were relying on
unemployment benefits of their not only
their scraping by but a lot of people
are having to take care of family
members who are unable to work and you
know now we're months away from the
initial stimulus check and many
Americans are without money and you know
as the virus is especially flying
through the state of Texas people are
seeing their sources of income drying up
and you know some cities have come
forward with plans you know like Austin
for example it has a plan it's like your
landlord has to alert you 60 days before
I believe you know they can evict you so
sort of gives you a little bit of grace
period between that time but even still
then you're responsible to pay back all
of this friend in the first place so
then you're in a situation Oreo four
thousand dollars for you know for the
past few months so there's a real crisis
when it comes to housing and
specifically evictions as landlords are
now gearing up to start coming after
people who have been in unable to pay
rent since the beginning of this this
crisis um you know they're using the the
court system they're using the kind of
you know fear and and weakness of
low-income people who don't really have
access to strong lawyers to be able to
defend them in these situations you know
and this is a nationwide problem the
Washington Post's citing the kovat
eviction defense project found that 20%
of the hundred and ten million of
Americans who rent units or at risk of
eviction by September thirtieth and
that's for a myriad of different reasons
but fundamentally the fact that most
people aren't unable to earn you know
viable income during this time so you
know this is not only just like a moral
crisis this is a fundamental capitalist
crisis so people are going to say the
term housing crisis and I'm not trying
to be nitpicky here but let's like
really talk about that means did
overnight did houses and apartments all
over the country just become filled or
did we see the housing stock just
evaporate or disappear no what we are
seeing is landlords who prey upon the
late
the vast majority of people in this
country are finding it difficult to
extract money from those people so
they're using the arms of the state
oftentimes illegally and illicitly to
try to corral and force those people
into paying you know absurd amounts of
money including late fees because it's a
whole other conversation you know so so
you know which is a whole other
conversation so that's going on and
what's this in the state basically is
supporting them so we don't have a
housing crisis in this country we have a
capitalism crisis we have a crisis that
is going on and there's been agitated
because of coronavirus but it's
fundamentally a problem of the defense
of private property the defense of
private property probably the defense of
private property over the kind of very
basic decisions of humanity that we
should be making right now which is we
have houses we have people who need to
be housed we have people who need people
not to be out in public right now I'm
not working right now because we need to
prevent this fire from happening we need
national a national rent freeze we need
forgiveness on all of these evictions we
need forgiveness on back rent since the
beginning of this crisis there has been
a complete failure on a state level and
now we're on a question as out of people
level are we going to be able to stand
up as a group of people wise I just said
110 million of us who were threatened by
landlords
against the system that's going to try
to throw keep on the street through to
no fault of their own because we are all
going through this crisis together right
now and you know we need to be prepared
and fighting back because it's something
that touches so many people and it's so
it's so basic of a problem that we have
the housing we have the ability to house
folks and you know our system is
actually the problem is the reason that
there's a tension here I do I have
nothing to add to that and I'll just say
I don't like to lean into this too
much but I've I know like what losing
your house is like okay and not knowing
where a house is gonna be and the idea
that we allow the staff and anybody
could not be more grotesque and
disgusting and the scale that we're
about to hit unless there's a serious
intervention mmm-hmm people doing rent
strikes policy intervention
ever is totally and the source of
the problem is property though to say
it's just crazy how property feels
confident to throw people out during the
pandemic mm-hmm we're just so
used to the two and that's the problems
we're so used to this idea that that's
an okay thing to do yeah yeah the
default setting is
do we have our guest joining us shortly
okay I'm gonna try to see if I can
pronounce this right
joining us now Matt what's the name of
the twitch show
oh stop he solves your problems
okay joining us now is Stavros halkias
he is a co-host on comm town and he's
also the stasi solves your problems on
twitch Stavros that's right thank you so
much for doing this man how we doing oh
thanks for having me dude dude I've
wanted this for a while I really
appreciate it yeah you doing pretty good
you know just kind of trying to stay
busy in here trying to get some stuff
done you know every day's a struggle in
quarantine but I'm trying baby how
seriously he's still taking quarantine
you know I uh I was I was like crazy
with it like I was totally I wasn't
leaving for anything I wasn't doing you
know I wasn't doing I was wiping down
the other nurseries wiping down takeout
saying but you know now I wouldn't even
go outside for a while now I'm taking
walks you know doing that but it gets a
little lacks I've had that I've had to
double back to the sink and make sure I
wash my hands once or twice after after
a stroll you know but you know I'm still
trying to I'm seeing I went to see my
family in Baltimore because I was just
I've been here you know with the
roommate the whole time so I took a
drive down to Baltimore and you know I'm
getting out there a little bit more but
you know what are you gonna do the
world's not going back to normal my look
the part of my life that I liked you
know I understand I'm a stand-up comic
and that's basically that industry is
just done for I don't know
a year or two I don't know people are
trying to outside shows people are
trying but it's not gonna be the same
you know the best part of a stand-up
show was a hundred people in a in a
packed basement meant for forty people
you know super tight everyone's laughing
that is exactly how you if you could
design how to spread code but it's a
stand-up comedy show so it's not it's
not happening for a while basically
we're talking to somebody I forget who
sorry but somebody about like I feel bad
for them um but they were gonna try to
do it on Zoom basically yes there anyway
no man that's the thing I don't think a
lot of my friends are trying and God
bless them I get it but to me it's like
you know it doesn't even exist
I'm you know what I mean I mean how
would you even see could you could you
would set it up so you could like see
everybody or would you yeah more like
like this like yeah most of the shows
are like this one of my friends did a
show in LA somewhere where they have
like huge wraparound screens and
everyone's on zoom and you can kind of
you know there's like a square
everywhere and that was the closest
thing to you know whatever the analogy
he used it was like it was like having
sex it was like with being with a sex
robot it's like you know it's a facility
you know the clothes it's the real doll
of you like you like click you have you
have to like you want to like bother
somebody in the crowd you have to yeah
could you put yourself on camera please
yeah like consult your living room or
something doing crowd work this is the
type of guy where'd he go yeah plug it a
router in please did you unplug and plug
it back in this connections bad I was
gonna criticize this resume totally gee
maybe get on them for that but so my mom
let me watch Eddie Murphy raw when I was
like seven or eight years old yes which
I still am a fan of well it's crazy
like how
don't change but she's also got and I
got this from her where it's it doesn't
make any sense because like Alice I'll
watch that I don't like profanity
vulgarity whatever and then all of a
sudden they'll be like specifically I
don't like bathroom stuff full but then
like I'll hear like the name and it's
just like calm down like yeah oh yeah
and so there's that and I'm just like if
my mom's listening I know she's gonna be
less disgusted right and it is and it is
and what did your family think oh it's
the best I my mom is the like the mo if
you want to think about the overly
supportive just caricature of a cute
little chubby Eastern European mom will
feed you it you know you you come by the
house to pick up you know something
she's gonna send you home with the plate
that guy I mean just the sweetest woman
on earth thought I was gonna I was gonna
be one of those kids that goes to
Harvard at like 11:00 you know like
believes in her son so much and she was
you know she's obviously proud that it
was like it kind of took off and I'm
making my living off of it and it was so
funny to hear her I overheard her once
on the phone talking to like a family
friend and she's like ah
stavros doing this radio show with his
fans and there's so many listeners and
people pay for it and he doesn't have a
day and then I just hear her get cut off
and she goes what's it it's called it's
called it's called but you know what are
you gonna do we broke the I'm a first
generation I'm the first born in an
immigrant family so we broke that you
know go to go to law school thing once
that was over once I wasn't gonna do the
traditional thing you know my mom she
just wanted to see that I was working
hard and was happy and so she's
supportive just you know we don't we
don't get to we don't get to into it
into the specifics but you
she doesn't go she isn't just like and
they may what they did was what AOC and
Rashida to Lib had the same show but it
was called town yeah just like the
boys do thank I made a joke about the
swats ticket I don't do that she doesn't
even she doesn't know how to work a
podcast thank God we just got we just
got her on Netflix you know what I mean
so mm-hmm there's a technological
barrier stopping her so she can stay you
know supportive cute mom she's come to
my stand-up shows and I mean my material
is pretty vulgar so you know she's
supportive there she just likes to see
me having a good time that's cool
did you ever try to like do the law
school thing I was a paralegal in
Baltimore very briefly I actually was it
was like for an evil law firm like I
didn't realize when I did that when I
took the job what kind it was it was
like foreclosure law right and so that's
not even like cool like no there's
nothing oh yeah nothing good so what I
did was I stopped evil I was like I'm
not doing anything I'm gonna like once I
realized what my job was after training
I stopped working I was like I'm just
gonna work on stand-up and it and I was
like I'll maybe get a maybe a couple
weeks it'll take them to catch on to
what I'm doing and I just got to work
there for like five months without doing
anything I was like I was thinking like
two-hour lunches I was just like you
know my boss would like they had like
the stats of what everyone's doing and
they were like you know on a typical day
somebody one of your co-workers might
run through whatever 40 files we
couldn't even tell how many files you
did because your computer wasn't logged
on enough to even run the analytics
that's what they did when I was getting
fired that's what they do
dude it was just one of those horrible
bureaucracies were think about the kind
of people that want to work for a law
firm like that they're the does the
reverse cream of the crop you know what
I mean just the absolute of the
crop people that can't get it was like
it was in Maryland but you had to be
or debarred it was like people who
couldn't work anywhere else it was just
the worst place you've ever you know
been so they weren't they didn't
understand how to do how to manage
people and think I actually remember
when we were when I was Sal I don't
normally say this much family stuff at
all but I remember being a teenager and
there was an eviction process and at one
hand being like obviously scared of
these lawyers because they're like
kidding us out of our home course right
but there I remember just even as a
teenager like you know I was only like
14 or something but I I just saw the the
landlord's council walking with them
about around the property and it was
just like that guy yes like he's
listening to a journey CD it's even more
disrespectful at least try to be a shark
right this is the guy that we had to go
to like law school in bermuda the cayman
islands families can't live here anymore
yeah they were it was brutal but that I
really didn't do I literally didn't do
anything I was I was I felt like that
was maybe like I was weaponizing
laziness for the first time I was due I
was I was mucking up the the I was
gumming up the works of a horrible law
firm by just because at the time I
probably have been a bad employee
anywhere but because I was so focused on
stand-up and I was out doing open mics
all night and yeah I would go I would
commute to DC after work you know an
hour and a half and then I would wake up
so I was like a boundary latterly yeah
but it was like when I was I was saving
money to move to New York so I was
really in the zone but yeah other than
that I mean you know I went to school
for public call it like undergrad I went
on a public policy scholarship but that
guy feels like you know I don't even
know who that guy that 20 year old me is
just like a totally different person
damaging my brain and you know just
getting up it shows things like
it that looks for the last 10 years and
doing edibles
that was yeah I was smart at some point
but I've I gave all that up to really
really be good at dick jokes I mean dude
you're definitely contributing more
doing that than like lobbying for like
the Maltese government right like sell
like passports to like heroin
traffickers so they can get EU
solutely something trying to UM do you
do you think you'll stay in New York
or is this like burning you out on New
York now man it kind of the opposite I I
think I realized like I really want to
stay here like I think I realize it's I
mean I the reason I moved here is
because I love I mean I love comedy I
love stand-up it's really you know it's
it's it's hard not to do it it's hard
you know - especially cuz you move here
because it's the place with the most
prestigious clubs the most comedy or
such as clubs right I would say but you
know this stand the Comedy Cellar
awesome you know New York Comedy Club
but also there's there's a lot you know
there's before all this there was a ton
of just great independent shows I ran
one with you know my my podcast bros and
come on everybody there's a great show
at I just complete complete coincidence
by the way but there's just so much
stage time and it's just it's the kind
of place where if you are the best best
comic if you're the best in this scene
you get to do stand-up comedy you know
20 times a week you know if you want to
and I'm that kind of guy with or out
yeah that's that was rubbish I'm Cindy
if you wanted to sure if you work at a
if you're working at the good clubs on
the weekends and they're putting on
every show and then you've worked the
other clubs and you know you just bounce
around doing 15-minute spots places and
you know that's the ultimate goal I
wasn't quite there but it's like and I
just realized like yeah you know what
I'm trying to say I don't I'm gonna see
it through I love it here even without
stand-up I guess this has kind of made
me realize like oh I just I love this
city and maybe it wouldn't be the worst
thing in the world if some of the
shittiest people that live here moved
back to Connecticut you know any place
maybe that
like it sucks what the people that have
to stay here going through but on some
level good riddance to the people that
are like their dads cottage
you know you think they're finally gone
though or are they gonna I don't know
though they'll come back when it's when
it's very when everything is super back
to normal and it's gonna be horrible
again like we're we're gonna have just
figured out a cool you in like a year
there's gonna be like a sweet spot like
seven months from now where it rocks to
be here right then everybody whose dad
paid for them to go to NYU is coming
back you know what I mean like you know
that you know what it made me it it's
it's I wish he wasn't like this because
I love these guys but I listen to
Michael Imperioli and steve Schirripa
have a Sopranos podcast and it I love it
because you know like Imperial he's like
so thoughtful but sometimes he's just
really ridiculous but mainly very
thoughtful and sure it would just just
constantly Joe's yeah knows and they
were on I I heard a clip of him on Rogen
and and Schirripa was just like you know
exactly the type of like he's like if
they had to change some of the stuff
with the cops yeah stuff maybe they did
of course he was like saying like as
soon as the Blasio became mayor he like
stay so this place in Tribeca and and
like he was anticipating and I was just
listening and I was like I was really
like I was realizing that this man's
terror is my like fantasy right they
might like reform the police and
these like will leave this like
really like yeah cuz I'm pretty
pessimistic but you're you're giving me
hope Steve yeah he's like all the chains
are gonna leave in New York it's gonna
be nothing but these dirty artists doing
their own thing am I gonna wear my good
I wanna go I want to go to Chipotle
Vegas New York and I realized it was a
Chipotle here and that's you know that's
what no it might not like them but
that's what Giuliani did yeah
I mean I like you know I like the pawn
shops and whatnot but right you know
give me the M&M store any day I shed a
tear when the M&M store came to New York
we made it honey this is that podcast I
waiting to do I'm doing a full rewatch
of The Sopranos over over quarantine and
I'm on season I'm by the start season
six for some reason I just want to go
fresh without listening and then once
I'm done the most recent rewatch I will
be doing I will be listening to the
whole thing for sure so I won't try to
first of all I want to invite you if
you're ever up for it once a month for
for the patrons me and some people like
woz and nando are gonna do we're gonna
do with paintless Sopranos rewind I've
watched so many die
but Mike Racine - it'll come oh yeah if
you ever want to do that that would be
fun that you yeah man I'd love to I
don't want to spoil the podcast but
they're just the dynamic of Schirripa
being like you know like really fine
he's great he's just say it is like a
big hearted really likeable guy but it's
just like occasionally like Imperioli
will be like well remember that was a
cut back to the first scene and the
clock said 4:15 and sharp was like yeah
exactly

totally they're hilarious batch because
imperially is totally like an actor
first and for year one I mean like this
and that's the beauty of The Sopranos
it's like it's half incredibly like
classically trained actors who happen to
be you know to perfectly portrayed
mobsters and it's half guys that wish
they were in the Mafia and Shh Ripper is
totally one of those guys he's like an
old Vegas promoter it's like there it's
like sure rivers our kind of guy who
fast-forwards through all the therapy
scenes you know what is that kind of
like like so Tony's being a hard-on and
dr. Melfi she gets it yeah you know
she's got some some sappy - it
would be like you know well that was the
same time that he mentioned the dream in
the last episode it's a lot of fun I
love it I can't wait I honestly I'm I'm
I'm pacing myself
it's the soprano Sopranos has to last me
I need Sopranos content constantly while
we're while we're locked down so I'm
pacing myself on that I'm amazing over
30 we actually found out that you uh you
listen to my friend that Wazza show
hoops adjacent yes I love and yeah I'm
big wow I didn't even really like woz I
I guess I was listening to like he the
basketball stuff he's done you know
basketball podcast and a lot of
incarnations that's gone through there
now the athletic but yeah yeah I bet
I've been a fan fan of his for a while
for sure just pure basketball and then I
realized later on that you know I didn't
realize how much our politics align
which is pretty cool wasn't the best
yeah well I mean cuz we do he's on this
show all the time and then we do the
walk pros but can i I know he what do
you think of how they're gonna reopen
basketball you know III think it's a the
closer we get to it I mean I didn't
think it was a good idea to begin with
right like I think I thought if they
were gonna bring basketball back what
they should have done was limit the
amount of teams gone straight to the
playoffs if you do anything everyone
recognizes that it's not ideal but the
whole goal is to get in and out as
quickly as possible finish the season so
that there's a champion crown but the
goal is to you know get safety and then
whatever money you can recoup great
unfortunately clearly what the NBA has
done is maximize the amount of money
which you know I get on some level I
mean that's a huge loss whatever but
they're acting like it's you know
they're just they just want to finish
the season they want to do this but it's
just it's a little too
they've taken they've invited too many
teams there's too many people involved
the location makes sense logistically
but you know Orange County where Orlando
is their numbers just keep spiking so
I'm very very hesitant about it and you
know teams are shutting down their
practice facilities the Clippers had a
staff member that tested positive so
they shut it down the Bucs
had a staff member they shut it down so
some some teams don't even have practice
facilities in their home markets half
the Brooklyn Nets have tested positive
and aren't gonna be in it and so you
know they're playing with like four
replacement players and it's just you
know I thought they should have just
done there but the best to do like a
quick playoffs give us something but I'm
very hesitant and I'm scared it's gonna
be a disaster I hope you know knock on
what it is it not gonna but nobody gets
sick definitely nobody gets seriously
sick but I'm kind of I'm worried about
it I got to be honest all right put this
so that's the worst-case scenario and I
totally agree with you and then just
even way less important but it matters
if you follow a sport like if you win
this thing it's a pretty big asterisk I
mean yeah there is an asterisk on it for
sure but I do think taking part
I mean I'm of two minds of it where it's
like I do think these players are making
a real big sacrifice and I do think on
some in some ways it's like they are
they are risking their health and maybe
the health of their family for the game
I mean that's that's sort of how I look
at it it's almost like they're doing a
service think you know to the game to
have a champion because truly the safe
thing here if we're not thinking about
money we're not thinking about legacy
any of that stuff is to cancel the
season especially in light of you know
just how much it's spreading in Florida
and how much it doesn't seem like they
have it under control
seems to be this that would be the you
know as how many players are testing
positive that would be the smart
especially a sport like basketball where
there's no distancing it's not baseball
in theory you know what I mean you're
you're like tennis is reopening there's
some schools yeah okay yeah I don't I
don't know man it's just I never my
principle that applies like pretty
literally I can't think of a single
situation where it doesn't apply is
never get in the way if somebody's check
so like right I guess I mean I don't
know like it
it's the player's choice and the unions
involved with it but it it's like how
the is that not going to spread
right absolutely and and it's the
saddest I mean you talk about not
getting the way of anybody's check the
people that are the most harmed by this
are the T are players who are on kind of
like a shitty team that doesn't really
have a chance if your team didn't make
the you know there's eight teams that
didn't qualify right if you're on one of
those eight teams you get paid the
rescue check no matter what now that all
the teams that are in the play in in
Orlando the remaining teams if you're
injured you get paid your check no
matter what but if you decide to not
play you have the option not to play but
if you decide to not play you don't get
the rest of your check for that season
so those are the players that are like
the players are like look I just don't
want to do it for philosophical reasons
I'm scared of my faith you know one
players kid has a respiratory issue he
is not playing he gets he gets doctors
check which to me seems crazy the ski
seems crazy that you put those players
those players are the only ones that
have to make a financial a tough
financial decision really and and that's
why I think they just they invited way
too many teams you know half the wizards
aren't playing Bradley Beal you know
they're only good player really he's not
playing they already had a free agent
who didn't want to risk injury he's not
playing so just like the Wizards aren't
playing the the the nets aren't the
naphtha Nets aren't playing and then
same thing with like you know the suns
and the Spurs like the teams that don't
really have a shot at winning who are
only in here to pad the regular season
games and help the NBA fulfill their
contracts with the local markets with
the local TV markets those those those
teams are pretty screwed honestly I mean
I think the teams that were in the hunt
in the playoffs they were gonna play
regardless I think these guys are just
competitors and they want to do it but I
feel for those other guys man dude you
could do this too yeah you could do
compound advice and sports yeah
a hundred percent that's flowing gotta
get you one I do by school podcast soup
odd don't lie I'm serious nodding all
the time yeah your potting all the time
I thought I was plotting all the time
it's exhausting bro I had to do
something when quarantine started I
started streaming every night I do
basically six shows a week so just to
keep my mind if I just is just to not be
with my own thoughts we got a semi that
I'm either streaming or I'm I'm I'm an
edible deep and watching a samurai movie
and my brain is either on or off I've
been watching a lone wolf the lone wolf
and cub series which are really good man
I do I'm I'm watching like but this is
the problems like I think of the things
that I do to zone out and I'm like
literally I do watch movies and I'm like
watching like documentaries about the
IRA well no I liked it but but my
barrier with dumb is like any other
barrier like I love dumb if it's
the right dumb nicely your podcast
is probably some of the only dumb
that I can connect to right exactly and
that's high praise by the way thank you
oh that's if we want to be percent the
best dumb there is no I think you
in racine are like the only I like yeah
I like it I like it yeah it's definitely
the way I got flipped up on your show
somebody sent me then Jordan Peterson
breath I was walking around just like
taking my phone out it's like a YouTube
clip just like right right right and
again right yeah yeah speedy recovery
from
being addicted to pills Georgia the only
beef it's funny for a guy that only eats
steak and does a bunch of pills he saw
you know you'd think that guy's cooler
do you think that's a guy that's like
some big fat guy on a grill eating rib
eyes just taking vicodin but no it's
some pseudo-intellectual you should be
like is is I watched on Netflix this is
actually I don't know it's not exactly
done but it's just bizarre there's this
movie called the Odessa connection
mm-hmm it's his it's it is the most it
is actually insanely stupid it's like
this this Russian mob associate who's
literally named Tarzan oh yeah who goes
to Tampa and basically like they're
blind planes for the Cali cartel from
the Soviet Union as its collapsing and
you can just go to the Soviet Union and
just literally like yep they have a deal
to buy a nuclear submarine for the
correct I'll like that's just like and
then dot and it's there it's documented
like the FBI case handlers are there and
everything and Tarzan you know whatever
you know sure this dude like has done
some very bad but he is just like
the mo he is steaks and vicodin right
just like everything is great just like
Michael and he is Maserati dealership
he's a good-looking guy
right he has an idea right and by the
way it's like isn't that like the whole
mind like that mites that's awesome and
is it like that's where you should be
going like there's all this like
gnashing of teeth of like clean your
room it's like no just let me be like
tarts totally do not read stop reading
stop reading that guy can't read there's
something that's happened to his brain
know he writes oh my children's books
he's got he's got this crazy combination
of being like an actual sociopath and
yeah like this childlike and he's just
like a man rat on me and you know I was
a heart
(Laughter)
that's definitely uh that's of a
European think anybody with long hair
just there's a couple Greek tarzan's
that I know you know Tarzan's growing up
I knew a guy named yeah they called him
Tarzan because he was he had long hair
and he cleaned when like he was a window
cleaner so he'd be climbing up in debt
you know he's high up there that's hence
the - full name he's swinging up but you
know by the buildings and he's got long
hair so yeah it started with Tarzan's up
to these days I think Tarzan is in
Israel he has immunity and children's
books good for him man I'm telling you
dude this documentary is pretty even at
this like Cuban guy who I actually
looked it up he got he ended up getting
arrested after the documentary came out
but he did like leave Miami and
write postcards to the FBI agents that
were surveilling him like hey guys I'm
here I'm drinking a pina colada yes just
like you're sitting like and you realize
like yeah we're always just twelve
because this I love it awesome
stop I want it yeah he's gonna take a
break in a few minutes you're spend a
little bit of the postgame with us
because we've outsourced these questions
for you let's do right baby let's
take one advice question though before
we go to the postgame and/or just start
with this is a very this is a super
earnest one okay from I can do earnest
all rights the staff have any strategies
I should use as I start interviewing for
teaching jobs oh wow teaching jobs
interesting I actually I used to be a
tutor in Baltimore City I worked at an
after-school program in Baltimore and
that was that actually that job was when
I realized like I have likes comedy is
what it is because it was like you had
to choose between doing you can't you
can half-ass a job but like as a
paralegal for a horrible company right
but you can't half-ass teaching children
you know what I mean I don't want to I
don't want somebody's somebody's future
to be ruined because I was hungover
you know so wait there's more stakes I
would say don't do open mics I would say
that's number one
don't do open my comedy as a you know as
a teacher though hmm I don't know man
I think just being a teacher is enough
to do people even want to be teachers
anymore the fact is I think this person
does clearly want to be right what I'm
saying is your desire for being a
teacher that's got to put you at the top
of the list already geez bro I haven't
had a real job in so long what are you
asking me for man I don't have a tooth I
remember I remember what cool teachers
were like but you know it's the same as
interviewing in general I would say lie
right just absolutely present the best
the best version of yourself the other
thing is if you're as the person who
wants to be a teacher your prized
selfless you're probably honest to a
fault so fight that think in in the
interview a little do a little bit of
your inner wall street bro you know what
I mean have a little bit of that
unearned confidence because you're
probably a very thoughtful person who's
not used to that so don't be afraid to
lie about who you are for the betterment
of those children that you're gonna
teach because you're gonna be a good
teacher so that's what I would say I
would say Ally and and I'm actually just
related to it I want to do it just to
follow up that this might apply to
everybody doing interviews um every
employer to the point where it's like a
joke in movies now they're very used to
what's a flaw oh I work too hard I take
the project too seriously and sometimes
bla bla bla bla what is an actual good
answer to like it's obviously it's still
gonna be a lie of course but it's just
not gonna be the same thing that they've
heard thousands of times before a good
answer to what yeah they're like what's
your weakness that
with all of my weaknesses I work too
hard right I would say especially if
you're a teacher you're probably the I
think the answer that is a you got a you
got to hit him with something technical
you know what I mean like something like
oh you know I'm not I'm not as I really
need to brush up on my long division but
I've been I've I've taken online classes
and I'm doing continued education but my
strengths are in you know this this area
but I've already taken steps you want to
say a flaw and then tell them the steps
that you've taken to rectify it already
would be sort of my would be sort of my
advice I was great at interviewing I was
a there was always a it was there was
always like a three week period where
whoever hired me like at first they're
like huh I guess he's just kind of just
getting a slow start and then and then
like about a month in there like I've
been duped never shows out did you let
you roll up with like a fake tooth a
suit but it like tears off and I'm
wearing a track suit underneath I wear a
lot of adidas do you love with you as
the deed is your favorite or pranaam I'm
definitely these guys I like to switch
it up with some Puma but you know what
I'm agnostic when it comes to I like I
like all brands when it comes to the
tracksuit you know that's that's good I
like that that's that's a message that
more people in these political spheres
need yeah I like all brands my favorite
thing is brands I don't know if you seen
victory toes did they're gay now so they
did a coat so it's solved yeah three us
took care of homophobia McDonald's is
covering racism mm-hmm yep Northrop
Grumman they got they got ladies
designers yes
we're doing good baby do not worry that
that Yemeni school bus bombers design
heard Blackwater wants some girl boss
mercenaries too so it's everything is
coming up thanks to the brands let the
brand's will save us alright brothers so
we're gonna take it we'll take a quick
break we'll get you back in the put you
spend a little bit of the postgame we've
got some more advice questions for you
sounds good dude I really appreciate
it's a lot of fun yeah yeah everybody
check out come down check what else do
you wanna plug dude yeah then you the
advice show that I've started on Twitch
every Friday six o'clock called stab you
solves your problem it's it's live on
Twitch and it's also my youtube channel
at youtube.com slash savvy baby and yeah
stop me baby on all the you know Twitter
Instagram all that stuff but the advice
shows what I'm really really doing kind
of poor my that's my quarantine project
so look for people to check that out
alright we will do some of the postgame
alright everybody thank you Matt thank
you David Thank You Vijay Prashad people
got really fixated on you plugging your
appearance as a debate with Noam Chomsky
backing the patron TMDs get the whole
thing spread the word be good to
yourself be good to other people stay
safe stay strong be well peace and love
see you in the postgame in about ten
minutes people



## Keywords:
