---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xTjQbAF1eoQ
---

# Video
20191021 Habermas at 90: A Discussion of His Contributions to Social and Political Thought
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xTjQbAF1eoQ)

## Transcript:
okay I think we're going to start
because professor Vlad / Jew is due to
come any moment he is the director of
the cloth Center for the instant for a
constitutional democracy but he's
teaching so he's asked me to moderate
this session I'm Dermot Moran from the
philosophy department and we're just
going to go straight away into the
presentations for harbormaster's 90th
birthday his birthday was actually on
the 18th of June last so like the Queen
were giving him a year-long birthday
celebration the and he's just about I'm
told to produce his latest book
oh I'm gifted their philosophy which
comes out on the 11th of November it's I
think 1100 pages long I'm told it's
called something translated either also
a history of philosophy or another
history of philosophy you can take your
pick I'm joking I'm joking I'm joking
anyway our for card I'm going to go in
the order in which they are on the
poster and that means that the first
person to speak is an Reichhold she is
from the oil oppa university in
Flensburg and I had to look that up it's
so far north it's actually almost in
Denmark but she's the director of the
interdisciplinary Institute for
environmental social and human sciences
and his publication has many
publications including on lively kite
and on issues to do with the the social
sciences and indeed semiotics
she's edited the work in English called
the other of a feminist reflections in
ethics with Helen Fielding and Dorothea
hala Kowski and she's also written on
semiotics and inferential ism on Robert
Brandon's work 2016 and on normativity
okay so I'm going to ask her first and
then I'll introduce each one as we as we
come to them and at the end we'll have
the discussion so each one will give 15
minute presentation first
so am pleased I should add that Anna's
visiting professor here at this semester
and first of all thank you for this very
friendly introduction and also for
inviting me at a visiting scholar to
Boston College I'm very happy to be here
and I'm honored to speak on this panel
on the occasion of to the 90th birthday
of Jurgen Habermas and my topic will be
from the social philosophical
perspective Harbor Mass on moral
emotions philosophy is a reflective self
understanding
haba mas reconstructs the historical and
normative development of this
emancipatory idea throughout the history
of philosophy and focuses on the traces
of enlightenment and the ideas and post
metaphysical thought to this day in his
new book already mentioned our I
negotiated a philosophy and I was very
happy to read parts of that and advance
he characterizes this my post
metaphysical human rationality as
historically evolved and learning
processes communicative and social in
nature embedded in vegetative ways of
life of embodied human beings and
interval one with an historically
evolved social and intersubjective life
world philosophical self reflection and
self understanding is methodologically
bound to a participant attitude that is
extended from a second person
perspective in into subjective discourse
to a wee perspective of the first person
plural that ideally aims at a universal
self understanding without leaving the
internal perspective altogether
transcendental reflection under these
conditions means reconstruction of the
performative and implicit
presuppositions of the communicative
praxis of everyday life my topic today
moral emotions is one aspect of this
huge philosophical project moral
emotions can serve as a lens to some
crucial
aspects of Hamas social philosophy
furthermore an analysis of moral
emotions past the potential to analyze
some of the pressing societal questions
we are confronted with today in the
following I want to focus on the role
moral emotions and especially moral
indignation play in harbours mass work
Hamas mentions more emotions at several
occasions and he points to irrational
and as a patriot potential in them in
the PostScript of his forthcoming book
Kaaba Mosque points out that moral
emotions like indignation are guided by
an intuitive account of normative
knowledge that implicitly structures
normative practices a rational
reconstruction of the implicit normative
consciousness can make this moral
knowledge explicit the reconstruction of
normative knowledge and validity claims
and moral emotions is not solely under
taken from a hermeneutical perspective
but it is conducted from a genuinely
practical perspective that reveals
sources and contents of practical reason
Hamas states that indignation resentment
and forgiveness as well as apologies
excuses and promises for recompensation
express or reflect the normative
struggles about validity claims
concerning the correct description of
what has happened and concerning the
norms referred to Hamas is especially
interested in the epistemic attitudes of
the participants expressed and moral
emotions the opponent's relate to one
another in a 2nd person perspective as
long as they strive for reciprocal
understanding in his account of more
emotions Hamas explicitly refers to pita
strawsons classic paper freedom and
resentment from 1962 it is important to
note that Strawson presents a rational
account of moral emotions banned binding
reactive attitudes constitutively to
rational
developed in the context of Oxford
ordinary language philosophy the straw
Sounion concept of reactive attitudes
relies on Austin's account of
performative speech acts indignation and
resentment are not solely identified by
their content but they are specific
performative types of uttering moral
criticism expressing indignation does
not mean to just state a moral judgment
but it is a specific performative act of
protesting against a felt injustice or
wrong when Hamas refers to strawsons
account of moral indignation in his
writings he refers to both the
rationality of indignation and the
performative power to protest to say no
and to express resistance it is
important to note that indignation
expresses validity claims from the
internal perspective of the indignant
person and clearly this perspective can
be incomplete non legitimate or even
false neither straw sahaba mosque claim
that every expression of indignation is
legitimate the crucial point in that
communicative processes no sorry sorry
the crucial point is that communicative
processes answering to indignation
asking for reasons questioning or
criticizing validity claims and adding
further information set in motion a
discursive process of understanding
based on fundamental norms of
rationality none of the perspectives in
this process needs to be utterly right
or complete every player in the game of
asking foreign giving reasons
incorporates a particular perspective
but the norms of disgust discourse
normatively unify the communicative
process obamas interest in a post
metaphysical communicative rationality
meets a specific criticism of
metaphysics in Strawson who develops as
account of reactive attitudes as a
methodological alternative to
metaphysical claims and the BET debate
about free will and determinism
Strawson rejects metaphysical
statements about the existence of
freewill the refutation of metaphysical
determinism as quote panicky metaphysics
and proposes his approach to morality
via an account of practically necessary
reactive attitudes
according to straws in a web of reactive
attitudes among them indignation
resentment and forgiveness form a quote
general framework of human life
human life is depicted as essentially
social and normative in the sense that
humans always are embedded in normative
practices the internal perspective
shouldn't be conflated with a purely
personal or individualistic approach
obamas as well as straws and reject an
empiricist psychological approach to
more emotions instead they analyze the
constitutive references to social and
moral norms in feelings like indignation
moral emotions co-evolved with social
human practice and reflect human
answerability to norms in modification
of putnam one can say moral emotions
ain't in the head moral emotions in the
above described sense have a quite
significant emancipatory potential in
moral learning processes and the last
part of the lecture on the occasion of
the celebration of his 90th birthday in
Frankfort this year hababam Oz focuses
on recent social and political
developments he diagnoses a drying out
of real discourse in the national public
spheres and identifies attitudes of
indifference and national racing team
Moe and I will say something about this
French word in a second dominating large
parts of the public sphere in this
situation he refers to moral indignation
as one possible engine of development of
a new political public and the
strengthening of an attitude of
solidarity that is not yet guarded and
institutionalized by politics and law
the leading moral standards of this
indignation are human rights the
emancipated social role of moral
indignation law
in its potential to strengthen
solidarity in fields in which solidarity
is not yet institutionalized by politics
and law one example could be the rising
global solidarity among young people and
climate protests referring to moral
standards the expression of moral
indignation in the public sphere can
help criticize existing institutional
arrangements claiming transnational
solidarity moral indignation is not only
located in a narrow normative sense of
indicating violations of existing norms
by certain actions but it can serve as
an engine for a more fundamental
normative and institutional change but
what about recent emo the second term
Hamas mentions isn't this attitude also
resisting institutional realities
pointing to felt in Justices
transforming social and political
institutions and protesting in an angry
and indignant way
Hamas refers to this rise of Hassan
chemo but he normatively and
conceptually distinguishes this aunty
more from moral indignation and its
types of no statements and resistance so
where exactly is the difference I want
to try a first sketch of an answer in
the remaining part of my contribution in
this I want to refer to marks Sheila he
analyzes his own team or and to analyze
this Vasanti more and show main
differences between moral indignation
and hassan team or Sheila analyzes a
small team or referring to structural
elements of Nietzsche's account like
Nietzsche he uses the French word reason
team or because there is no adequate
translation and also Hamas uses the
French word in his lecture and I don't
know about English but in German
definitely there is no german word to
replace it
Vasanti more essentially is an attitude
of wanting revenge and carrying a grudge
according to the Sheila anger or having
a grudge are not transitory feelings
leading to action resolution or protest
on the contrary there is
Jamal is characterized by a fundamental
suppression or inhibition of actions due
to feelings of inability or impotence to
act
Sheila points out that restaurant emo
must be quote clearly distinguished from
the impulse for self defense even when
the reaction is companied by anger fury
or indignation end of quote in
restaurant emo the immediate reaction is
postponed
whereas moral indignation serves as a
motor of change and motivates
individuals or groups to act and protest
recently more developed it is it's
attitudinal force by suppressing actions
the outside is constantly regarded as
evil or enemy
whereas indignation in the straw Sounion
and harbor Mazen sends is a
communicative attitude that aims at
understanding and soul the normative
struggle Asante more searches for
objects of revenge in contrast to
indignation that is directed to what
specific objects and events that give
rise and reason for indignation asan
Teemo is decoupled from real objects and
facts it is a general attitude that does
not directly react to objects but that
is manifested over a long time and whose
objects are quite indefinite asan Jamal
is largely decoupled from the level
effects and events hardly reactive to
arguments and thus hardly modified so
far the distinction between resident emo
and moral indignation seems to be clear
as glass on the level of systemic or
institutional frames that host and
strengthen resident emo the distinction
becomes less clear-cut whereas there is
no clear link between recent emo and
facts there seems to be a constitutive
link between resin Timor and general
structures of societies the feelings of
importance and powerlessness that are
constitutive in Hassan's emo reflect at
least potentially and vaguely structures
of power symmetry and inequality in
societies Sheela describes Vasant him
as a reaction to the simultaneous
existence of social structures of
inequality and injustice and the
normative claims for equality and
justice quote Hasan Timor must therefore
be strongest in a society like ours
where approximately equal rights
political or otherwise or formal social
equality go hand-in-hand with white
factual differences and power property
and education and of quote at this point
a normative ambivalence and the concept
of resident emo is visible on a
structural level resident Jamal seems to
arise especially in societies of social
and economic injustice these injustice
are not the object of moral indignation
though but they feel resulting more
without being hit or addressed by it a
felt powerlessness to answer these end
justices leads to a decoupling of
criticism and Hassan timur becomes
productive in an ideological way
nationalistic or racist or misogynist
values are created and with this
collective enemies the simultaneous
existence of claims for justice and
equality on the one hand and power are
symmetries on the other that Sheila
diagnosis from a philosophical
perspective seems to be covered or
hidden by reason team or ideologies they
are directed against minorities
producing narratives and myths that lead
to a felt superiority over even weaker
parties and society Vasanti movas is an
ideological project projection that in
the first for revenge leads to a certain
amount of satisfaction and joy and a
feeling of power for those who are part
of the resident emo movement the
satisfaction is mostly decoupled from
the societal inequalities that remain
remain uncritical
it is this coupling of Grisanti more
ideologies and factual societal and
capitalist indices that might lie in the
background of Hamas diagnosis of a
drying out of
Disco's and a filling up with attitudes
of indifference and Vasanti more in some
respect the role and attraction of
Basanti more in recent societies is
reminiscent of the Marxian
interpretation of the role of religion
as an opium for the people the state and
the society produces auntie mo as a
false consciousness restaurant team all
ideologies make the people forget about
their powerlessness and social injustice
instead they enjoy impulses of revenge
and anger as well as certain solidarity
among the young group when Marx views
religion as an expression of suffering
and a protest against it this might be
said about this auntie mo as well in an
inverted way
Vasanti more expresses the suffering
from social injustice and a certain
power to protest seen this way rasaan
team all seems to be linked tomorrow
indignation at least in some respect

thank you very much second speaker is
well known to you all David Rasmussen
has been a member of our faculty here in
Boston College since 1968 he spent time
with Hamas in the 80s in Frankfurt and
has published quite a number of books in
harbor box including reading Habermas
the handbook for critical theory and
then I think eight volumes of studies of
Hamas with sage so yeah a lot of my life
has been associated with yoghurt however
mas about I suppose everything goes
faster than we think so it must have
been four years ago I think it's about
two years ago anyway the honey
Hamas made the list of the 100 most
important people in the world okay and
and then the discussion said the problem
is reading Hamas is like eating ground
glass
and therefore it's pretty hard I don't
know how many people have had some
internal experience from Hamas but it's
pretty hard to you know figure out what
this guy was up to he was an amazing guy
he spanked began there was a front at
school called the Frankfurt School and
in Germany which is made up of a group
of very famous well it started with a I
will book on that it started with a with
somebody who thought that they treat
each marks institutionalised marks in
the university and and that's what they
did that is they came up with a kind of
theory of which is called critical
theory and it had brilliant exponents
and Hamas was a student of one of those
Theodor Adorno
and and then carried on to what we now
call the second generation I mean he
really is the second generation of
critical theory although there are a
number of others associated with it just
to finish the ground glass analogy a few
years ago he gave it a talk the Tanner
lectures at Harvard and they were in the
Sanders Theater and the Sanders Theatre
was filled up and so he he talked about
something about three or four of us knew
something about it was a attempt to show
how you could free law from morality
when you made the transition from Conte
to the present it was setting up his
facticity in gelt owned his philosophy
of law book and of course there were a
thousand people there and be around him
is like to be around a movie star you
just gotta they they flock around and
they're always you know would you sign
this book and he very apologetic any
since I sorry I have to sign this by and
so on and so forth
but anyway
they came to see him there this is
wildly complex and Hubble must when he
gives a lecture like that he doesn't he
has no sympathy for his audience he's
not trying to explain you know this and
that he just goes through it as he did
on his 90th birthday when he talked
about morality and cityscape morality
and ethics anyway in the middle of it
he said you know he said you know I'm a
German professor he said I'm not like
your American professors he said I just
I just can't put it in simple simple
terminology and the crowd roared they
cheered it's the one thing they
understood anyway
I on the other hand he's one of the most
well it's my own experience with him he
came here in 1984 to give the lectures
discourse of modernity he came back in I
think 2002 or so or maybe it was later
than that he something like a world it's
a famous paper that gave us a world of
something Constitution for a world
Society brilliant paper and then he and
about three or four years ago he got
into the issue of whether the European
Union could have a kind of legitimation
form because of the crisis of the
European Union it's question who are you
if you remember the European Union and
he gave one of the subsequent papers to
a book they wrote on the crisis the
European Union so I would just as soon
tell you stories about Hamas but I
suppose I should give something of a
paper so we had his 90th birthday this
summer
it was a it was a kind of world
historical event in in in Germany
he's Germany's most famous most famous
intellectual and so all the papers had
featured Hamas and there was a huge I
think he'd he was there was a there was
a big auditorium that he was president
and there were five other halls in the
university that this this lecture was
was was piped to and and he did it at
nine years old with extraordinary vigor
and then we had a to be a conference and
he would respond to the various lectures
that occurred over this period and and
generally had interesting things to say
anyway well what I was going to say was
he's my sense of him was he's the only
person I knew who absolutely a genius
but he could be a regular guy and that's
quite a combination great fun even
though he has this you know this
incredible pile of books that he's
written which are quite extraordinary
anyway the last of the thing I wrote it
for his birthday was a thing called
populism and the structural
transformation of the public sphere
after he wrote his dissertation they do
a thing in Germany called habala T about
ability tot ziens rift which is a kind
of second dissertation and he wrote this
thing the structural transformation of
the public sphere the public sphere
means in German often leash tight and
over the waveguide can be translated as
publicity it doesn't ask it necessarily
it's a public sphere I think to the
American year gives us something it's
just about the manifestation of public
opinion
and that's a big deal he says because
public opinion is under assault it's an
it's on the basis of public opinion and
religious the legitimation of politics
through public opinion that the modern
political structure was formed now this
is uh I mean here he comes out of this
Marxist tradition but the foundation
it's a very subtle thing the foundation
of the structural transformation of the
public sphere is really liberalism in
its wooden table mas smuggles liberalism
into the Frankfurt School kind of post
Marxist analysis so as we look now in
this period of social media and fake
news one wants to have a model to see
you know what should I mean all these
well okay my colleagues I'm not going to
do this
there are many inadequate discussions of
populism because what it what it
presupposes that is it breathable as a
normal kind of political society and
what is this where you go back to the
structural transformation in the public
sphere and you realize that here you
know this is what the model of sub of of
a democratic society should be and
that's very interesting the other thing
that's very interesting about this this
is his advice to his students okay his
PhD students you got to have a thread
and once you get the thread you can
figure out what your next book in your
next project and your next thing is
going to be and here's the secret to the
thread it's in the structural
transformation you can see I'll have a
little comment at the end to show you
how the all the issues that are really
raised in there he somehow deals with as
as his life is going on now
just a couple of things I know I'm
running out of time already okay in my
book
view of the book does three things first
it shows the public sphere as an
historical phenomenon which emerged and
became a source of democratic legitimacy
in modernity second with Conte it finds
a normative moral foundation for the
public sphere and third with the help of
Hegel and Marx and Adorno it describes
the decline of the public sphere know
what I go on to say is I think he really
distanced himself from the third claim
about and there Adorno had written this
stuff about the cultural industry and
it's it's time takes the cycle of the
culture industry comes there's a hot
period and then it goes but the
interesting thing is that what this book
does is it traces kind of free
discussion from literary societies to
politics and what happens in that
process which is implicit I mean what
his description of what happens in this
process is implicit and whatever
whatever he's done afterwards and it is
that reason replaces tradition in and
reason as it is expressed in public
opinion now I'll skip most of this and
just he does he does up he does a I
think I have a summary of his fast well
anyway the point is that I'll just give
you a quote from Hamas public debate was
supposed to transport transform Valenta
swill into wrought CEO reason that in
the public competition of private
arguments came into being as the
consensus of
what was practically necessary into
interest of all but you see the issue I
mean it's very interesting to look back
at this because now we have the assault
on public opinion in terms of anything
can be missed
through processes of misinformation any
kind of any kind of public thing can be
undercut so the whole idea of consensus
is is problematic on the other hand it's
very interesting that the big the real
force behind modern democracy is the
idea of the public and the idea of
public opinion now my summary of the
thing is this first historical analysis
shows that if a new form of public
emerged with modernity associated
essentially with new forms of
communication thereby making possible
the emergence of a literary public
sphere which became the basis for the
political public sphere
so all these salons became the basis for
the political public sphere
second the this new public was
essentially limited to those who held
property and were educated which
suggested that the bourgeois public
sphere was contained but given its
intellectual focus would burst the
bounds of class constraint you know in
other words the Marxist critique has
already been well you know these are a
bunch of rules well people well they
were but they thought of themselves as
universal so they you know they didn't
see themselves as being representing a
particular class they saw themselves as
being represented universally third of
the emancipatory potential of this
development was based on the new
emphasis on equality critique and
inclusion and fourth the transition
conceived from the perspective of
political legitimacy could be summarized
the movement from a taught artists non
Veritas facet legen authority not truth
makes the law this is you know they
trace us back to Hobbes authority not
truth makes the law and the transition
is
and define the snobs to Veritas the
transition is to Veritas non octo Titus
facet Legum truth not Authority makes
the law as Carl Schmitt both quotes
Schmitt positively here which is quite
unusual
not not polenta's but not Co all right
now just one final comment I see I only
have a minute or so left one final
comment is the book is fascinating but
in the in the ability on shrift
we do have this kind of culture industry
you know this thing happens and then it
declines at the late 19th century in
20th century and so forth but there were
two chapters that were inserted in the
book and it's like that's where the real
hub amaz is the chapters on Kant Hegel
and Marx and of course what what we see
is that this movement from volantis to
rotc oh you know this is as it were
concrete eyes by Kant and there you get
the link between morality and politics
which is I suppose the subject that has
most preoccupied Hamas all these years
thank you thank you David
well our next speaker is a professor how
bronckhorst who is the head of the
Institute of sociology at the university
of Flensburg he is also a doctor of from
the Frankfurt School having graduated
with his PhD from Frankfurt he's been
visiting professor at the new school for
Social Research and has a number of
publications in English including Adorno
and critical theory solidarity from
civic friendship to a global legal
community and 2014 critical theory of
legal rebel
okay thank you yeah thank you very much
for having me invited for this panel I
would give him a small title the
absolute and social revolution already
at school and in the Communist bookshop
of Commerce Park in the Rhineland in the
late 1940s Hamas has read Heidegger sign
and sight line in sight of the being and
time and the works of Karl Marx in the
common spot communist book shop and dine
outside from another bookshop
this led to a combination of Heidegger
and Marx familiar to that of the early
modules in the late 1920s and early
thirties from which you can find trails
in the already endured dissertation
which as the first beginning of nearly I
think the first hundred pages or 80
pages are about Marx the early marks on
this basis how I must hold his PhD
thesis on shelling that's absolutely in
the shifter is absolute the only shape
the absolute and history two ideas of
Schelling's philosophy of history and
especially this rate I'll tell the ever
from the early 1910s eighteen tens
eighteen tenths became important for
Hamas first the highly speculative idea
of dialectic based on the Gnostic
materialism of Yakov boomer boomers
Protestant version of the Jewish
heterodox doctrine of creation through
an organic self-contradiction of God
second a kind of anticipation of left
lane lane
jung-hee galleon criticism of his
it's absolute idealism in shellings
early philosophy of history could say
that shelling in a way was the first
young Nigerian in advance
yeah so earlier already then he grants
and has written his most important works
sharing will cover of yes
yeah younger than Hegel but he became at
school the teacher of heeded yeah so he
was very influential for the Hegelian
philosophy later they came asunder so as
ever in these stories this latent young
he gay an ism of shelling still
triggered enthusiastic the actions by
Kierkegaard one of the many young
Hegelians students learn Kierkegaard one
of the many young Hegelians students who
visited the late shellings lecture
course in Berlin 1843 finally sharing
Kierkegaard wrote in his notebook
finally after a boring first lecture now
in the second lecture came the word we
all were waiting for so long English
that recite reality and then wasn't get
the catch word here for the entire
movement in a way the title of his
dissertation covers the entire of
hamamass dissertation tires his entire
work and entails its basic idea first
there is no absolute or unconditioned or
idea in the Platonic sense or God in the
Christian sense it cetera and if there
is any it is exclusively in history the
second half sentence is a research
program that finally after the
linguistic turn of the early 1970s leads
to the theory of absolute
and unconditioned claims to truth
justice and authenticity which were
already mentioned by Anna which are not
coroner was human this humankind not
coroner's humankind but with human
beings communicative use of language
before humans started to talk there was
a long period yeah
longer than or maybe maybe as long as
our entire period from then on was so as
one does not really know it it keeps
speculative but what what one knows is
that they did not speak they had sign it
sank kind of sign language they even
when the ethic could speak they start
great collectively late to speak the
species the latent young sorry the
second yeah these claims for
unconditioned truths are situated in
every informative imperative and
expressive speech as an everyday
language the unavoidable use of
unconditioned truth claims is insofar
conditioned product of the social
revolution that may changed every day
for the better or for the worse for
example by genetic manipulation without
which how Hamas has written also later I
was asked written a book and latest we
disappear with the evolution of talking
and working animals so it is
historically second how our mothers
early interest in the evolution of the
apple root initially leads via marks to
a sociologically extended and fallible
philosophy of history and the key paper
in a way the key to his entire work is a
lecture on shelling and Marx in
Heidelberg from 1960 that brought him
ganas offer of his first 10 for his
first 10 10 yet tenured was
the electric in Heidelberg the lecture
came out in the volume tio he on praxis
in English theory and practice
from 1963 but was not translated for the
English edition and as far as I know as
never has never been translated but the
title is already problematic dialectical
idealism in transition to materialism
the electrical is Muslim uber tanks of
materialism or thereafter Hamas began a
polka medic for the further how amazing
work yeah the after Hamas began to
understand historical materialism as a
serie of social revolution there is due
to not only accidental variation and
social selection of functional systems
and structures but also to socio
cognitive learning processes such as
those explored present a marquee and
Darwinist and cognitive psychologist
Jean Piaget have a mastery well it this
theory of social revolution in the late
1970s in a couple of essays edited under
the title to awaken structural this is
to abortion material is most said he
thought I think he thought that was
understandable only in Germany and the
English translation came out later under
the title communication and evolution of
society so and the second and then also
in this two volumes of the theory of
communicative action putting the
reconstruction of historical materialism
and the theory of communicating action
together we could think Nate them or
name them with respect to its shelygin
said Lincoln origins the absolute in
history of class struggles we all
history is a history of class struggles
yeah this is the and that
what's the history of learning processes
of social groups of now socially
situated social groups taken class
struggle in abroad not only economically
sense economically highly restricted
sense using blue man and persons or the
sight of objective spirit and that means
object to spirits and Eagle means the
reason embodied inhabits Hardware
institutions social systems and so on
and meet and Durkheim on the site of
subjective spirits
the reason inherent in individual and
collective moral indignation and
resentment plants purposes and
intentions of all kind dis curses and
actions yeah this is the reason the the
subject of learning processes is
subjectively is not objective reason
however masks are not objective spirit
how I must reconstructed the critique of
political economy in the much broader
framework of a critique of relations of
understanding book from Thomas McCarthy
about how amass from the early 80s has
his title that they are very fitting
title during the 1960's have a mass his
friend his friends on the academic and
political left and their students I
quote Hamas believed themselves in the
center of all progressive activities and
however mas edit fifty years later in
the lecture in Frankfurt in June this
year one day after his birthday nineties
birthdays they're the target questioned
and were we not in the center of all
progressive activities in the 1960s
however mas books and initiatives of the
60s all became of course pondered deeply
with the catchwords of the students
movement of 1968 it began was a forward
to the SDS mmm
random for them for a Democratic
University in 1960 who's ruling the
Democrat II and structure to debate on
the university of form during the 1960's
it followed two years later the word
that was most important for the entire
students companions and David had
mentioned had talked about it already
the public and the depolarized public of
this natural transformed public sphere
that had to be read politicized
palete ization was another catch word
that also was from was not from Hamas
but Hamas had used it very early at that
time and it it cost polar to this
movement so he was influential in
Germany he was very influential at that
time not to the United States at all and
nobody knew him so this in 1968 the word
public was everywhere and everything
negotiated behind closed doors all
conflicts shadowed and repressed in the
private sphere should become public it
was a parallel of this entire movement
for a long time a long time means that
couple one or two years at that time so
the the the it was an accelerated time
of history so something like a
revolution is water revolution yeah but
it was a movement that that copied
revolutionary practices so to say so the
students over did appeal to public so
much that in Ontario and Paris where
Foucault was teaching then all those
four remove can't destroyed including
the restrooms in Kiel where I studied
the students were less radical and an
elder student gave
book of how Hamas gave gave me the book
of Hamas and suggested to read the
chapter called from the art from the art
reasoning to the art consuming audience
after that I read the chapter on culture
industry
David mention it of the dialectic of
enlightenment and the other chapters and
all I could find of career series
already in 1963 came the volume with s a
volume with essays out that anticipated
the turn of the students movement to
Marxism already in the conjunction of
its title theory and practice
then came the critique of positivism and
technocracy in the 1968 volumes
knowledge and human interest and
technology and science as ideology and
the not yet translated 1971 debate with
lumen under the title theory of society
or social technology in 1971 followed a
sound critique of late capitalism under
the title legitimization problems of
late capitalism that immediately was
supplemented by a seminal volume of
essays of Klaus offer then still Hamas
assistant under the title structural
problems of the capitalist state have a
mass and office now even more well it
ceases that capitalism without
democratic steering and control of a
state that is at least not only
capitalist but also democratic might
cause not only legitimization problems
but a very table veritable veritable
legitimization crisis if such a crisis
breaks out how about speaking as book in
the title of legitimization problems not
of a legitimization crisis and the
reason is this if such a crisis breaks
out and it seems that we are now facing
such a crisis
it can it can be solved only so some
kind of or at least strong elements of
democratic socialism that is Jesus of
Hamas otherwise it becomes a
revolutionary crisis for the good or for
the worse which is much more probable
now
knowledge and human interest is an
interesting book not only because it
states on initially and tries to show
that epistemic criticism is possible
only as a critical seer of society but
also because it anticipates the later
Siri how Hamas later Siri that
philosophical developments are
intellectual Oh from academically
specialized learning processes which
nevertheless reflect and even trigger
social cognitive learning process of the
entire or can trigger of the entire
society our mas has explained this idea
in the debate between philosophers and
prophets church fathers and reformers in
the Western in history of Western
philosophy in his latest book of
Chanukah shifted their philosophy this
two-volume book since the late 1960s
can't played an increasing important
role in hamas philosophy however he
became never a neo-kantian
who sticks to the entire dialectical
dualism of Genesis and validity Genesis
on gay talk with which the brain of
every German student of philosophy is
colonized in their first class at the
philosophical department despite his
recognition of the exceptional position
of Kant and his harsh criticism of all
our so tallien he ganglion Marxists he
and Marxist series of the good life and
his intrinsic and defense of country
ontological morality Hamas F
remain the guardian Marxist however he
understand as his latest book and the
already quoted lecture in Frankfurt this
year nine mile move allocate and Italy
kite once again morality and ethics and
ethical life it is available at YouTube
show shows cants theory it was by the
way a lecture course the lecture was in
the biggest lecture hall in Frankfurt
with five or six electric wolves was
full stuffed with people were five
thousand people there
yeah for Smith with television in all
rubes amazing in some way observed
enterprise so this lecture shows can't
theory as a living system that learns
from all later born generations and this
is a very point of his philosophy of
learning process in history cants past
breaking inside in human autonomy that
was that we are free if and only if we
bind ourselves voluntarily as mark says
I was trying student always it's over ok
I want only I finish this paragraph yeah
okay a can't theory or L sorry
however here have a mass understands as
his latest book and the already quoted
lecture and Frankfurt this year so Kant
theory as a living system that learns
from all later born generation hands
past breaking inside and human autonomy
that we are free and only if we bind
ourselves voluntarily
to universal norms that for the time
being guarantee that everybody is free
because a singular subject is really
free if and only if or subjects are free
however mas leads can't concept of
autonomy after Kant has wrecked Hegel
and Marx in his lecture he performed a
counterfactual progressive have a
neutral reading of can't heal and Marx
that tries to improve the lasting
insights of Kant morality autonomy by
reading him as a I quote Marxist and
blatant author who maintained right in
comparison with Hegel after he had
learned sufficiently enough from Hegel
this way Adorno and Horkheimer already
had read Kant Hegel and Marx in a
seemingly familiar way adano has heard
Peter from after B Topher has heard
sufficiently enough of feedback
therefore adano can hear Beethoven as s
he never was hurt before the result of
such a synthesizing reading or hearing
that improves and also a composer by new
and enlightening insights and
innovations which are beyond his or her
time horizons is doing critical theory
of society thank you and sorry for life
our last speaker is Frank Michael Mann
of the Harvard Law School
his professor emeritus at Harvard Law in
constitutional law he's published on
Brennan and democracy the fellow of the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences
and past president of the American
Society for political and legal theory
the legal philosophy he's published on
constitutionalism and on human rights
including on John Rawls and is a
specialist on South Africa and Israel
thank you I'm going to start with a
complaint that the philosopher Bernard
Williams made against the political
theorizing of John Rawls Williams
charged Rawls with an error of what he
called political moralism political
moralism and by that Williams meant that
Rawls proceeds so Williams said by
subjecting politics to the constraint of
a morality conceived prior to politics
where Williams rather wants the
realities of politics to shape from the
start
the morality applicable to politics well
I think Rawls in the end complies with
what Williams wants and my question for
now is going to be does Jurgen Habermas
comply with it is Harbor Mouse
chargeable with political moralism in
Williams's sense and if Harbor mas
escapes the charge how how does he well
I see two ways to answer that he does
escape it
the first way lies through a familiar
and compromising Lee instrumentalized
idea of political legitimacy which you
can find in the work of Harbor mouths on
law the other way lies through an idea
of legal validity that's more
distinctive of Harbor mass and that tax
between Williams's two Shores of reality
and morality or as we might say of fact
and reason legitimacy first what is
legitimacy and why does it matter the
legitimacy of a legal rule says Harbor
mass consists in whatever perceived
attribute of the rule extends to its
address
sees a possibility of following the rule
as harbor mouse says out of respect for
the law and why does that matter well
one reason given by a Burma's is that
levels of actual compliance with the
rule can be expected to vary with
addressees beliefs in these are his
expressions beliefs in or suppositions
of that quality in the rule of deserving
this of respect Habermas says the less
illegal order is legitimate or at least
is considered as such the more factors
such as intimidation the force of
circumstances custom and sheer habit
must step in to reinforce it so when
Habermas writes taut towards the close
of between facts and norms a book that
I'm gonna
henceforward call by its initials BFM
when haver mas writes that the
democratic procedure for the production
of law forms the only post metaphysical
source of laws legitimacy we might read
him as saying that an appearance of the
laws Democratic procedural genesis is
the only thing that these days we'll
call citizens of widely varying for a
philosophical and moral outlooks to
consider that law of deserving of
respect and that might all then seem to
be pointing towards a highly
instrumentalized concept of legitimacy
given given that the stability of a
positive legal order is for anyone and
everyone a prime social dissident and
given further that stability is
dependent on a certain kind of
widespread motivating effect from the
orders positive laws and given finally
that an appearance of the democratic
production of the laws is our only post
medical post metaphysical recourse for
the generation of such an effect
sustaining such an appearance
had better be our course now that's a
real argument and it would leave
Habermas easily safe from charges of
political moralism it would be something
rather the opposite of political
moralism political realism with an
exclamation point and many followers of
the work of harbor Maas would certainly
feel let down if that would turn out to
be the sole ultimate ground of harbor
Mouse's defense of constitutional
democracy in his great work on law a
purely hypothetical defense it would be
in which the only pre institutional
component is the starting positive
everyone shared interest in a stabilized
positive legal order with no more said
about the values embodied in that order
or pursued by it well what I've said so
far has all been worked up from harbor
masses proposition on legitimacy to
repeat the democratic procedure for the
production of law forms the only post
metaphysical source of the law's
legitimacy I want to compare that now
with the principle offered by Hamas
under the name of the principle of
democracy which also has a prominent
place in the argument of vfn that
principle says only those statutes may
claim legitimacy that can meet with the
assent of all citizens in a discursive
process of legislation now discursive
process is for Hamas a highly
counterfactual in a highly moralized
motion a discursive process would be one
meeting certain standards of focused
sincerity absence of coercion and
openness to contributions from all
concern no actual political discourse
meets the discourse principle it's a
counterfactual
aspirational idea so can legitimacy in
that principle of democracy still figure
as a matter only and purely of non
moralized sociological fad well in a way
it can the principle of democracy states
that only statutes meaning meeting a
certain normative standard of
acceptability to all citizens in the
discursive process can claim legitimacy
we can easily give that a sociological
twist it says then only statutes meeting
that standard will be ones that turn out
in fact to cause addresses all to
respond to them as respect worthy it
doesn't say that as a matter of what
ought rightly to be the case on the
sociological reading it says it as a
statement of what is in fact the case a
law that a law that comes out of
something that looks like a normative
leaf satisfactory discourse will as a
matter of sociological fad be stable in
the system will generate the right sort
of response from citizens and a law that
doesn't want well okay we could read
harbormaster's democratic principle in
that way but on a reading more attuned
to harbor mouses philosophy as a whole I
think we'd have to say that a charge of
political moralism might be starting to
find some legs harbor Maas presents his
principle of democracy in BFM as a
derivation from a soap a prior so-called
discourse principle the discourse
principle is not localized to legal
theory in harbor Mouse's works but
spreads widely across them its states as
follows just those action norms are
valid to which all possibly affected
persons could agree as participants in
rational discourses note the key word
there is not legitimate it's valid this
is not about this is about the nor
being what it rightly or fitly ought to
be in a sense beyond mere expediency now
now the principle of democracy the word
where the word is legitimate not valid
is according to Harbormaster derivation
from the discourse principle the
democracy principle he says is the
discourse principle tailored for norms
set up as law within a working democracy
but the discourse principle from which
the democracy principle is derived is a
moral principle by my reading and so at
this point a seepage of morality into
harbor Marcion legitimacy is becoming
pretty clear so do charges of political
moralizing then oh wait I think harbor
Maas to his credit avoids them moral in
content as the discourse principle and
by derivation the democracy principle
may be these principles are not framed
by Hamas as expressions of a reason or a
reason ability antecedent to and
external to social facts Harbor mosque
does not explain or justify in that way
the whole darkness he insists these
principles have he presents them yes as
as expectations of what he calls a moral
point of view it is not however of
excuse me a view that reason
independently posits or discovers it's
rather one that philosophical reflection
develops and confirms from as harbor Mao
says a perspective that it encounters in
society itself it's not the moral point
of view full stop it's rather says
Harbor mosque the moral point of view
from which modern societies are
criticized by their own social movements
it's the point of view from which
citizens
mutually and democratically recognized
as free and equal seek validation for
resolutions of matters that they see
must be settled among them but over
which they disagree that is to say the
matters taken up in politics it's also
argues Habermas in BFM a point of view
whose presence among us finds
confirmation in a rational
reconstruction of our own historical
constitutional democratic practice and
self understanding a lot of B FN goes
into that rational reconstruction well I
can take here a page from a recent book
by Gordon Finlayson harbormaster's
discourse theory of law rights Finlayson
limits itself to explication of the
conditions under which a democratic
constitutional state conducts its
functions when it functions as it should
now that as it should so I take the
harbor Massey in teaching to be lies not
in the stars but in ourselves it lies in
the depths of the language and the
depths of the vocabulary of ideas by
which we constitute the world we have a
Democratic heritage constitute the world
including ourselves and each other as
free and equal subjects under reciprocal
obligation to treat one another as such
that is I think a teaching that in
ourselves not in the stars in our
identity not in the stars
that's a teaching to fortify us in
troubled times in our ongoing pursuit of
the project of constitutional democracy
and I regard it as a single contribution
Jurgen Habermas okay thank you very much
I think we have some time for questions
I maybe will go directly to the floor
rather than asking the part the
panelists to comment on each other yes
at the back please
this sort of ability Mikey got a second
generation of the Frankfurt School marks
in great from the first generation and
dialectic vitamin and oh so like dawn
down the room right they really make it
out that it's very difficult to be a
sort of mark Sisson to let go in the
absence of the party and so and of
course agra moss in some sense right the
sort of london ism door no and
Horkheimer and so given the sort of
historical events about transpired with
the crop up of venue left going from
sixties and seventies and also the
transition from like say kings imported
state to neoliberalism i guess some
white of these events Wow why do you god
would you guys consider a pogrom AUSA's
you know in this generation progress or
necessary okay anyone here on the panel
want to take that question up okay David
yeah well if you look at it from the
point of view of of the early function
school which you seem to have some
knowledge of what Hamas does is he he
brings the whole funk word school
orientation up-to-date that is I wish I
could remember this we did a book on
Hamas in law just as the law book came
out and it was reviewed by the what is
it the London Review of Books and this
analytic philosopher said well you know
we look at Sartre
I mean what's Sartre you know and then
you go and you and and daddy died I mean
daddy died who would read them and he
goes on this in this arrogant way in any
fine he says well Hamas is like a
one-armed paper hanger you know but
Hubble mas was somehow legitimate well
the point being that he updated the
at school and and dealt with with issues
of contemporary philosophy the German
code word for that was going from a
philosophy of consciousness to a
philosophy of language but he grounds
and this is relevant it seems to me that
the argument that Frank just made that
he grounds in speech act theory and in
any case you know people read hamas in
ways that they never read Adorno
Horkheimer etc and that's that's I think
one of the real significance of mind
sense in what I'd call postmodern
ownership so I come to a role and half
of us seeking a theory of a public
discourse that is can negotiate the
support of the voices okay but I have
two impressions and I asked to be
corrected I had the impression that both
thinkers were criticized for in fact
excluding the religious voice and
mindset make privatizing it or put it
pushing it to the side when it came to
the final secular deliberation and then
I had the impression the second
impression that both thinkers responded
to this sort of criticism and tried to
modify their theories to accommodate
more adequately than religious so I'd
like you know corrected maybe I'll ask
someone here to friend breakfast since
you mention goals
a human proclivity and a human concern
that would have to be duly respected by
any acceptable state and in so doing of
course he was following very much in the
American tradition of the American
constitutional democratic tradition in
which he had been brought up you're not
giving your not giving do wait and do
effect to the special kinds of claims
that faith makes on human beings in
society and over a period of time in
which he wrote series of essays he
eventually collected
the guts of all of them in a second big
book called political liberalism in
which he brings to the floor a
consideration that he hadn't featured
strongly in a theory of justice what he
called the fact of reasonable pluralism
that there are in society a variety of
conflicting but all of them reasonable
comprehensive religious metaphysical and
moral views and any theory of justice
any conception of justice has to make
allowance for a fact of disagreement
that cannot be suppressed that cannot
rightly be suppressed by a claim that
one of those points of view was correct
and the others are merely to be
tolerated
and so a series of modifications of the
theory and the arguments supporting them
occurred in political liberalism and
that I think a baited some of the
criticism but not all of it what remains
is that the starting point for laws is
outside of faith it's a starting point
that treats faith again as a fact of
major perhaps dominant importance and
the societies with which deals but it
does not proceed now if that's the
complaint then wall stands guilty as
charged and habermas I think would
equally stand guilty of that charge and
that's because and this in a way this
would be a part of the answer I would
give to the preceding question for
myself this is because Hamas and Rawls
both come in their legal theorizing and
their political theorizing in their
constitutional theorizing both fall
within the ambit of in a broad sense a
liberal view Hamas is not just a son or
grandson of the Frankfurt School
he's someone from my point of view
engaged in a critical defense of liberal
in the broad sense that I have in mind
and that's why to me he's a figure of
special interest and importance because
because his critical approach to a
defense of liberalism brings insights
and and supports that that are very
important but he's a liberal in in that
sense and Rawls is a liberal in that
sense and so there's a limit a boundary
around the extent to which they can
satisfy the kind of worried concerned
genuine heartfelt as it plainly is to
which you're appointed they just add to
that just one thing that I mean habilis
himself acknowledged that his initial
starting point was more like Marxist in
relation to a religion you know and and
he it came as a surprise to him the
resurgence of religiousness in modern
societies so he felt he had to adjust
his views to that so to a degree one is
Rawls idea a public reason where he the
last paper he wrote and it's it's the
most accommodating to religion and Hamas
has made I don't grab the name of the
paper but at any rate it's a kind of
claim that says that he I don't really
believe this claim but he he says that
he is in some ways more accommodating to
the religious subject than Rawls is but
it's very much in the same line
interesting question I mean basically
was what Frank said but and or what you
said but I I think that in our mas
I mean how my words relation to religion
is not unimportant yeah because the
walls go up in a very religious context
and lost his face so to say in a very
political context yeah when the
preachers they preached against the
China against the Japanese yeah as a
racist preachers kind of we are not our
title fundamentalists but just
nationalists yeah first world war any
any any way full of that and so and then
then he then he is a break they get
hidden very interesting about that and
Hamas go up in the person context was
not too much religious but he had
everything yeah very early and go go
after them with a good knowledge of
Luther yeah so but most total Eva diva
cults really really gives all musicology
however he was a his essays yeah however
he is was always very interested in
religion from the beginning of the
beginning in this shelling dissertation
until his last book on that is also on
business blog is on the European
philosophy that is a mix of Christianity
and
Greek philosophy yeah and and and and
and and there some interesting motives
in particular special kind of Marxism or
to he followed that he saw in the
ignition
not in philosophy the basis of a he's
still young religions the basis of
emancipatory emancipatory movements yeah
emancipated movements and the idea the
Kantian idea of with his Auto stubborn
Italy yeah the but the the Kenyan idea
of national freedom yeah so SS
emancipation from repression and jealous
yeah as he sees in the in the philosophy
consultation he thinks as the old
Frankfort school and people like toy is
not so much known and in America but
there's a German tradition it sees that
that that ontology and metaphysics is
latent Lee positivist from the beginning
because of this latent Lee positivist
from the beginning because it is so to
say the the relation to the facts yeah
and in religion we have relation
normative relation to the reality
how much already interpret the creation
that creation of from nothing yeah the
trotty x neru in this new book s very
roughly yeah s using it within the
society that nothing means it was
nothing with a society so long yeah and
we have to create a new society so in
the distillate if it this normative site
this place and the important role for
Hamas in philosophy and this has
religious sources and then there's also
body courts Retton the directive kite is
this something that we
that there was a stuff of utopian
thinking in in in in in in socialist
social movements yeah and he's Hamas
still has a has a reserves so to say a
field of it as the maybe they have an
argument in further there comes
something more in in the in the car of
religion the literal cough religion I
just think this is very interesting
concerning his optimism are emancipatory
idea of movements since I think there is
a link and practical optimism and it
whereas lasat normative because
otherwise the the danger is of falling
into a dialectics that doesn't
distinguish I mean you know just saying
no or presenting in a way with other
source can go either direction and this
doesn't seem to be what Hamas says also
in the book and I think the utopian
source of movements is linked to what
you just said about religious running
out of time I mean he committed him so
when he made the transition to and I
think this has been problematic of
course how Hamas would never admit this
but I when he made the transition to you
know the philosophy of language he did
along with Carlotto Apple and this is
the very basis of everything he's ever
done is to buy into speech act theory
and speech act I mean you know my
argument even at that time and he was
very sensitive to it and and well anyway
so that the the ground of if you look at
the law book you will see as you know as
you know that the the theoretical
foundation of it is speech act theory
and the problem with speech act theory
is or it's not a problem with speech act
theory per se but to universalize it as
making that the basis of an entire
philosophy has always been problematic
so that hamas has really really had to
underplay this and you find him not
referring to this stuff when he gets to
when he in nineteen what was the 1980 I
was there 81 the day the discourse there
he came out and the discourse here he
kind of covers it up but it's really
there this is what makes the distinction
between you and D that Frank was talking
about and this is and so to become a
appropriately pluralistic he's had to
kind of dance around this and he's done
beautiful
you know he's a real superb he's an
expert at this and and and but but I
think this is problematic and I don't
know they on the other hand as someone
said the chance to go to his 90th
birthday it was like the chance to to go
to Hegel 60th you know I mean it's
I mean you won't see somebody like that
again for a long time so what I would
say is in a way I don't think it's a
turn he took but what is very striking
reading this and now is that he kind of
he refers to philosophers men so from a
feminist or a woman's perspective it's a
tradition which is a classical feminist
criticism that is prolonged also in the
new book look at whom he quotes it's men
it's the traditional men doesn't mean
that you cannot twist it around this is
not what I would like to say but in a
way the traditional criticism on a
Universalist perspective that is not
that it's may be covering differences
and in justices in a way so I think this
is something I would I don't think its
attorney took but it's a very
traditional approach from this point of
view to short short answers one short
answer is that in in BF n he
characterized me as a communitarian and
that that would be one of my charges of
mistake again but I was but extremely
honored and flattered to be included of
course
(Laughter)
engaged publicly in a debate about
whether Hamas wants to ground politics
right politics valid politics
in deliberative democracy all the way
down with no pre democratic foundation
no pre Democratic starting point at
least that's been my my reading I don't
think I think you know just just we were
talking a little while ago about some
limits some boundaries around these
philosophies well that's for me a
boundary around
broadly speaking liberal political
philosophy at some point down there
you've got to start with a notion of
rightness or fitness or suitability that
doesn't come out of a democratic
deliberation but that structures and
constitutes a democratic deliberation
and then yummy and then later on the
rotzinger
that he he has a real sense that
liberalism of itself can't solve its
crisis and that he s is sort of
intimations of deprival that head in the
direction of predation but he presently
his language theory doesn't admit of the
reduction of religious speech into the
framework of those norms and so he stuck
to believe that with the last word we
can wait for his hundredth birthday for
the next uh this good thank you so much
for coming here thanks for the prayer
pattern


## Keywords:
