---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2iIqUl41hXY
---

# Video
6/18 rights discourses & books to read
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2iIqUl41hXY)

## Transcript:
hey give me but he sorry about that
previous stream was not working bad
internet connection but I think we've
figured it out let me know when you
arrive if you can hear me and if
everything is okay in terms of the
connection and everything else hey can
you hear me okay awesome so I got about
like a half hour so it's gonna be short
want to hit some themes and give you a
couple of book recommendations and then
of course guys super chats are major for
the YouTube channel so if you can if
you're able hit us with a super chat and
if you've got any good questions I will
answer them for sure that helps keep
everything going and I would strongly
recommend you go to patreon.com/scishow
and get the entire Michael Brooks show
experience please hit like while you're
watching this and all the rest so let me
start with I realized something today
earlier on the majority report I hosted
Jean Bosch line it was a great show and
watch I check it out and you know this
is very annoying because in the context
of talking about the objectively and no
one in reality would deny deep and
serious human rights abuses of the
yogurt in the Shenzhen region China and
President Trump apparently embracing
this policy and praising it in a meeting
with President Xi according to John
Bolton's new book now taking anything
from John Bolton John Bolton was a world
historic monster and a threat to all
sentient life so you know let's let's do
that you know keep that in check but
Jean used the phrase concentration camps
and I I wanted to have some precision
around the use of that term and I'll
tell you why
um and the real difficulty and challenge
of speaking critically about human
rights discourses and understanding them
in the context of u.s. foreign policy
and then also an understanding the rest
of the world on its own terms as best as
possible particularly a place like China
where there's just so many implications
so one and there's a lot of work that's
been done on this and again this is the
stuff like this isn't easy you know if
your whole kind of perception the world
is just sort of Wikipedia entries and
sound bytes and you know freaking out
about stuff on social media you're
probably not reading books you're
probably not really kind of trying to
think things through so Samuel Moines
who's the author of rights are not
enough we did a really good illicit
history together and other scholars and
also people I recommend people watch my
canon and Thabo and Becky's conversation
on the International Criminal Court and
an Africa justice or peace on al Jazeera
that's a very worthy conversation and
and and and and and many others have
been complicating human rights
discourses because especially in the era
of so-called humanitarian intervention
with the key points between the sort of
high point of what was perceived as
incorrectly as the enormous success of
Kosovo and then the kind of universally
recognized horrific disaster of Iraq
there was this enormous intellectual
infrastructure on both among the right
and among liberals about using the US
military as a sort of arm of global
Human Rights enforcement and in practice
because obviously human rights is not
the motivation of US foreign policy you
know trade regimens might be
normalization might be there might be
times where people inside the
bureaucracy can synthesize the human
rights interest with prevailing interest
but obviously you know I think any adult
would understand that obviously kind of
pure altruism is not the driver any
country's foreign policy let alone the
preeminent empire in the world you know
and if you know again if you sort of
this isn't the conversation to get into
detail of why that's wrong if you
actually think that is you know that's
just kind of childish thinking so I'm
assuming everybody's you know above that
is watching this and so you really
started to have to look at the use of
human rights rhetoric as a tool of
forming consensus around very aggressive
and militaristic u.s. foreign policy and
you know that can go in a bunch of
different directions there was also then
I think you know sometimes and then this
other desire to complicate the rest of
the world that of course the simplistic
one no narratives that come out of the
rest of you know very complicated
situations are obviously not reflected
through you know us corporate news or
Pentagon friendly news that's obvious so
mom Donnie as an example is
significantly done a lot of really
important work on Darfur and others now
on the flip side it's very you know you
can't allow that sort of critical
appraisal to allow you to deny other
countries significant in serious human
rights abuses so I want to just say
really clearly that in Shenzhen and
amongst the you Gers and we recovered
this more on the show as well as also in
Tibet which is an area that I still care
a lot about it there's obviously serious
vicious systemic human rights abuses
there's zero question about it and it's
something that we need to be serious
about and understand including actually
I think in some of the Dziedzic says
some of the models of surveillance and
coercion are going to be globalized so
when I asked that question of gene it
was in no way to minimize what was
happening it was to also though not get
too comfortable and Daniel Bester has
pointed this out with you know allowing
narratives that speak to the most sort
of dramatic collective cultural memories
we have
to shape enormous ly complicated and
serious foreign policy areas you know
particularly China which is of course as
we cover extensively on the show that is
the other you know preeminent you know
in rising world superpower and there is
a huge energy inside the United States
not just the Trump administration in
democratic party circles as well in the
arms industry and others take a much
more hawkish approach towards China as
the sort of consensus world consensus
view of Chinese foreign policy in the US
has collapsed in the last few years the
sort of guiding light since the opening
under shishun paying and really through
you know much of the Obama
administration kind of ending with the
pivot to Asia and accelerating under
Trump so we need to balance all of these
variables and not minimize any and of
course never minimize the horrific
treatment of the u Gers but at the same
time we can't just sort of peddle
essentially you know sort of discourses
that frame and support the US national
security state either so this is the
kind of tricky stuff that I think
sometimes we succeed really well on on T
MBS sometimes we don't and I do my best
and of course like every other human I'm
making mistakes and failing all the time
but you know it it does be it is more
challenging because you're not sitting
in one particular grid and then just
kind of repeating and repeating and
repeating so I I just kind of wanted to
clarify that will definitely do more of
that kind of content on the show
including definitely more interviews
with Samuel Moines and other scholars on
this now I want to give you guys a
couple of book recommendations while I'm
doing this as well if you're just riding
in please make sure to hit the like
button and if you can hit us with a
super chat it really helps this channel
and maybe we'll get to some questions
but of course you can just get with a
super chat regardless of questions so
first book I want to recommend is this
anthology it's called claim no easy
victory
the legacy of AMA Clark overall I still
mispronounce the name I deeply apologize
one of the co editors is Bill Fletcher
jr. Bill Fletcher jr. has been a guest
many times on TMDs and it'll be the
guest again the last Tuesday of this
month Cabral was revolutionary and
theorist from Guinea Bissau
and Cape Verde he was also an
agricultural list just a brilliant and
very humane and deeply dissin sight 'fl
intellect and revolutionary and I love
this phrase I mean there's a lot in this
book there's this on the present state
of African politics there's a lot on his
theoretical orientation the specifics of
his revolutionary struggle the
relationship of Portugal agricultural
development women's rights but I really
just was struck even just I love this
phrase this idea of claiming no easy
victories like in this kind of very
superficial structure we're in and as an
Matt Chrisman I think has been making
just excellent points about the
pernicious nough supply for themselves
what they had sent devised and how it
generates all of these enormous Lee
alienated and toxic cultures and
practices and the superficial perception
of claiming an easy victory when we know
these actual transformations are
enormous ly hard and and we will get
there but they're nowhere close so this
was an awesome book claim no easy
victories this is on a very different
tip I'm told one of the comments that
Palgrave publishing has a lot of good
material in Asia I don't know about that
but out that's definitely something that
we'll check out oh and thank you for
checking out against the web as always
please do I'd be honored if you bought a
copy of against the web cosmopolitan
answered a new ray and were
in the middle david Griscom and i we're
putting out we're gonna self publish and
publish either in August or September a
TMDs guide and it's gonna be like kind
of the core TMDs tenants anti
essentialism internationalism and
building a healthy dynamic culture on
the left and and more thoughts on Nathan
Robinson's new article calling out
right-wing populism is essentially
fascism of the venire apocalypse so I
don't I I read Nathan's piece I want to
give it another read but I I don't yeah
I I I think there's a lot of things that
need to be really disaggregated here so
I do not think and I think it's very
important to say that um that uh get
some Sun bro
thank you I know not all forms of
right-wing populism or fascism no and in
fact and this is frustrates people
sometimes but disaggregating different
lines is essential for us to be able to
defeat them and I think as an example I
made this point with Boris Johnson and
again I'll do the usual stipulation here
that is true sometimes it's annoying to
have to do the stipulation that Boris
Johnson is utterly loathsome and let's
just be very specific there's thousands
of people that are dead because he's
Prime Minister and Jeremy Corbyn is it
and it's a world historical tragedy just
as Bernie not being president and not
being nominee that Jeremy Corbyn didn't
become Prime Minister Boris Johnson is a
you know is it is a is a right-wing
entitled oh--this now I'll just
say this but watching him campaign and
run in the UK and see people make
one-to-one comparisons between him and
Trump and like yes would I personally
consider them to be something of a
racist up
lutely but his campaign and how he
appealed and what he was campaigning on
would absolutely not be analogous across
the board to trump let alone bolson ro
and in fact he was making a very
different and interesting you know in
very compelling argument I think we're
looking at electoral II where he was
sort of neutralizing the most extreme of
this new right-wing wave while appealing
to you know very real public appetites
that we have to deal with on on various
issues and then at the same time
actually making a very effective play
which is also dishonest on being
economically more or central left or
progressive so you know no I think we
need to be much more specific about
these things I also think that there's
much more gradation on so-called
cultural issues that we need to really
start disaggregating I think that if we
look at it in three ways there is a base
and left-wing politics that everybody
gets publican provisions every single
human being in a polity gets health care
housing food security materially that's
the base then in the liberal rights
sense which we all should be fiercely
committed to and many of us aren't but
we all should be that we say that
absolutely regardless of who you are
regardless of your identity regardless
of anything else you have full and
complete legal and civil equality full
stop no whether we're talking
about this new very good Supreme Court
ruling on the equity of trans people
whether we're talking about every single
thing that flows from I could take what
could roughly be called the 60s rights
revolution Civil Rights Act Voting
Rights Act that whole infrastructure
marriage equality and so on these things
are actually usually important and we do
fight for them
then there's the realm of people need to
all think the same way about culture and
that's any project like that as a
disaster III there needs to be
infinitely more room to allow people to
be conservative or radical or unorthodox
or whatever in their own social familial
spheres we need to get back to being you
know much more properly lazy fair about
that and I actually think um you know
and not constantly trying to kind of
control and and and police people's
beliefs rhetorics this and that behavior
we should set some very clear markers
which have already done in the realm of
substance of economic civil and legal
rights and I think you know what
obviously there's gonna always be
cultural battles but there's gonna be a
wide range of belief and practice and
you know again that's why Adolph read
always says the base question is do you
need to work for a living a lot you know
that arises out of that so I think a
span again when you especially when you
globalize it I mean you know there's
gonna be plenty of folks that you'll see
you know particularly in countries and
places that have produced some of the
best the left has ever and will ever see
and if you tell them that having what
they perceived to be socially
conservatism along with their commitment
to socials it makes them a fascist I
mean you know in addition to being
offensive I mean it's ridiculous it's
it's so we need to always be thinking of
how we actually add add it's a process
not of subtraction and that also you
know has the parallels with do we have a
renewal and transformation culture
versus all that you know that's kind of
like garbage
call out cancel stuff so I think those
things actually be parallel you know
again I always I read Nathan I think he
made some some some solid points I you
know it but I in the main I have a lot
of strong disagreements and I
no I think that um yeah I mean I I think
that's what I think
let's see good news in mail and ballots
have been mailed out in New Jersey glad
you're learning from Georgia have you
seen them in New York yes have seen them
they're coming out and listening for
about a year just began trying to do not
understand what this court is but I'm in
than just team just this court now a
welcome aboard thank you so much what do
you make of India China be a serious
threat of war or petty Lance gravel
anything that adds to the tension in
that part of the world is very scary to
me I think that most likely will be
contained but obviously there's very
much more aggressive leadership in both
India and China India is you know China
had already sort of been very present in
this area India more so recently and
look something like 20 soldiers died
that day dad that's scary that's real
that is not just the normal level of
simmer they've had since 1962 do you
find it odd that more left-leaning
progressive folks are turning okay
Oklahoma for congressional races rather
than presidential I don't know enough
about that seeing the resume the
rebellion in London black resistance yes
this is global what do you think the
next generation of the IDW likes of
Rueben Peters to and so on that's a good
question I really don't know you know
more and more people tell me that I need
to check out Tim pulls but I'm
not I'm not sure and again you know the
even though it's not a thing the way it
was these guys still have very good
platforms one other book this is very
different than the Liberation Theology
tip that I've been on barking to the
choir the power of radical kinship this
is father Greg Boyle
he runs a ministry in LA and works in
the community primarily with gangs that
that's his like main focus this book is
humble it's beautiful it's simple
to read and it actually it has a warmth
and generosity of heart that is very
needed for this time oh let's see
cuz we don't know we don't know what to
turn out and these races are yet right
and and definitely look and we wouldn't
be having this that there wasn't a huge
amount of capacity building the Bernie
campaign Bernie is good and so much in
wallet I mean the incredible
inspiring thing happening right now is
obviously the uprisings and the protests
black lives matter movement the movement
against all forms of police militarism
and Brutalism and murder and then in the
you know this this world of kind of like
you know all the sort of digital you
know
unfortunately way too much and
it kind of brought her coherent left
it's terrible and it's it's a real
tragedy that there isn't the focus and
the ground of the Sanders campaign and
the incredible work it was doing
Lula on the Workers Party in Brazil this
is an awesome treatment awesome write-up
of Lula is coming to power the
accomplishments the compromises and the
social base of the Workers Party it's a
sympathetic grilling and treatment and
covers the beginning of that governing
period and a lot of people have asked me
about that about books on the Workers
Party and Lula and so I want to keep
recommending them and I would really
really enjoy this book I think I Lula as
of now says he will not run again there
was a major arrest of a bull Sonora
associate today I think it is possible
he will as of now it's unlikely he is in
his mid 70s there are other leaders in
the Workers Party but he it's a miracle
for the world any role he's out playing
yeah I look I I definitely don't think
sagres a grifter I saw that and I and I
kind of don't really like that word has
gone from overuse to irrelevance I don't
even like what the what does that even
mean I mean you know grifter used to
actually have like a kind of meaning of
like I don't know
you're going out like selling fake
medicine something that might that might
certainly apply to some media people on
the right right but but I know I don't I
think you know again there's a lot of
gist you can million people could
disagree with they could produce
they could you know whatever
million arguments to have I don't you
know Griff thing is is something else
and that word has has become completely
irrelevant they're just aggressive
ridiculous overuse please do if you
don't mind folks kindly hit the like
button and make sure if you haven't
already to hit subscribe if you don't
mind folks my one last asked in the chat
is if you are a tea NBS patron please do
tell folks why you dig being a patron
and if you've read against the web
cosmopolitan answering you right let
them know about the book also guys I'm
so stoked I love what Anna and I are
doing if you haven't gone over and
subscribed first of all Jacobin youtube
is an amazing educational resource watch
the myth of economic reductionism and
they don't read watch all of my
interviews laid off read tomorrow bill
Fletcher juniors doing one on Juneteenth
it's just it's incredible
and I love I love I love weekends with
Anna and Michael I think I daresay so I
think we're doing an awesome show a few
more minutes if you guys have any more
super chat questions I've got a few more
minutes before I have to run
I hope the rights discourse made sense
when you're trying to really really
think through things and balance in a
way that is you know real and a sort of
applicable to all this stuff I think
it's uh it's um you know some sometimes
you know people who sort of have kind of
knee-jerk you know sort of reactions
things aren't able to thinks things
through you know sort of missed the boat
but I know that
you know one of the things that's
amazing about this show in this
community is there's a lot of people who
are really reading really thinking and
really really want that historical
context it's Santa's dreamy in real life
as he is online how I don't know I mean
I that's that's quite a word sure let's
go yes and yeah
any other questions before we wrap
I really hope as always I hope you guys
are taking as best care of yourselves as
possible and your families I hope you're
treating yourselves well and each other
well I hope people are staying safe and
staying strong as best they can I
recommend checking out a Joseph
Goldstein guided meditation around us
talk some of these books logging off as
much as possible being safe but making
sure you're going out getting Sun
Michael every time you stream makes my
life it'll look better what's your
favorite contemporary political authors
and books well that's really kind
well I just gave you three books that I
really am digging right now please
explain a multipolar world but I always
recommend please read class notes by
adolphe read I'm reading necro politics
by a chilly bin day right now I'll talk
more about that later and I'm actually
reading a really interesting biography I
think it's called man of tomorrow of
Jerry Brown which is also kind of an
interesting history of California a
multipolar world is the idea that there
is not one singular uni power there
isn't the United States basically or
anybody else dictating the direction of
the globe there is a multitude of
outlets of power which could and does in
many respects you know again even the
Soviet Union tons of problems this is
not where we want to be tons of you know
horrors of Stalinism so on at the same
time and again let's please we need to
be real about everything so the Union
was funding as an example we talked
about Cabral earlier major liberation
struggles across Africa funding the
African National Congress and then of
course you know there was that real
impulse which I have the most sympathy
with over all of the non-aligned
movement which really in some respects
encompasses everything from you know
from Cuba to Palm Sweden and so on you
have a multipolar world it's a more
democratic world overall and it allows
potentially really more choice and power
in the periphery just for the illicit
history sunday shows alone it's worth
being at EMBs patron I've learned so
much these last two years it's crazy
that is awesome thank you for all the
great content Mike stay safe and healthy
brother we love you I love you back and
thank you so much question mark I really
really appreciate it - question marks -
donations there all right guys two more
minutes any other super shots kindly
press the like button go to patreon
accomplished EMBs go by against the web
Cosmopolitan answer to
a new right at red Emma's in Baltimore
in a couple of days the new the T MBS
store will be restocked can you do
opening books like books for high school
seniors in college freshmen age sub book
seems so much for my friends start with
you know I'd honestly really start with
towards freedom by tour a read the case
against race reductionism I I think that
that's a brilliant and amazing
accessible book and watch the interviews
I've done with them both forty NBS and
Jacobin I think that's a great one to
start and that's a great question and
I'll definitely think more about it
thank you
all right folks stay safe out there stay
strong
be well much love toward freedom by
Toure


## Keywords:
