---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M0KHxLHVKnU
---

# Video
AcqOfLang2: Rational Speech Act Framework
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M0KHxLHVKnU)

## Transcript:
so to try to explain what might be going
on with these different behavioral
experiments a vanilluxe Contras and
parole in 2017 investigated explaining
children's behavior using something
called the rational speech act framework
and the idea is that this is a way of
thinking about how the language
understanding process works it's a
social reasoning process your reasoning
about how other people might interpret
things and so there are different levels
to it and so we'll just sort of walk
through what they look like so a
pragmatic listener at one listener one
this is this guy right here so someone
who's taking into account communication
in context this pragmatic listener
interprets an utterance right figures
out what it means by reasoning about a
cooperative speaker that's the one like
what would a cooperative speaker have
said that's why this person is pragmatic
listener and that speaker is trying to
inform a naive literal listener l01
level below about the world right so
they're these sort of recursive social
reasoning right reasoning about a
speaker reasoning about a listener right
and so hearing when you hear an
ambiguous utterance in your pragmatic
listener you're gonna reason as jointly
that is reason at the same time about
the true state of the world right like
how many kiddies jumped on the bed and
the scope interpretation that the
speaker had in mind is it the surface
scope or the inverse cope as well as the
likely question under discussion that
the utterance addresses you're like
trying to figure this out all
simultaneously just from hearing every
kitty didn't jump on the bed right and
this is actually embedded in a Bayesian
inference kind of framework so that's
what all of this math here is really
just saying you're trying to reason
about this by reasoning about these
things that thing is this that thing is
this right it's these different
recursive levels and we're not going to
walk through the math here and because
of in the interest of time but that's
basically what's going on that's why
it's called a rational speech act model
because rational it means you're trying
to do the thing that makes most
probabilistic sense using Bayesian
inference now there's one additional
wrinkle here so when you are being asked
to decide did every kitty
this utterance rather an okay thing to
say every kid he didn't jump on the bed
you're not actually listening and trying
to figure out what the state of the
world is you are looking at the state of
the world right there and you're trying
to decide whether you would endorse that
so that actually involves one more layer
on top you as a speaker trying to decide
if you would say this
so what 7le and friends do is when they
are trying to capture this they're gonna
model whether a speaker would endorse
this utterance as a description of the
observed state as opposed to not right
so this is the pragmatic speaker one
level above who's gonna make this
decision by reasoning about the
pragmatic listener whose reasoning about
the co-operative speaker whose reasoning
about the literal listener right so
you're one more level up because this is
not your normal task of listening this
is trying to say would I say this right
so that's how the rational speech Act
framework plays out in child behavior so
we're gonna be trying to match this
pragmatic speaker probability of
endorsing or not with these child
endorsement rates right that's the goal
and so what you're gonna do is this
again this expansion of this Bayesian
inference equation here but it's is the
probability of endorsing that utterance
given some observed world state so you
given W endorse the utterance what's the
probability of the speaker this
pragmatic speaker doing that given the
observed world's data say two kitties on
the bed right that is what you are
calculating and that's going to depend
on your listener your pragmatic
listeners probability of inferring that
world state and whatever interpretations
and questions on your discussion go with
it given that utterance so it's that
reasoning about this guy and he's do be
reasoning about these other two guys
right so that's how all of this is
embedded together


## Keywords:
