---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nm0wV0CenWY
---

# Video
Adverse Selection vs. Moral Hazard
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nm0wV0CenWY)

## Transcript:
all right in this video I'm going over
the difference between adverse selection
and moral hazard and these are often
discussed together and there's good
reason for that one reason is oftentimes
they happen together like the same type
of contract will be associated with both
adverse selection and moral hazard they
also have some things in common so
they're both about a 7 asymmetric
information they both are about a bias
that happens and they're both about
entering into a contract so the
difference is with adverse selection the
ISA in the asymmetric information is
about the type of person who's attracted
to particular type of contract and so
definitiely adverse selection is were
asymmetric information about the type of
person attracted to a contract causes a
bias before entering into the contract
so when when the parties sign on the
dotted line for the contract the bias
has already happened because of the type
of person attracted to it and so this is
another way of thinking about adverse
selection it has to do with the type of
person attracted to the contract on the
other hand moral hazard is asymmetric
information about the behavior of people
who are entering into a contract and
that that behavior that's caused by that
causes a bias after entering into the
contract so moral hazard is really about
the incentives created by the contract
and the bias that happened because those
incentives play out after people are
under the contract so let's go through a
few examples and of course if we're
talking about a contract we need to be
thinking about what type of contract and
I'll go through a bunch of examples but
let's start with health insurance
okay so we have health insurance
contracts and of course there's a lot of
things associated with health insurance
contract that network of doctors which
procedures are covered which procedures
are not covered but one of the most
basic things about a health insurance
contract is what is the copay how much
do you have to pay if you go in to the
doctor do you have to pay a hundred
percent of the costs or fifty percent of
the costs are zero percent and a classic
copay might be twenty percent or 30
percent is the responsibility of the
patient but you could have higher
quality health insurance where the
patient pays zero percent so let's
imagine a low copay like zero percent
the copay you can go to the doctor for
free whenever you want versus a high
copaque contract now of course if you
have a high-paid copay contract
that means that the insurance itself the
premium you pay for the insurance can be
cheaper so if we're thinking about
adverse selection this is going to be
about what type of person is attracted
to each of these types of contracts and
as you might imagine the low copay
contract is going to be attractive to
people who go to the doctor a lot if you
expect to go 12 times this year to the
doctor you're more likely to choose the
plan with a zero copay every time you go
whereas if you only plan to go once or
not at all to the doctor you might be
okay with a higher copay at $20 $30
copay if the price of that insurance is
cheaper so because of that there's going
to be different types of people that
select into these contracts as a matter
of fact sick people are more likely to
select into the high-quality health
insurance the local copay insurance and
healthy people are more likely to select
into high-quality health insurance
now the fact that healthy people do
select into this high quality health
insurance means that there's actually
going to be a lot fewer costs to the
health insurance company so it will
actually be able to UM they'll actually
be able to reduce the cost of that
health insurance company so this can
actually be even cheaper than it would
be if people selected randomly into
these bins just because the cheap people
to insure and that buying this look
quality health insurance so it gets even
cheaper and the reverse is true for the
high quality health insurance with the
Loko payment because sick people select
into that plan it's more costly to
insure them because they go to the
doctor a lot and the insurer will have
to pay for more and that leads to the
insurance companies needing to raise the
price of the insurance so the high
quality insurance ends up being more
expensive than it would be if people
selected randomly into these plans and
that's adverse selection at play now
health insurance also has a moral hazard
effect so if we think about the
incentives that are at play based on the
co-payment are you gonna get the
name-brand drugs or are you gonna get
the generic drugs well if you have a
zero percent copay you might as well get
the name-brand drugs so the copay is
something that's going to incentivize
watchful behavior in terms of what kinds
of things you buy and that's going to in
turn affect the the price of the product
so if people are incentivized to always
take the most expensive option always
take that always take the name brand
drug always take that the fancy
treatment as opposed to watching your
pet your every penny then that's going
to also drive up the price of health
insurance so the copay will lead to
different types of behavior based on
that contract
so there we go that
type of insurance contract is going to
lead to certain behaviors based on the
incentives in that contract based on the
co-payments and that's actually going to
to influence the quality of the product
or the price of the product in this case
so both of these factors are going to
influence price as a matter of fact both
factors will drive up the price the
insurance premium for low copay
insurance and will drive down the
insurance premium for high copay
insurance let's look at a different
example now actually let's go over a
couple of classic examples that actually
don't match up between the two and the
classic example of adverse selection is
the lemon market for cars so in the
market for used cars in the used car
market the type of person that's
attracted to salva car on the used car
market is someone who probably has a car
that they're no longer that happy with
maybe that's because there's something
wrong with the car or because they
expect it to break down soon or because
they're annoyed with some feature of the
car there's a lot of reasons you might
want to bring your car to the used car
market and many of those are bad reasons
so if the contract is the sign the
dotted line at the used-car lot the type
of person attracted to sell their car on
that that market is going to have the
biased in the direction of having cars
that are just about to break down or
that have some other annoying feature to
them so that's an example of adverse
selection it's a classic example an
example of moral hazard is ten friends
going out to eat and splitting the belt
so if the contract is the ten friends
coming to an agreement at the beginning
of the meal that they'll all just split
the meal equally then that incentivizes
certain types of behaviors matter of
fact it incentivizes you to order
dessert to order the expensive dish and
a few drinks with your meal and that
incentive is created by the contract the
verbal contract that all ten friends
have agreed to and because of that
behavior incentive it influences the
experience or the product it drives up
the price of the meal because people
behave in a way that's responding to the
incentives at play so that's moral
hazard and adverse selection let's go
through a couple more examples where
these sides match up
so if the contract is renting of a house
we're gonna have both moral hazard and
adverse selection at place so if you're
just not in the stage of life where you
really have time to care for a home or
have time to really invest in cleaning
your house and doing that the regular
upkeep you're more likely to be
attracted to renting the house and if
you're a naturally messy person who
doesn't really want to take care of
things and maybe is fine destroying
things or doesn't want to think about
that you're more likely to rent than you
are to buy so the type of person who
shows up to a rental is a different type
of person on average than someone who
shows up to buy a house if you show up
to buy a house you're more likely to be
someone who's interested and caring for
the product and of course there's also
the incentive after you enter into the
contract the contract itself creates
incentives the fact that you can leave
anytime you want you don't have to pay
for any damage that's something that the
landlord is responsible for means that
based on the contract there's less
incentives for rental people than for
people who own to take care of their
home and do a good job with that
so moral hazard and adverse selection
are both at play when it comes to
housing run adults now of course
societies come up with some solutions to
try to address the moral hazard and
adverse selection problems for example
um your credit score is something that
can help this particular situation do
you pay your bills are you a risky
person for your landlord to take on as a
renter and that credit score acts as a
mechanism for for reducing both of these
because um it helps the landlord to sort
through the people who show up to make
sure people have a history of
responsible payment if they show up and
the fact that the credit score is in
place also creates an incentive for
people to pay their bills after they
rent because they want to keep that good
credit score so that's one solution to
both moral hazard and adverse selection
that reduces the market inefficiencies
that happen because of these two
concepts and there are other mechanisms
as well and for example that the deposit
you put down on a house when you first
start to rent it you you put down a
thousand or two
one month's rent or three months rent
and you don't get it back if you destroy
the property so that's another mechanism
and play to try to reduce the moral
hazard problem and it could potentially
also have something to do with adverse
selection because you need to have saved
up for that deposit so that could create
some small reduction in the adverse
selection problem as well so that's
adverse selection and moral hazard
really the difference is adverse
selection is about the type of person
attracted to a contract moral hazard is
about their behavior based on the
incentives in the contract and both of
those things create a bias in the actual
product that the contract is meant to
enact in the world


## Keywords:
