---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nEuTlJ3CM9s
---

# Video
Amnesty Int'l: Biden Must Halt Weapon Sales to Israel After U.S. Arms Used to Kill Civilians in Gaza
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nEuTlJ3CM9s)

## Transcript:
this is democracy Now democracynow.org
the Warren peace report I'm Amy Goodman
with n sh a coalition of international
noos are holding a global day of action
today calling on all states to Halt the
transfer of weapons parts and
ammunitions to Israel as the death toll
in Gaza tops
34,500 we go now to Jerusalem where
we're joined by budur Hassan a
Palestinian writer an Amnesty
International researcher on Israel and
the occupied pal inian territories
contributing researcher to a new amnesty
report titled us-made weapons used by
government of Israel in violation of
international law and US law budor thank
you so much for being with us why don't
you tell us the conclusions of the
Amnesty International
report USA in respond to the National
Security memorandum on accountability
and safeguards on the transfer of U
defense items and um and other services
to Israel is based on firsthand
documentation by Amnesty
International of how Israeli how us made
weapons and US supplied weapons have
been used by Israel in unlawful attacks
not just during the current War but also
in an earlier military campaign in May
where they were used in disproportionate
attacks killing civilians and injuring
civilians and where they were used were
small diameter bombs were also used in
the wanting destruction of property in
cases amounting to Collective punishment
also we cite in our research two cases
where us made J dams have been used to
decimate entire Families Two entire
families the Abu family in um in the
middle area in balah and in J family in
der balah also back in October a total
of 43 civilians were killed in just two
attacks amnesty International's research
did not find any evidence that there
were any military Targets in the area
raising doubt that the attacks were
direct attacks on civilians and as such
should be investigated as war crimes and
as such also there is a high risk that
by continuing to supply arms to Israel
the United States was fully aware that
it is also supporting the commission of
war crimes and it's complicit in the
commission of war
crimes as a B has the US uh responded in
any way to uh your report which came out
earlier this
week we are still waiting for a response
by the us we the call is clear the call
is on the US to hold all arms
transferred to Israel as long as Israel
continues to fail to comply with
International humanitarian law and
international human rights law and it's
not just about the weapons that Israel
is using us made weapons also Israel
continues to use torture and other ill
treatment and also arbitrary detention
against Palestinians which also violates
international law and if you could talk
budur about this uh Global day of action
uh May 2nd today what prompted this call
who all is
involved uh the collective includes a
variety of humanitarian organizations
and human rights organizations that call
for an immediate ceasefire recognizing a
ceasefire is the only way to end the
human the man-made humanitarian
catastrophe in Gaza but also calling for
an arms embargo in Israel and all
parties to the conflict including
freezing all AR arms transfer and
ammunitions to Israel and this group
came together uh because it's recognized
that it's not just of course the United
States of course the United States is
the biggest supplier of arms to Israel
but there are other countries supplying
arms there are strategic cases
litigations before numerous National
courts demanding that the courts demand
that governments stop fueling this war
and fueling human rights
violations I wanted to ask you about the
number of Palestinians right now who are
detained under What's called the
unlawful combatants law um what cases
have you been working on what are the
profile of those detained the number of
those detained um if there are charges
against
them officially Israel acknowledges that
it's currently holding
865 Palestinian from Gaza as unlawful
combatants under unlawful combatants law
Palestinians and they are mainly from
Gaza do not know the evidence used
against them cannot challenge the legal
grounds for their arrest and they do not
they are not charged and they are not
they cannot face a fair trial of course
under the amendment to the unlawful
combatants law a person from Gaza can be
detained for up to 45 days without even
being issued arrest order they can spend
for up to 75 days without seeing a judge
in many of the cases in most of the
cases we have documented we interviewed
doctors we in interviewed human rights
Defenders and also interviewed
journalists who said that they were told
that they have a lawyer to represent
them but they never saw that lawyer they
they said that they could not even ask
why they are being held in jail they did
not know two of the do doctors we
interviewed spend 140 days in prison
without ever knowing the charges against
them without being able to challenge the
grounds based on which they are being
detained Israel never substantiated the
very fact that they were taken snatched
while treating wounded in hospital only
to spend 140 days in prison and later be
released without ever knowing while they
were detained in the first place well
earlier this week uh and this is of
course something that happened before
October 7th uh but just earlier this
week the US has found five units of
Israel Security Forces responsible for
human rights violations most of them
committed against Palestinians in the
West Bank the state department said this
is the first time the US has come to
such a conclusion about Israeli forces
and again the violations occurred before
October 7th and will not impact US
military aid to any of the units if you
could talk about the significance of
this and whether you think this may lead
to similar findings following October
7th for a far larger number of uh
Israeli security forces
units of course we think that these
findings came a little bit too late in
the first place uh and in a sense just
implicating five military units serves
to exceptional lie these five units and
kind of absolve the Israeli Army as a
whole the Israeli military as a whole of
its Collective responsibility because we
cannot speak about individual units in
the Army and not recognize that the
Israeli military as a whole has been
committing grave human rights violations
against Palestinians and these human
rights violations for decades have been
fueled by impunity not just from the
military Advocate General and from the
investigative systems at the Israeli
Army but also by Israel's Judiciary
judicial system that has been UN in
uncapable and unwilling to investigate
these violations so it's not just few
units here and there exactly and
precisely how it's not just about one
extremist or violent settlers it's not
the problem of one violent settlers but
rather the whole settlement process
I wanted to ask you budor Hassan about
Gaza you have the Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu saying that the
invasion of Rafa is going to take place
can you talk about the significance of
this and also talk about the famine that
uh people in Gaza face the opening of
the Aras border we just interviewed two
people a rabbi American Rabbi Alysa wise
and the Israeli born writer AEL Waldman
who were rested there as they tried to
get an aid but now Israel is saying it's
open what level of Aid is getting
in uh to open first of all as Amnesty
International we have been calling for
opening all land Crossings and allowing
the unfettered access of Aid into Gaza
as per of course the provisional
measures ordered by the international
court of justice and it's good that they
are f beginning to to enter although
it's not nowhere near the quantity that
should be entering but to allow Meer
amount of Aid to enter while on the at
the same time threatening to invade
rafah which we know that rafah is the
main place where most humanitarian
organizations are working at the moment
where more than 1.3 million Palestinians
from Gaza mostly displaced people are
staying so invading rafah and
threatening a ground invasion in rafah
would lead to the decimation of the
whole a system in RAF itself so allowing
humanitarian Su or improving inry of
humanitarian Aid on the one hand but
launching a ground attack on ra which
would increase and er uh complicate the
humanitarian disaster in Gaza is
absolutely not going to help the
humanitarian situation there of
course and the number of prisoners who
are being held finally
I mean on the West Bank are since
October 7th 8,000 Palestinians have been
arrested yeah more than that at the
moment there are 9,000 Palestinians held
in Israeli jails including
3,424 administrative detes people held
without charges on or trial which is
nearly 40% of all Palestinians daytin
held in Israeli jails are held without
charges or trial in addition to those
detained many of them of course are
being detained for organizing in support
of Gaza for trying and calling for an
end to the war on Gaza but among those
who were detained and he's now just
under house arrest is Palestinian human
rights lawyer Ahmed Khalifa and he was
ridiculously he was arrested and
indictment indicted on inciting to
Terror because he chanted in support of
Gaza and for an end occup
he chanted that Gaza will not surrender
to the tank or to the gun and based on
that he was indicted on H charges to of
incitement to terrorism he faces for up
to two years in jail based on that law
and he's now under house arrest he
cannot work as a human rights lawyer he
faces the threat of being disbarred from
Israel lawyers Bar Bar Association he
cannot work at the municipality where he
has been elected as a member of of
municipality and if Ahmed Khalifa ends
up being convicted of incitement to
terrorism for chanting this will have a
chilling effect on freedom of expression
but it's also kind of gives us Echoes
for what's going in the USA you know we
see these attacks by and Crackdown by
Israeli authorities on anyone who dares
to raise their voice against the war and
similarly we're seeing similar
crackdowns in the United States against
students organizing to put an end to the
atrocity crimes happening in
Gaza Bud Hassan we want to thank you so
much for being with us Palestinian
writer Amnesty International researcher
on Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories will'll link to the amnesty
report titled us-made weapons used by
government of Israel in violation of
international law and US
law for


## Keywords:
