---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JiOfsrm6cu8
---

# Video
Are your favorite academic theorists really CIA spooks?
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JiOfsrm6cu8)

## Transcript:
all right i am so excited to be here
with uh gabriel rockhill okay gabriel
rockhill is the founding director of the
critical theory workshop um he's also
professor of philosophy at villanova
university the author and or editor of
nine books and the one in progress uh
that i just saw gabriel that i think is
of most interest uh today is the your
title i assume tentatively titled the
intellectual world war the cia's failed
attempt to kill the idea of communism so
that's uh pretty cool that's right right
on with what i want to talk about so the
reason i wanted to interview uh gabriel
i'm just talking directly to my
listeners now is uh youtube just put
this um video in front of me at the
algorithm and it was one of these
lectures uh from the critical work
theory workshop called toward a counter
history of french theory and so i just
watched that video and it was like you
know
inform
you know just like a typical your
typical academic lecture you know any
academic uh has seen hundreds of these
types of lectures but the content was
like
stranger than fiction so the idea that
like u.s foreign policy
in extends to trying to influence what
seems like obscure and inaccessible
academic theories it's like kind of hard
to believe but you know if you're a
listener to the show you're familiar
with the idea that imperialists try to
get everywhere make sure they leave no
stone unturned
so um but you know i i will recommend
that lecture too uh when either whether
you're done this interview or you want
to pause this and go and listen to that
or
any of these other works by gabriel so
gabriel thank you that was a long intro
thanks for having me on it's a real
pleasure so gabriel you run this
critical theory workshop which you uh is
described as an international school for
trans-disciplinary cross-cultural and
committed research seeking to bring
affordable education with real use value
to a broad public but like the the name
of the workshop the critical theory
workshop
it suggests that you you know you're
talking about these theories that we're
going to talk about and and you you seem
to know these theories you know these
french
so-called critical theory that we're
going to focus on today in a way that's
not like oh uh i'm i want to know my
enemy so i want to know your i want to
know your personal relationship to these
theories and and how you got into them
and kind of start there
yeah i
you know i'm a
farm boy from kansas who grew up working
construction so there was nothing
organic in my immediate environment that
would connect my mind to the world of
french theory
but i wanted to get off the farm
and wait where are you from in kansas
two a couple years ago i was in salina
kansas i spent a whole summer there
northeastern kansas okay that's not
salinas but uh
yeah
cool okay go on sorry and so so anyway i
wanted to get off the farm and i was you
know i have a quick mind was good at
school and pretty clearly identified as
my father told me you know you should
study hearts you don't have to work hard
like me i took that pretty seriously and
i wanted to study theory that was
somehow practically relevant because i
was always attracted to social
transformation and fighting for equality
and justice
and the coordinates of my intellectual
world this was in the 90s
were determined largely by what was the
hottest commodity on the global market
and what was being put forth as the most
radical so in my undergraduate years i
was exposed to french theory and thought
well these are the smartest philosophers
and theorists in the world they're doing
something radical and new that's never
been done before
i should learn french and go and study
with them because that's what's you know
the the most important thing globally
and so that's what i did i got a
scholarship
uh after undergraduate and i went to do
a master's degree with luca rigorei
i then continued studying and was one of
jacques derrida's last students because
i did a masters with him at the
zest in central paris then i went on to
do my phd with paul uh not with uh paul
ricker fortunately with uh alembedu
and it was i arrived in paris basically
you know i got a scholarship and then i
you know i come from a working-class
family so i worked in order to support
myself and i wanted to stay there and so
i was a deep believer in the cause so to
speak i was believing i believed in the
ideas i believed
that they were going to solve you know
problems uh serve social justice in some
capacity
so
i you know studied with derrida and then
at the same time there was it was the
kind of tail end of the grand era of
french theory so i took classes with
paul recur
with 18 balibar with jean francois with
julia cristeva the list goes on any of
the ones who are still alive when i
arrived in paris in the 90s i went to
their seminars i went to their lectures
and their conferences so your whole goal
was like
to find the most radical thing and like
yeah because i i had a moment i mean did
you have a moment like this i had a
moment when i was like 18 years old and
i was in the library of like the
university of toronto and i just was
like oh you know what i bet the best
books are the ones that these professors
have put on reserve so i started looking
on the reserve shelves and i found
chomsky's book deferring democracy and i
was like deterring democracy who deters
democracy that's weird and i i was
living like in the suburbs with my
parents and i just like read the book
and i got home super late because i was
just sitting in the live you couldn't
take it out on loan so i was just
sitting in the library reading this book
until really late and then i came home
and i was like oh my god who's chomsky
what is this so did you have like a
moment like that with a french theory
like is that um
well yeah i was attracted to what was
you know put forth as being the most
sophisticated and the most radical and
so in the early 90s at least in my
circles that was dario
and i remember reading the books in
english not understanding them having to
read heidegger and kant so i did the
whole history of western philosophy in a
very serious way
obviously learned french but then since
derrida also at least famed to know to a
certain extent i mean i think he did
know german but he dabbled in ancient
greek and latin so i studied those
languages too because i thought well if
this is the smartest person and he knows
these languages i have to know these
four languages and plus english and then
know the history of western philosophy
and
classical education like that's you know
that's what they that's what they always
for hundreds of years that's the idea
like latin greek french german
philosophy yeah
no absolutely and and i was very
dedicated to that style of education and
i spent years in the national library in
paris
studying all of those things and you
know deeply believing in them
while at the same time there were some
shifts that took place because uh you
know
dairy does discourse when you compare
what he says to what he analyzes i began
discovering contradictions that he would
say something happened in a particular
text
and it didn't happen in the original
version of that text like his
interpretation of descartes for instance
and then he would talk about these texts
as if they were you know sacred
scripture
but i looked into the history of the
plato's corpus for instance and we have
nothing from the hand of plato and so
there's no material history of the text
so why would you take what plato wrote
as sacred lore
when he actually we had nothing from
what he wrote and he said in his seventh
letter that he never put his true
thoughts into writing anyway
and dario wasn't dealing with these
larger questions uh of both the kind of
hermeneutic questions but then the
larger questions of
the material historicity of text and so
that led me to then explore more broadly
the work of bourdieu and the borders and
sociologists who are very present in
paris i was increasingly track attracted
to the kind of cultural marxist scene so
bad you
uh runcier is kind of coming out of the
fucoian heritage and so materialists at
a certain level but an anti-communist
anarchist uh very much like foucault
and so that that was the world
cultural marxist so
just where i'm i'm coming from like a
very naive place right like and from the
point of view of the theory like i i i
did i did science you know i did physics
as an undergrad and then i did history
as an undergrad and then i like
continued in on the science path and
like my politics is all like chomsky and
then i've
really naively started reading marxist
texts like lennon and and marx himself
just reading it like again i'm following
the way that you're following like you
actually did what derrida said you know
he did right like know the languages and
stuff which maybe he didn't actually do
and i i'm kind of the same way because
chomsky is just like whatever you can
read anything just go read it and so
that's i'm still kind of doing that
but when you say um
these the when you said that you
discovered that
there's no actual
material of plato it's like all we have
is
um
all we have is like stuff other people
wrote about plato and copies of quotes
well we have manuscripts that go back to
i believe the 11th century right right
we don't have them they go back to
plato's time so that's the oldest thing
we have about plato
yeah we have texts that have been you
know if you look at the history of how
those manuscripts were handed down they
were recopied by hand for
for decades and centuries
and so
obviously and there are also texts that
didn't match up right so there are
certain versions of plato's dialogues
that don't match with other ones and
then they were formalized in the 19th
century the latter half of the 19th
century in germany there was an attempt
to establish the definitive corpus of
plato right at the height of industrial
capitalism when intellectual property
law and identifying what the commodity
was that was saleable and who owned that
commodity was so important and so that
relationship between author and text
really became
uh
you know institutionalized in the 19th
century the other thing is from when
you're like on like doing online stuff
or podcasting or whatever and you're on
the left it's like there's this there's
this like the idea that cultural marxism
that's like something jordan peterson
accuses
other people of being but you're saying
cultural marxism is an actual there is
an actual theory of culture called
cultural marxism
yeah what people will identify as
cultural marxism is a
you're largely european phenomenon but
then of course it also did spread to the
us
and canada and other places that were uh
that are highly eurocentric in their
intellectual orientation and cultural
marxism is usually
kind of identified as a split away from
actually existing socialism and so lenin
the bolsheviks uh the third
international and all of that is often
classified as kind of eastern marxism
because they're the marxists who change
the world and are anti-colonial and
anti-imperialist whereas cultural
marxism or what some people call western
marxism
uh kind of threw up his hands and said
well there's no revolution in the
western world so therefore we're going
to focus on culture and cultural
analysis so if it be adorno and
horkheimer or if it'd be
you know badu self-identifies as a
maoist and we'd have to go through and
talk about individual cases but i think
that it is fair to say that there's a
general tendency within
marxist intellectuals in the western
world to be much more focused on kind of
culture in the intellectual world and
they often tend to denigrate actually
existing socialism so they're usually
either trotskyists or cultural marxists
in the sense that they're not they're
not they're more interested in
interpreting the world than changing it
let's put it that way dominica
wasn't yeah i was just gonna say i know
a little bit about western marxism
because he's got that book class
struggle uh by dominical la sordo so
there it is it's available in spanish
but it's gonna totally come up in
english okay awesome yeah that's
loserto's definitely changed my life so
okay so wait you're you're um you're not
you're
finding anomaly let's like according to
like the thomas kuhn uh you know
structure of scientific revolutions um
book
uh you you're going through this process
you're finding anomalies in these
theories and you're finding these things
and uh so let's let's pick up from there
in your story yeah so
after a few years in the in the
daredevil circles you know attending a
seminar weekly and really being in the
the mix of it i
began identifying these contradictions
and then wanting to resolve them and so
i started studying the history of the
platonic corpus that we were just
talking about and have written on the
history of that
the constitution of those texts
and i was increasingly
attracted to what i would now frame as
the kind of historical social sciences
so both at the level of history with the
anal school and then
in sociology particularly kind of
borgesian sociology i ended up basically
doing two masters in philosophy and then
i was doing a phd in philosophy with
badu but simultaneously in the french
system i did a masters in the social
sciences because in the social sciences
at least you're explaining real things
and you can test theories and things
like this at up to a certain point
but then of course i started
encountering other contradictions like
borgio thinks and argues that there's an
autonomy of spheres and that art is
somehow separate from
the economy and politics and other such
things which is obviously not true
that's usually an excuse to like not
you know boycott israel or something
that's usually where that you smuggle
that stuff art is different art is
separate yeah yeah it has it follows its
own laws that aren't somehow the laws of
uh of capitalism so obviously it's the
bourgeois ideology of art and so in
short then i
you know i think at base i was always a
materialist
and so materialism allowed me to test
claims and find out what was true and so
i shifted into the historical social
sciences but was still working with
particularly badou rancier and balibar
uh completed my dissertation and you
know uh
continued to do things within the
philosophic world but i was always
situating philosophy in relationship to
the larger material world and so
i didn't self-describe or think of
myself as a marxist at that point in
time in fact marxism for me was this
kind of cultural marxism that said a lot
of
loosey-goosey and kind of incorrect
things about art and culture
and right and i bet they were low-key
everything you were reading is sort of
anti-marxist right like i i had that
experience where whatever they're like
um and then there's the stupid marxists
who just say the same thing over and
over or whatever there's all these kind
of back handed
so you you kind of absorb that right
they never make a systematic attack on
it or rarely but by these kind of snarky
things that they say
you get this feeling like oh this is
probably not worth
a hundred percent anti-communism is the
air that we breathe within the
capitalist academy and i was in france
in the 90s so this was the twilight of
communist consciousness you had the
collapse of the soviet union then you
have derrida quite disingenuously
publishing all these things about the
specters of marx and whatnot basically
just making marks into another
dispersive commodity that we can play
with and explore and constantly
re-signify
and so
marxism was not something that anyone in
my circles was saying was was great or
worthy of study or other such things on
the contrary in fact i never even took a
class on marks there were no classes on
marx the closest that i got because i
took uh baju's seminar for for years and
he's the self-declared marxist but he's
also a self-declared platonist and so
platonists believe that there are
in metaphysics that there are pure forms
of ideas so that's like superstition
that's like the cave and the the shadows
on the cave and there's an ideal for
that that's a yeah that's plato
yeah i mean basically he's an idealist
yeah who trafficks in certain forms of
materialism but is not really a
materialist himself and what i mean by
that is not what he says because people
can say anything when they're playing
with discourse but what he does his own
intellectual practice is idealist
through and through
and so although he traffics or plays in
certain forms of uh materialist analysis
and so in that regard i didn't want to
be like that i found
some of badu's writings to be
uh very
how to put it it just wasn't solid work
it wasn't materialist research that was
evidence-based and so
but i ended up getting a job in french
theory i should add
so here i am teaching french theory i
got a job you know 12 years ago at
villanova university to do french theory
at a place that was known for derrida
scholarship darion religion of all
things
and
i continued to i kind of began focusing
much more explicitly on
what i was interested in is well if all
of these philosophers have this one
particular way of doing philosophy in
which they sit down and they analyze
texts devoid of context and have this
relationship to a canonical body of
texts my primary research question
became how did that come about what were
the material forces that made philosophy
into the individual interpretation of
canonic western texts
and that was the first book that i wrote
which
really
charted out how we got here in short
but that was the beginning of of course
a much larger i think intellectual
itinerary where i also then began
exploring art and culture
how
uh cultural products in general are
fabricated and i think i can say now if
i can jump up to the present really
quickly looking back on this i
recognized that
subjectively or personally i was drawn
to i want a materialist analysis that
explains something about the world so
that i can change it and i wanted it to
be radical because i wanted it to serve
some form of social justice mission a
quality piece you know whatever you want
to call it and
the problem was that what was on offer
by the system and by what i would today
call the intellectual apparatus so the
entire system of intellectual production
circulation and reception
what was on offer was not
historical materialist analysis what was
on offer was a very trendy form of
discursive idealism in which you would
learn sophisticated language games and
different ways of speaking
and you'd constantly problematize which
is basically a form of skepticism you
say oh well chomsky says this but how
does he know this and
you know these types of things what is
justice are you sure that that's what
justice is because the greek said this
and heidegger said this about the greeks
so
that's that encounter if you will
between my subjective experience and the
objective social world and the
intellectual apparatus led to enormous
contradictions and unbelievable
frustrations on my own part and then i
just began studying the apparatus i
wanted to understand the system of
intellectual production circulation and
reception that made a young
you know naive but well-meaning kid from
kansas
study derrida and learn all of these
sophisticated things about french theory
instead of being trained to understand
the world but like
and what you said though like it's it's
partly that it's like not accessible but
it's but you know i i thought a lot
about
the inaccessibility of academic theory
and these writers are among the least
accessible
i find you know it's it's all it's very
hard for to just pick up
a book by derrida and have any idea what
he's talking about
it's an important part of the ideology
actually because it's very much i've
done you know some sociology of religion
and it's very much like the discourse of
the initiated and if you want to be a
priest or bishop or pope you know
whatever you want to be in the religious
hierarchy you have to spend years
learning the internal language and when
you're exposed to it i remember the
first time i was in derrida's seminar
and it was obviously all in french and
there was all of this vocabulary that
was so sexy and sophisticated and people
saying these refined things and a
rhetoric that derrida had perfected he's
very very good at rhetoric
and that keeps people out
it creates the illusion that the people
who are part of that discourse are in
the know just like in a religious sense
and it also plays an ideological
function because it structures our time
economy
so if you want to criticize coming back
to what you said earlier if you want to
criticize marx you don't even have to
read marks
let alone lenin and mao and ho chi min
and everybody else you just say oh well
you know good on paper bad in practice
or you know whatever communism doesn't
work yeah gulags leads to the gulag
yeah it's all for white men i love that
one right that's like uh the the
sort of
theory that made the most important and
significant anti-colonial revolutions in
the world and it's all just for white
men
but but the accessibility just just to
say like the accessibility i think is
a problem and and i think a lot of it is
like what you said and i think that the
i think that in the kind of american uh
academy or like the north american
academy and you probably know more about
the schools of thought but like
mathematics is used in that same way or
like economics
and mathematics it's like you can't
comment on the economy unless you
understand these economic
charts and equations which are again
designed not just for obscurity but also
to make you not understand the economy
but like there's also the thing that you
said the second thing that you said the
part of it of
you know
academic this is why people hate
academics the inaccessibility but also
like not taking a stand on anything so
it's like oh what is power what is
torture what is wrong what is right what
is imperialism everything's imperialism
nothing's imperialism nobody's
imperialist how do we know and it's like
that's why people hate academics because
it's like you go there you go to an
academic because it's like hey you spend
a lot of time reading and thinking give
me some kind of answer about what what
to think about this and they say well
gee
you know welcome to my seminar where i'm
gonna you know turn you around in knots
and i think we can talk a bit about
foucault now because i i've pulled this
quote out of one of your um papers on uh
foucault the false radical the faux
radical
um and you say you know foucault
openly embraced academic specialization
the intellectual taylorism that's
integral to institutionalized knowledge
production under capital he also
encouraged intellectuals to focus on the
anonymous
decentralized micro physics of power in
their local context and thereby abandon
the project of elucidating and fighting
against the macro physics of power
um operative and global class struggle
and in this way with remarkably few
exceptions he gave carte blanche to the
major imperial projects of his lifetime
so like what i what i see there is also
like by doing this kind of
you know what is this what does this
mean what does that mean and doing it to
every idea whether they're an
emancipatory or an oppressive idea
you're actually making more space for
oppression and imperialism because de
facto they're going to win unless
they're challenged
yeah no absolutely maybe two things that
would be helpful
just to frame the the conversation
because there's a lot packed into what
you just asked is that on the one hand
one of the dominant ideologies of the
professional managerial class as it
manifests itself in the intelligentsia
is idealism
that the driving force behind the world
is ideas and ways of speaking and
discourse
and opposed to that is an orientation
that is materialist and materialists
want to understand they're not
empiricists so it's not just we're going
to count these facts out and
be bb encounters or things like this
it's that we want to take the facts from
the world and situate them in a system
of explanation that allows us to
understand them and ultimately to
intervene in that world in order to
modify it that's what materialism is
kind of in a nutshell and so i couldn't
agree more that one of the major
problems with academics in general is at
least within the humanities very rampant
idealism and so welcome to my seminar
it's more complicated more sophisticated
what is power we have to read hobbs
before we can even begin to speak or the
other things that they do is they just
ask questions right
uh what is this what is that what is
this what is palestine uh is it a place
is it a thing is it a people um
and and darida of course was was really
perfected this uh the endless
interrogation where you just defer
signification and you never actually get
to anything that means anything so i
just wanted to quickly highlight that
but in relationship to foucault you know
he's somewhat of a complicated figure
and one of the reasons that i focused on
him and the specific piece that you're
referencing
is that foucault has idealist elements
in the work that he does but he traffics
in materials right so he creates the
sense that he's talking about real
history and real things and he's in the
archive and um demonstrating these
things but
the catch is that his accounts of
history do not accord with the
scientific historical materialists
materialist accounts that we have in
fact they're pitted directly against
them so
uh you know foucault tried to
demonstrate that
marx and marxist political economy kind
of shares the same epistem as boudoir
political economy
which at one level could be true and you
know marx and engels in particular wrote
about this but the reason that
foucault does that is to try to reduce
marxism simply to discourse to make it
into a set of ideas and he ignores then
the material forces that are operative
and so in his own lifetime coming to
your second question
this was a period of intense global
class struggle
in which
world war ii it happened
27 million soviets gave their lives
defeating the nazi war machine
communism was on the rise you had
communist revolutions you know in north
korea and china and then in 1959 it
comes to the western hemisphere with
cuba and the list goes on
and you have an enormous uptick in u.s
imperial interventions where you have a
minimum of what 50 foreign countries
that the united states has tried to
overthrow since world war ii
uh the majority of which were
democratically elected
and foucault
who says we should be specific
intellectuals
who focus on the microphysics of power
in you know our immediate institutions
in many cases that's what he highlights
i mean it depends on what aspect of his
work we're talking about right uh he can
go to different extremes and there was a
moment of kind of marxian
vaguely marxian almost more anarchist
radicalization in the wake of 68 that
i'd be happy to talk about but in
general foucault was not interested in
giving an account of imperialism even
though it was on his doorstep
right the algerian war was was one of
the bloodiest conflagrations and he was
kind of just hands off he was going to
the library and making up
histories that didn't accord with the
dominant historical materials histories
and was very explicitly anti-marxist in
1966 1967 he really directly claims that
marxism is a philosophy of the 19th
century and it's like a fish out of
water in the 20th century so it's not
only that he ignores global imperialism
for the most part but then also the
anti-colonial struggles that are rooted
in the marxist tradition he just throws
out completely and so these are very
reactionary political positions to take
but that's not how he's marketed by the
apparatus that we were talking about
earlier so most people don't know this
they know foucault because they see an
image of him as a bald guy with a
megaphone and a leather jacket and
that's enough it's literally just a logo
and they read foucault with the sense
that somehow he's a real radical
and i'd be happy to talk in greater
detail about specific political
positions he took or just didn't take it
all
yeah no i think i you know because
because there's
i mean
it there's the whole context like you
said of um what's going on in terms of
decolonization in the 60s and 70s when
he's doing this academic work but
there's also the western european
context which i think you you've
mentioned in some of your other papers
where it's like you know this is one
thing that that's coming becoming like
more and more clear to me with current
events
um you know in with the russia ukraine
war and what's happening with uh with
germany and like the the different
stances that western european countries
are all taking like the way they're all
lining up with the us and like the way
germany has
you know com basically
sacrificing they're in the process of
sacrifice we don't know how far it'll go
but it looks like they're in the process
of sacrificing their own economic
well-being for the u.s
agenda like they to buy u.s gas instead
of cheaper russian gas and and whatever
other range of things they're going to
give up over the course of this
sanctions process but like
to to to understand how much influence
the u.s actually wields over western
europe which we think of as very
independent and in some ways like the
parent where the u.s is the child
um that's not really the case right i
mean that like
that's a big part of the story which you
also talk about in your work where
the u.s actually has enormous influence
over
every aspect of life in western europe
including france including germany
including the uk and the kinds of i mean
the uk and the us hard to separate but
one that system
is actually exerting all kinds of
influence so you know maybe we can you
talk about that context too
yeah absolutely and it might then
eventually bring us to the u.s national
security state because part of the
context as i mentioned earlier i'm
interested obviously in studying the
work of
specific cultural producers and reading
them seriously at the diffuco or derrida
or other figures but i'm not interested
in isolating them from the larger social
world and the intellectual apparatus
within which they operate and one thing
that's extremely important to understand
if you want to understand french theory
and this is not what we're trying to do
in the academy right we're trying to be
specialists and be specific
intellectuals as foucault would want us
to be
uh is to look at the cultural
imperialism of the united states in the
post-war era and what happened is you
know the united states
was hesitant to enter world war ii in
part because there was a conflict in the
political elite between what side they'd
enter on um right because there were a
lot of hitler supporters including alan
dulles who would then later direct the
cia
and they decided to just do a
bloodletting and
assumed that the nazi war machine was
going to destroy the soviet union
because that's what they wanted and
that's what they tried to do themselves
between 1918 and 1920 when they invaded
the soviet union to strangle the red
babe in its crib as winston churchill
said with 13 other capitalist countries
that didn't happen because the red army
orchestrated a world historical defeat
of nazism and started marching westward
that's when it became important for u.s
imperial interests to intervene in
western europe in order to make sure
that it didn't go communist and so in
the immediate post-war era you have a
situation where the us military
obviously intervened and so you have
boots on the ground in western europe
but then they set up an entire cultural
apparatus in order to oversee you know
through the marshall fund and through
cia money to structure the major pillars
of the western european countries if it
be politically socially the labor unions
if it'd be intellectually uh if it'd be
film or other such things political
parties overthrowing
regimes they don't like false flag
operations bombings that operation
gladio operation gladio is a great
example of that right this is nato's
secret army which people should be
talking about more today given all the
discussions regarding nato
rehabilitating all the nazis
paper clip i mean
yeah tens of thousands of nazis and
fascists who were brought to the united
states who are given free passage to
latin american elsewhere who were
propped up in the united states to run
the intelligence services in countries
like germany i mean a nazi general was
became cia reinhard galen and then
oversaw the intelligence services in
germany under of course the surveillance
of the the cia and so this is
you know a very very big part of that
picture and so coming back to the french
intelligentsia the goal and thomas
braden was one of the cia operatives who
oversaw these operations and he actually
spoke out quite clearly about it in an
article that he published called this uh
something like the cia is immoral and
i'm glad
in the saturday evening post and he
explained that the project in western
europe at the level of cultural
imperialism was and it's quite smart
when you think about it smart in a
really you know crass and conniving way
because they didn't they propped up a
lot of the right of course you know the
the fascist forces that were talking
about and things like this but they
realized that the communists
particularly within france and italy
were so strong everybody wanted to be a
communist because the communists were
the ones who defeated the nazis right
all the intellectuals cultural producers
etc people are literally reinventing
themselves to present themselves as
members of the resistance and so the cia
project was to fund support and prop up
what they call the non-communist left or
the compatible left these are the people
who don't believe in actually existing
socialism who are the kind of rad libs
and the radical recuperators who are
going gonna sound like the communists
but actually are pro-capitalists and
pro-imperialists
and so the cia set up the congress for
cultural freedom um an enormous
international organization with offices
in 35 different countries they were
running dozens of prestige magazines
they ran a
forum service which is a press outlet
they were pumping the kool-aid out
internationally in what frank wisner
another member and architect of the us
national security state called the
mighty wurlitzer they wanted a system
that could be centralized like a
wurlitzer which is like a kind of
jukebox machine where he could sit in
langley virginia at cia headquarters and
press a button and have whatever message
they wanted to have played played
internationally in their press outlets
and in their intellectual platforms and
you know to come back to ukraine this is
what's going on now we see that the
mighty wurlitzer is in full swing the
media the corporate media is in lockstep
and so the intellectuals that we were
just talking about a moment ago are not
somehow independent of this larger form
of cultural imperialism and the
intellectual apparatus on the contrary
many of them work directly for some of
these organizations or published in them
in various ways so the frankfurt school
of critical theory theodora dorno he was
publishing in cia journals in their
monac uh max horkheimer anna arendt they
were invited to cia conferences and went
and went to these junkets and were very
well paid to do that because the
positions that they were taking were in
the interest of u.s imperialism and its
cultural imperialism right so that
larger contextualization which i could
say a lot more about but i feel like
i've been talking a bit is really
important for understanding the
specificity of these theorists otherwise
what we do is what we're encouraged to
do in the academy is just have a
one-to-one almost
epiphany-like relationship between the
text that's isolated from everything in
our own personal subjective experience
which is bourgeois ideology right the
freedom of the individual and the
consumer product that's before them but
you never ask about the system how that
consumer product is packaged there's
never a critique of what i call the
global theory industry but it's also
like um
you know if by getting the left it's so
smart because it's just like these young
people like you or me who are like
getting into
reading stuff and they're like okay well
i don't identify with the right at all i
think this you know fighting uh for the
for the little guy
you know i think that that
oppression is bad i want to work i want
to work with these kinds of people and
then you're you're slapped with you know
trotsky and arendt and totalitarianism
and all these ideas of like well if you
go too far to the left it's bad you know
it's just as bad you know stalin's just
as bad as hitler and there's there's all
this stuff to to kind of make sure that
you don't uh you don't get it like you
you don't you don't really get what
really happened um and and the other
thing i want to like move to is um
you know you talk about because when
when you talk about the congress for
cultural freedom you know it's kind of
like the core of this this uh discussion
or like what i was thinking of titling
this is like are your favorite academic
theorists really cia spooks but it's
like
you know you have this thing where
you're like there's a wrong way of
looking at it which is it's not that the
cia is
pulling the strings of of your favorite
theorist and like hey foucault write
this hey derrida write that hey hannah
arendt write this and like pulling these
strings but rather you you talk about it
as like it's not a puppeteer
but it's um like a puppet theater or
something so can you talk about like how
it's how it's more
it's actually work which makes it worse
actually
yeah more terrifying um
yeah and and i guess i would just say
maybe we'll come back to this in a
little bit but the dominant image that
people have of the cia
is at least within the western world
tends to be
the
an image of the cia that's largely
actually produced in various ways by the
cia due to the extent of involvement of
the central intelligence agency and
other agencies of the national security
state
in cultural production
and if it be james bond's films if it be
mission impossible or other such things
tv shows you know 24 etc these are
products of the us national security
state and there's excellent scholarship
on precisely that front and it produces
this idea of you know the james bond
character with all the gadgets and the
sexy women and on and on and on
what it doesn't do is allow you to
understand how the cia actually works
and ralph mcgee who's a former member of
the cia
wrote in his kind of account of his
experience in the cia he said that you
know what the cia principally is is it
doesn't principally gather intelligence
its primary function is that it is the
covert arm of the us government
and so its primary function
is disinformation
and controlling the minds of the masses
and doing covert operations kind of
behind the scenes as well you know the
kind of bloody covert operations but
then there's also all the media cultural
and intellectual interventions that
they're involved in working with
thousands of academics according to the
church committee right so this isn't a
small enterprise and so i agree that the
congress for cultural freedom is a
centerpiece but the tentacles are quite
uh expansive so then coming to the
metaphor of the marionette theater this
is what they do right they don't
literally drop off a briefcase at hannah
auren's office and i mean they did
invite her to junkets and they did
correspond
they sometimes do that stuff too yeah
they sometimes do and aren't i've been
to the arent archive and she you know
really enjoyed being wined and dined in
switzerland and getting foundation money
and doing other such things in fact the
origins of totalitarianism she received
funding and support from the foreign
office in in great britain and so it's a
national security product uh if you will
uh so yeah they do both things but the
primary orientation that they have is
they build the marionette theater in the
sense that they control and fund the
cultural and intellectual apparatus
and then they make the marionettes come
of their own accord
because as we all know to come back to
the image that you were sharing earlier
you know both of us were bright young
minds looking to figure things out what
are you going to do are you going to go
to the street corner where there's some
crazy guy yelling about lennon or are
you going to go to the prestige
institutions and study the premier
cultural and intellectual products that
are everywhere on offer well
unfortunately for my sake i probably
should have gone and listened to the guy
on the soapbox mind you in toronto the
people with the papers are trotskyists
anyway oh okay well there you go there
might be yeah there's there's misleading
information
a lot of different places
um but the the control of the
intellectual and cultural apparatus
makes a lot of sense because then
you get plausible deniability
and you have the people who are in the
apparatus
are there because they want to be it in
it and they believe in it
and a lot of them aren't forced to do it
so one of the uh images that some cia
officers talk about running agents is
they say that you always have them on a
leash
but a good agent is on a leash that's
long enough that they don't even know
and that's the majority of academics and
a lot of cultural producers is that
they're working within an apparatus
that's controlled by the powers that be
they're not aware of it because they
never really come into conflict with it
because what they have on offer and what
they're doing and what they're providing
with their cultural products is
precisely what the apparatus wants so
it's a much better system because you
have a marionette theater with no
strings right you have the marionettes
who are chugging along and what they
want to do is advance they want to get
more and more distinguished degrees they
want to get invited to the junkets they
want to give keynotes and all of that
and that system works extremely well and
it we should understand as well that
this is a manifestation of the
superstructure and it's one of the ways
in which this terminology i think is
helpful is that the intellectual
apparatus is a key component of what
marx and engels called the
superstructure right and these are
institutionalized mechanisms that format
social consciousness
if you want to
ideologize people
you need to control the institutions
that are structured in order to do that
the schools the press outlets the
churches the
uh the unions for that matter and other
such things
yeah and but
i the other thing maybe the last kind of
discussion uh that i want to have which
is not short but i wanted to talk a
little bit about like science because
again like turning this in a
biographical direction like i got the
sense from my family you know
that like
you can you can do politics like you can
do whatever you want for for you know if
that's if that's your you know if your
conscience calls you to do it but like
you should learn something real and
valuable like
learn some science or engineering or
something and and then you know you can
do this on the side kind of thing yeah
and you know that's a part of the idea
that wasn't like
my parents just got that idea out of
nowhere you know that's uh you know
that's something that's also put into
our society that you know the so-called
stem you know science technology
engineering and which i have my own
problem with stem because i'm like it's
all just science there's no the t e and
the m are all science just say science
but anyway the idea is that like natural
science matters um social science is a
career dead end it's a waste of your
parents money but
the the most powerful
you know the the arm the covert arm of
the u.s empire uh disagrees right i mean
we've you've you were saying that you
found that like
the cia thinks that social science and
and academics is actually really
important
yeah crucially important uh in
a few different ways one is that the
professional managerial class in the
intelligentsia is tasked with developing
new and more sophisticated forms of
ideology
so that the capitalist ruling class can
continue to rule by consent or primarily
or principally by consent at least
domestically because obviously
internationally that's not the case
um and obviously there's a lot of
repression within the united states with
police killing mass incarceration and
other such things but they can at least
rule one segment of the population by
by consent and so they need
uh intellectual production in fact one
of the things that's fascinating about
the cia is there's a lot of internal
documents that say very explicitly that
the primary war is the war for hearts
and minds
and at one level this makes sense
because it's a cost-benefit analysis as
surprising as it is
under capitalism it is actually
um
beneficial at the cost level to rule by
consent compared to rule by repression
because you have to beat people up you
have to kill them that takes time it
takes energy and other such things and
if you can just flog them over the head
then it's much much uh well in certain
cases it's it's better and
that aspect of of imperialism
is
you know related to
what we were talking about earlier in
the sense that you have to produce a set
of really trendy and interesting ideas
that are intricate and sophisticated but
don't actually explain how the world
works
and you want everybody to be attracted
to those ideas to study them deeply and
have to study them for years and years
and learn foreign languages and entire
canons and other such things so that
they're devoid of materialist analysis
right and so the form of
both stem and humanities that are on
offer are those that don't allow us to
analyze and see the social totality
and that's why historical marx
historical materialism has largely been
excluded from the capitalist academy and
denigrated because historical
materialism is a single science that
looks at how everything fits together
how science is related to economics is
related to politics etc and so there's
no isolated
siloing of particular disciplines in
particular intellectual uh endeavors and
what the system that exists wants is
they want to produce the next worker
bees right if they be the new engineers
the new scientists etc but they don't
want engineers and scientists who
understand that the cdc is guided by
moneyed interests which it obviously is
it re you know revamps its guidelines
based on capitalist imperatives and what
the political elite tells them to do but
they don't want scientists like that
they want one who or who ask or who ask
hey is it a good idea to have bioweapons
labs in ukraine right now is that a good
idea
maybe a biologist asking that but yeah i
want to give you like the last word on
this particular question of the
importance of of this type of work where
you say you know
if some presume that intellectuals are
powerless that our political
orientations do not matter
the organization that has been one of
the most potent power brokers in
contemporary world politics does not
agree
the cia believes in the power of
intelligence and theory and we should
take this very seriously in falsely
presuming that intellectual work has
little or no traction in the real world
we
not only misrepresent the practical
implications of theoretical labor but we
also
run the risk of dangerously turning a
blind eye
to political projects for which we can
easily become the unwitting cultural
ambassadors and that's like so much of
what's going on i think is like a lot of
semi-winning or unwitting cultural
ambassadorship for for this kind of
stuff
oh absolutely because it's the lingua
franca of the academy and if it be
anti-communism on the one hand is the
kind of dominant ideology
or
the
constant at least within the humanities
transcending discourses that come up
that are just further reiterations of
something you know a discourse of
difference of radicality and other such
things
then
uh
unwitting agents i think is is the exact
name for it because people are just
continuing to be vehicles for what the
intellectual apparatus wants to pump out
and it's at that level that yeah there's
an enormous investment in intellectual
and cultural production on the part of
organizations like the central
intelligence agency and other elements
in the national security state they
believe in ideas and they believe in
culture because it's a way of formatting
social consciousness right and i should
maybe add to that that
uh in hearing my own words read back to
me i i think to myself well there's a
risk in that position
of sounding like
the real struggle then is the struggle
to get our ideas right
and given as i said earlier that i'm a
materialist not an idealist i'm not
suggesting and certainly don't want to
suggest that well ideas can save us and
we just have to get the right ideas and
get them to the right people and then
we'll all have enlightenment and the
world will be better no the base drives
the superstructure we have to
reconfigure the social relations of
production and in order to do that we
have to practically intervene uh we have
to build structures organizations
parties that enable us to do that etc
but
uh part of that project
is one of cultural transformation as
well and so one of the things that we're
lacking in the capitalist world is a
really developed cultural left that can
nurture young minds like our own and the
stories that we were sharing earlier so
that we can go to cultural centers and
bookstores and
um and film screenings and art shows
that actually are legitimately leftist
rather than the kind of faux radicalism
and woke
cultural products that are currently on
offer and that won't get us
all the way to where we need to be but
it will go a long way to at least
opening people up to
different
uh
modes of social organization and
recognizing that the way you overcome
capitalism is not through reforms and
through small changes it's by changing
the economic base and transforming it so
that it is socialist so that you
socialize the values produced by workers
and you guarantee universal health care
education housing right to work
uh respect for the environment it's very
very important and cultural flourishing
cultural flourishing is essential to the
socialist project and
what
my recent work has or what i've been
engaging in my recent work is what a
socialist apparatus of cultural
production looks like right when it's
not about indoctrinating people and
pursuing an imperialist project it's
about bringing the masses into cultural
production educating people of everyone
to be creative in their labor so that
you don't just have the sultified masses
and the few damien hurst and jeff coons
who get to make a lot of money making
pretty crummy art
expressing their creativity within
cultural apparatus and so there's a lot
more that i could say about that but
that has to be on our radar right it's
not just that we're going to
differentiate ourselves from the
dominant cultural apparatus we actually
have to build a socialist cultural
apparatus and get plugged into the
social socialist cultural apparatus
that is already operative in the world
yeah that's really good i guess um you
know that's that's like
because
in a way you're you've been working on
kind of turning the turning this
materialist analysis on
uh academic work itself like where do
these ideas come from and why are they
promoted in the way that they are and
why do we hear this person instead of
that person or these ideas so much uh
amplified instead of others and then
turns out to be the cia we're like see i
am like there are some crude uh you know
again like stranger than fiction answers
to a lot of these things but i guess the
last thing um the last thing i wanted to
say because you've said a lot of really
good stuff about um
the kind of infrastructure or you call
it an apparatus but like the kind of
intellectual infrastructure that we need
to think about uh especially if we're in
this you know in this sphere like
whether whatever you're an academic
you're a writer you're a youtuber
you know you're you're a twit tweeter
like this you're all part of this and
and you use this phrase that i really
like you we need to create echo chambers
of critical intelligence
um a culture of radical leftism with a
broad institutional framework of support
extensive public backing prevalent media
clout and expansive power of
mobilization so that's like a that's
like a mandate right i mean that's a lot
to aspire to but there was some hints in
what you said earlier
about
the kind of theory
that
you are into now
right and so you know i was i was
talking to my spouse about how i was
going to talk to you before and and
she's not a big fan of foucault either
and she was like listen the trouble is
if you guys get into um if you get into
the specifics of foucault fukuokians
will be like that's not what foucault
says anyway uh you know so whatever
specific claim you make they'll be like
no that's you guys are misreading uh
foucault clearly foucault is radical or
whatever foucault's whatever you want
him to be
but um
you know
how do you think about
how we should read these things should
we you know finite time there's only so
much time uh in the world but like if
you are trying to educate yourself um
you know how do you go about it
what what standpoint do you think is a
good one now what starting point is a
good one um you know from the point of
view of
this type of education maybe
self-education maybe you're a teacher
watching this
um you know i know a lot of teachers
listen to my podcast uh on history um so
you know how do you
how do you approach it now like now that
you've gone through all this and gone
over and have a sense of of what
produced what it went into the
production of these theories
um where do you where do you where do
you stand now
let me just back up for one sec because
one thing that you said earlier is
important and that is that so the
central intelligence agency has been
involved in the intellectual and
cultural apparatus but so have the
foundations and the corporatocracy right
so there's not a kind of one-to-one
relationship there's an entire web of
capitalist interests and covert
operations that that control these
mechanisms and i could say a lot more
about that but i just wanted to
highlight it and i also wanted to add
that in developing an alternative
apparatus you know part of my own
intellectual energy and given the fact
that you're giving that you've been
running this podcast for so long i take
it part of your own intellectual energy
has been put into not just
individual cultural production but
creating platforms for sharing ideas for
getting voices out there and so the
critical theory workshop or the atelier
theory critique that i run is part of
that the radical education department or
red i'm part of the collective of
liberation school so i'm a big believer
in developing our own apparatus and this
being integral to our intellectual work
it's not just my you know personal
products that i'm pumping out there with
my writing i'm part of a collective that
is trying to move the needle and we can
do it a lot better if we work together
instead of just individually as we're
trained to do
regarding the
things that i'm reading now and and how
that relates to
the things that i was reading when in in
the 90s i guess i would say two things
well one is to first respond to the uh
highly the problem that your partner saw
with going into fukuian specificities
i've had a number of articles that are
slander articles that have been
published against me that basically say
that i don't know foucault that actually
there's this really intricate thing that
rock hill is left out i think it's
laughable and kind of embarrassing that
and i actually put this in that original
article that what there's a there's a
circle of foucaulians with an initiated
discourse that i know from the inside i
mean i wrote a 500 page book in french
that deals with foucault and what fuco
is analyzing and if these critics want
to take me seriously then they should go
and read it but they don't they don't
engage with my deep scholarship on
foucault and how i've pointed out that
he misread nietzsche he misread
descartes he misread kant and i spell it
all out line by line nobody deals with
those critiques they just want to throw
me out by doing a kind of standard
anti-communist ideology
circle the fucoian wagons i could see it
coming from a mile away it's really
pathetic
and i wish that people would engage both
with the foucault scholarship and with
the larger issues that i'm addressing
which is the
cultural imperialism that we were
talking about earlier
so
to finally come to the uh last part of
your question
i think that historical materialism
is a science
that is explaining how the world works
and giving us tools to transform the
world and make it a more just and
egalitarian place and when you read
historical materialists
they are crystal clear because they're
trying to understand the world and
contribute to a collective project of
exiting capitalism so i would encourage
your listeners and viewers to read
people like michael parenti who's
crystal clear dominica lasorda crystal
clear uh anila juarez if you happen to
read in french she's very very clear
jack powell's excellent historian will
give you a sense of what world war one
was what world war ii was
uh you know there's a lot of other
figures who i could uh who i could
listen eduardo galliano is a titan right
um vijay prashad you just had on your
show not that long ago right there's a
lot of defending defending him from the
same kind of stuff from being a tanki
right yeah
yeah exactly and so i would encourage
everybody yes to tap into historical
materialism and know that the traditions
of historical materialism are not
dogmatic are not closed it's a dynamic
ongoing science that is fallibilistic
it's based on bringing the evidence in
and trying to explain it and if it's not
well explained then changing the
framework of analysis so people should
read lenin and ho chi minh
and now and angles and marks and you
know i could go on um but it's the
richest tradition that explains how
things actually operate in the world and
give us tools for
uh leveraging power in the direction of
a more egalitarian world
all right gabriel rockhill that is a
that i don't want to go past that that's
a good ending
uh for this one thank you so much
great well thank you for having me on
it's a pleasure


## Keywords:
