---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EuO5-ObYRa8
---

# Video
Avraham Burg: Hope and Despair in Israel/Palestine
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EuO5-ObYRa8)

## Transcript:

so I think we should start welcome
ladies and gentlemen I'm very happy to
introduce you around work I mean he
doesn't need a really introduction most
of you know him and he is here also
because he's senior visiting fellow at
the IBM and I quote the first sentence
of his CV in today's program the
sentences it's a political career that
reflects the endless complexities of
life in the modern Middle East I mean
perhaps you will tell me this is a
trivial sentence because it's valid for
any political career in any part of the
world however in terms of complexities I
think it's safe to say that the Middle
East is a little bit different and also
what I want to say Israel with her
special founding foundation founding
history is for us in Austria not like
any other country I mean especially and
also for us in Austria most of you as I
said no I won't work but let me mention
some biographical details son of a
famous father German born Joseph of
Israel's national religious party and
the mother born in heaven Rivka Arenberg
served and rose in ranks in the army and
graduated from the Hebrew University in
Jerusalem in in sociology before he
entered into politics for the Labour
Party to be exact at that time it was
the alignment it was a party he worked
as an adviser to Shimon Peres and was
first elected to the Knesset in 1988 and
became it speaker in 1999 serving in
this position until 2003 album was
active in peace now
of course we are talking about peace
with the Palestinians from the early
1980s when it was not so I mean
mainstream after he left politics he
became he became a distinguished
researcher and also and of course he was
also before an excellent speaker and we
are looking forward to hearing him
our topic is hope and despair let me ask
you something personal also I checked
the results of the 1988 election which
brought you into the Knesset Paris
alignment had 30% and yet sectional
shammies Lee could had a 31.1 and four
years later labor under its atropine won
the elections with almost 35% and he
could under Shamir fell to 25 I think 11
days ago the joint labor geisha list
made less than 5% of course I know even
it's not your party anymore but are you
sometimes desperate if you think of what
happened to the Israeli left in the last
20 30 years can we move to the next
question hi good afternoon
we know each other for many years I mean
more years than we care to remember and
therefore you know that there was so
many years in politics that never mind
what is your question I have my own
answers okay so let me try to answer
indirectly at the beginning you said
that I'm coming from a kind of a
political complexity and I feel it's not
fair it's judgmental it's very
patronizing I look at your political
system well compared to yours ours is
simple straightforward fully understood
okay tell me the outcome of tomorrow
okay tell me for how long
Coates Coalition will hold tell me when
is the next coalition between the
extreme right wing for how long will the
right wing will hold is a one-party give
me answer for this I simply would
respond to mine okay well we know who
will become Chancellor well okay the the
difference between your political system
and ours is that in Austria by the end
of the elections you know who won in
Israel by the end of the elections we
begin the negotiation what is really the
result of the elections having said that
I'm also very very upset about the topic
of this afternoon and I'll tell you why
I read that tomorrow the same time not
here but in different place there is
hope despair and humor in politics about
Ukraine our topic is about hope and
despair in Israel Palestine Ukraine is
full of humor I mean Russians there he
used her American cutting the money Oh
crane gate this is humorous ours one
president went to jail one Prime
Minister went to jail another one is
going to jail finance minister was in
jail this is full of humor system now
when you take all of this into
consideration I will say as follows
Israel was for many many years up until
the 90s and the 90s is a crucial decade
not just for the Western world but for
us as well I will say a bipartisan
system or bipolar system large chunk I
mean
flagship of the left was Labor flagship
of the right was be good and around you
have couple of satellites through the
90s because of various things the
political system was shut it down and
fragmented into tiny little pieces that
created coalition formation almost an
impossible mission what happened in the
last elections
four months ago was for the first time
almost in 15 or 20 years the political
system goes back to two big flagships
one around former chief of staff guns
and one around Prime Minister Netanyahu
the outcome of the elections is such
that none has a majority and therefore
we and maybe the deepest constitutional
and political crisis we've seen in years
into this comes your hidden question
about the left and I would say the words
about it and of course about peace with
a Palestinian at the package there is no
left in Israel
I wonder historically whether there ever
was a left in Israel at what sense when
I say left here in Central Europe it is
a package deal of social fairness
secularization of the public sphere
freedoms and rights of the individual
respect minorities fair distribution of
public resources etc etc etc when you
say left in Israel it's one element only
yes or no arrangement with the
Palestinians all the rest of it you
might be an arch capitalist but
considered left you might be an arch
ultra-orthodox but consider left you
might be an extreme secular but being a
right winger not clear so it's not the
same categories as what you're talking
about and on this I will say as much as
the Palestinian topic is dormant or
disappeared or silent in the public
sphere it bubbles and it will erupt
but I think I mean what you are your
analysis about what's being left and and
and right these categories don't work I
mean not only not in Israel but also
it's becoming difficult in other
countries but I mean okay so perhaps
Israel will go to vote for a third time
or perhaps not I mean what it's do you
think it makes a difference if pentagons
succeeds in forming a government after
all which is not excluded I mean now we
are letting you know Netanyahu is trying
but he's probably will be the next one
this Saturday afternoon here in Vienna
my feeling is that the third round is
closer than a government maybe Sunday
maybe the Monday maybe next week I'll
change my mind that yesterday when I
read the cards it looks to me that
within the cards third elections are
closer I see no serious difference
ideologically speaking politically
speaking content speaking between the
guns party and Netanyahu's party
we don't really know him as a politician
we know him only as a campaigner am i
right we don't know him and I don't know
whether it's a compliment or not okay
the jury's still out but we know some
people around him within the party the
ideology is very much very much
right-wing bourgeoise center-right
ideology that I would like to speculate
that only didn't we have Prime Minister
Netanyahu and his baggage both the
criminal personal baggage and the public
attitude towards inciting one community
against another community towards being
under the spell of the right-wing
messianic
grouping of his guns potty would have
never come to the world in a way that
they're in order to remove netanyahu not
so much to offer a full comprehensive
alternative and if tomorrow morning
there is ex machina netanyahu is not
there
some of them will disappear some of them
will merge into the Likud and the
political system will be a different one
having said that one thing is for sure
and this is I cannot even begin to
describe how crucial I think it is
politically the nature of the individual
the characteristics of the individuals
might come historically crucial
Netanyahu of the last couple of years
simply splitted and divided the society
into elements of which are alien and
almost hating each other the nation
needs a healer and it looks like the
behavior and the courtesy and the good
nature of mr. guns might offer a totally
different leadership Gestalt than the
one of Netanyahu so content wise
politically wise not much of difference
but attitude wise a huge gap between
them okay because the word healer it
sounds a little bit like a charismatic
person a little bit afraid of Kerry
give me five years with no charisma give
me you know let me sleep I need the rest
I mean we had 70 years of uber
charismatic society give me a couple of
you give me vacation give me a couple of
boring years okay I'll pay for it
before we come to hope and despair in
the West Bank and in Gaza tell us about
the mood in Israel I mean these
elections number two perps now number
three I mean are people mobilized to go
to a third election or are they just
tired and fed up and exhausted and my
father whom you described earlier who
was among other things one of the sages
of the nation it was a funny guy I mean
it's strange to say somebody come from a
germinal region to have a sense of humor
but nonetheless okay and when they told
him listen in the street they say he
said which Street are you talking about
so tell me whom are you talking about I
will say that generally speaking the
overwhelming majority of the Israelis
are living in a better economic
conditions then the parents used to have
something good happened to the society
yes we have growing gaps between heaven
have-nots yes the social solidarity is
quite fragmented but each and every
individual is in a better shape than
used to be ten years ago so economically
there is no reason for an up for an
unrest politically speaking there is a
feeling that okay the system is system
sucks but we do not believe you more
than we believe the other because they
are all liars from Trump and down I mean
it's an international system of fake
leadership and faked confidence all the
same then it comes to the issue which is
for me is very very painful I do not I'm
not like light-hearted about it people
do not feel daily the corrupting eroding
contaminating price of the occupation I
mean it roads the society its
it's it's a malignant cancer in the soul
of the nation but on the daily life the
individual Israeli does not feel it
including the 20% non-jews non-jewish
Israelis on the daily life it is not
there and therefore you have a situation
which looks beautifully but you ask me
it's very fragile
it's a scry skyscraper built on it you
know it's the view of the Middle East
it's the dual of the israeli-palestinian
conflict and it's the deal of the
internal Israeli debates and Cold War's
and ours say that in Israel we have
today at least two Cold War's one is
between observant and none observant
what used to call in political science
church and state it is out there very
very very much alive and the other one
is between our say progressive and
conservative forces about limitations of
human rights and civil rights about the
roles of NGOs about the power of the
civil society about the centrality of
the government versus the responsibility
of the one about whether democracy is
about the voice of majority or being
sensitive to the voices of minorities as
well these tensions are out there the
daily Israeli does not feel it is not
troubled by it but it does not mean that
they are not there in fact I was going
to ask you what's more dangerous for the
society or I mean it's hard to tell I
mean the occupation and and what it does
to a society or the conflict between
religion and and let's separate between
the two though they are not necessarily
separate well most of us were born into
the paradigm of the solution between
Israel and Palestine will be the
two-state solution
now when I started my first years as a
as a peace activist and it was mid 70s
rather than early 80s I mean it took a
huge political energy to persuade people
that the two-state solution is as
possible as feasible Labour Party the
first among them who didn't even want to
hear about it was the Labour Party which
laid all the foundations for a
settlements movement and people believe
somehow that the two-state solution is a
kind of a product in the political
supermarket that has no expiration date
this is forever
now nobody ever produced a product with
no expiration day my feeling again as
for now Saturday afternoon in Vienna
that a two-state solution formula is
dead if tomorrow morning it will come
back to life I'd be the happiest to
endorse it as for now I do not see how
it happens it is not that I didn't want
it it is not that I do not feel that the
Palestinians are more than eligible and
have all the rights in the world to have
their own self-definition and
self-determination which is by the end
of the day a state of their own I do not
see how it happens and therefore the
argument is not anymore yes two states
and no two states the argument today in
Israel in Israel and I do not stand for
a side of the Palestinians here I
describe my inner society is actually de
facto between two concepts of one state
the contemporary one state which says
Israel is omnipotent li presented
between the Jordan and the Mediterranean
and there are two regimes one full of
privileges for the Jews in one
of discriminations for the Palestinians
and the other argument is I would like
to have if we have a one-state I would
like every individual between the Jordan
and the Mediterranean to have the rights
to have the same rights so is it one
state full of discriminations and two
regimes or is it one state with one
regime equal for all is it easy the
answer is no is it feasible not yet but
the same amount of energy that we had to
invest 40 40 years ago to persuade
people the two-state solution is the
solution now we have to invest with the
same people the same amount of energy to
tell them it's it expired well I'm
playing The Advocate of the abilene here
of course and I mean what anyone would
tell you is ok that's the end of the
Jewish state and the Jewish state was
recently enforced by this national law
which I mean already in Israel excludes
a little bit others for example the
group of the very very frustrated and
depressed those if I mention them the
nation No
yes tried to emphasize and deeply
institutionalize the notion of the
superiority of one element in the
society in this the Jewish element
structurally wise the Jewish Democratic
formula is as stable as a matchmaking or
lovemaking between nitroglycerin it
cannot work and I'll tell you why it is
an empty formula first with a smile then
with no smile what is a Jewish state I
was driving the other day from Jerusalem
to Tel Aviv and in front of me drove a
taxi and on the taxi was a huge bumper
sticker this taxi keeps Shabbat
so wow that's an interesting taxi what
does that minute make skadoosh or it is
holla or it goes to the holy bath before
Shabbat or goes to the Wailing Wall to
pray the text is not Jewish the taxi
driver is a state has no Jewishness
state is like it's a tool it's like a
table it's like a bottle it's an
instrument in the hands of the people so
the state cannot be Jewish unless it is
the Muslim Republic of Iran or the
Jewish Republic of the Jews unless
something built-in makes the state
secular modern instrument very Jewish
otherwise democracy has one source of
authority and this is us the humans we
are the source of authority of the
democratic process the Jewish the way it
is interpreted by the Israeli
legislature which delegated the
responsibility to interpret the Jewish
element in the Jewish and democratic to
the hands of institutions Chief
Rabbinate and individuals rabbis who are
not fully committed to the democratic
source of authority but fully committed
to the divine theocratic source of
authority creates a formula Jewish and
democratic of a state that has two
sources of authority one vertical from
top to down and one horizontal us
doesn't work no system no company no
society no organization not even a
family not even individual individual
can function with two sources of
authority and eventually there will be a
separation between church and state it
cannot function having said that I
believe that the nature of the place
should be defined by the National
communities but not necessarily by the
state which means I have no problem to
live in a state in which that you
are having their national definition and
the Palestinian Christians and Arabs
whatever a Christian Muslims have their
own and live together next to each other
can be even agreed about language can
even agree about sharing power can even
agreed about sharing sharing content and
I'll give you an example I have a 40% of
my grandchildren speak fluent Arabic the
goal the bilingual school one day couple
of a year ago came one of them back home
and I asked him you well what did you
have in school today and he said grandpa
we had a birthday I said wow that's
great
whom you celebrate this is Mohammed did
a great the birthdays have wow that's
great what did you bring him as a prison
said grandpa grandpa not Mohammed my
friend who lives around the corner
Mohammed who passed away many years ago
and I said to myself Wow
my father a graduate of the Robina
seminar in Berlin an Orthodox rabbi the
leader of the National Religious party
practicing Orthodox has a grand grandson
who celebrates the birthday of Prophet
Mohammed is it isn't it a miracle by
Jove the answer is yes it is possible to
live in a shirred spiritual society
exclusion I mean this is this is exactly
what I guess they received a book by
Moroccan an American from a Moroccan
Jewish lineage with the title when we
were Arabs I mean they live together and
of course they celebrate it also
together impacted wherever they were not
so laughs
this is normality let's say that in a
world in which Dona Tremont's to make
America great again and put in what once
the 10th century czar
back again and everyone wants the
Ottoman Empire back again and the ISIS
was the halifa back again I would like
to
they called an Arabic again between the
between the Jews and the Muslims and I
believe it's possible it's more positive
more constructive more full of
containment of each other so why not yes
I believe it's possible what I was
wondering when you explained the nation
law you defined it in a very religious
way and this is was I was wondering I
mean this law doesn't exclude
non-religious Jews so it's more a
national question I mean I don't like to
say racial question but I heard there
was an even a discussion of the Chief
Rabbinate in in Israel if you could
agree to permit T&A tests to prove
you're Jewish or not which I find I can
imagine that I'm in love with rabbis
responsible for the biological data of
of Jews in Israel you know you can
imagine that I'm in love with it okay
maybe I will
even go and study some rabbinical
studies to become the one but it's it's
outrageous I don't know how many of our
also ridiculous I mean I hope they
laughing no no no no no listen humor is
in a crane not with us okay remember we
owe a sense of humor is he's a little
bit limited recently the nation no no
whomever of you who did not hear about
it google it and have fun okay but
recently was a kind of extreme right
strategy to reframe Israel more on the
Jewish side than the Jewish Democratic
side when you say when you said in 48
Jewish it meant something like Italian
in Italy or French in France or Austria
in Austria something which is between
culture and history and citizenship and
belonging and whatever and this was more
or less than in 48 it was part of the
spirit of the time when you say Jewish
today in Israel or you say the nation
low
it's a redefined not just linguistically
but much deeper we are living today in a
situation that intellectually speaking
or historically speaking
we've never been in such a place as much
as the nation idea of the national idea
is a new one it's 200 years old is 300
years old a nation-state is as young we
in Israel have a new definition of being
a jewish national it's a fusion not even
a merger it's a total immersion
immersion of five elements never
immersed before language territory power
religion and then language I said
language territory power politics
sovereignty politics so this is so
powerful there were times in which we
spoke Hebrew but not over the entire
land sometimes we had the entire land
but we didn't have power sometimes we
had power but we were not religious some
other times we were religious but it was
in Aramaic rather than in Hebrew never
did we have all the five components
together and today if you do not speak
you Israeli Hebrew your no-goodnik
you're not for the greater Land of
Israel you're a traitor you're not
religious your Trojan horse you do not
believe in the absolute power but you
believe in a shirred society you are a
well poisoner you are left to your
no-goodnik okay and when you take all of
this together you realize that the
nation low created actually or try to
institutionalize a new entity and this
is dangerous
so I mean there are many prophets coming
from your country so also you should try
to be one no no no they don't pay well
for profits no no please know that it's
better to be a rabbi try to
we try to figure out what could happen
soon okay now mr. Trump and his
son-in-law
they are waiting with the glorious deal
of the century do you expect to be
pleased to be presented what will the
Palestinians - what about this pair on
the Palestinian side now what do I know
I mean I have a feeling that part of the
deal of the century comes from the
school of thought of zygmunt bauman the
late zygmunt bauman which is a liquid
deal of the century today they have this
tomorrow it will be a little bit
different tomorrow it will be a little
more different he doesn't know who's the
government we don't know his personal
situation we have no clue about it the
deal of the century would be on the
table only when it will be on the table
now we have to remember one thing only
the conflict is between Israel and the
Palestinians if we do not succeed to
directly negotiate with each other
because of whatever reason the political
coalition of the Prime Minister the
settlers the Hamas the weakness of Abu
Mazen whatever will it be we need an
honest broker we need an intermediate er
who is well accepted and caused by both
sides Americans to begin with a
problematic I mean American I mean both
houses giving for 70 years standing
ovations for whomever is the Prime
Minister of Israel cannot be fully
received by the Palestinian side as
honest broker it leaves us the Europeans
whatever the Europeans want as long as
Germany is what it is there is no
European
see it's my take another generation
another generation and a half did the
German system will behave differently
but as long as Germany is so much hooked
to the past and therefore driven by its
conscience rather than by its
realpolitik it means that there is no
Europe in a world in which we cannot
negotiate directly between us and the
Palestinians the Americans are one-sided
and the European are quite frustrated
whatever deal will be put on the table I
see it as a very very difficult to
negotiate even if it's the best deal in
town the real investment should be about
the manner and the modalities of the
negotiation rather than the content and
there I see a lot of problems not
impossible not impossible
but I would pay a lot of attention to
this side of who is the mediator and how
rather than the content itself do you
expect I mean okay Netanyahu succeeds in
forming the government will he make
through his promises about annexation
it's very difficult to know you know
Netanyahu if he is a 1 if I give him
credit for one thing our giving credit
for two things the first one is he never
stands for his promises and that's a
real it's a real virtue I mean you need
a special character to give promise of
the promise make people believe you time
and again deceive them time and again
and get reelected I mean these are
genius so the promise talking big them
be promised let's see the other side is
which is much more important Netanyahu
unlike quite a number of our previous
Prime Minister
is a well-read person very bright
intellectual historically driven he has
a strategy not all of it is tactics only
his strategy is I will say very much
Samuel Huntington that there is a clash
of civilization between children of
light which has us judeo-christian
democracies and them them are the dark
side of the universe billions some point
some Muslims all of them versus all of
us this is the drive which drove George
W Bush to Iraq on a democratic crusade
which brought the entire middle is down
to its knees and all the world order of
the middle is simply crushed because of
this notion a Netanyahu will always will
align with the more conservative
elements in the West in general in the
United States of America in particular
and the more conservative the American
system goes the more conservative will
he go to the corner of a van Jellicle
Christian fundamentalist if not more in
order to keep Israel in this camp this
is actually his true historic mission
and therefore for Netanyahu from his
psyche if I understand it correctly from
reading his books and listening very
careful to the deep notion to the to the
inner voice of his messages for him
compromising a piece of land is not just
compromising the historical great land
of Israel is a compromise that
eventually might lead to a domino effect
that will affect the entire West because
we are from his point of view the
outposts of the Western civilization's
in the Middle East and therefore to see
him compromising on the Land of Israel
is very difficult on the other hand
he's a prime minister that has not too
many wars under his belt and like Olmert
and like Perez and like Robin unlike
Barack he is very reluctant to declare a
conflict with the region or with the
world and therefore my speculation is
that between his arch-conservative
strategy and our tactical reluctance
from a conflict he will maintain the
status quo so I should invite you to
also ask questions and I see a lot of
handsome we start here and there doesn't
you mentioned you about being castrated
by Germany driven by bad conscience and
not by we are politic maybe you could
say some more sentences about the
situation and about the expectations you
would have expectations for myself or my
expectations concerning a European
policy that's positive it's cool what is
your name please what is your name
France
at the era in which in where I was less
naive than I am today today thank God
I'm a neo naive but at a time in which I
was cynical my expectation was that one
day the European leadership will swallow
its pride and talk with the Americans
and the Americans were swallow their
pride and talk with the Europeans and
together they will come with a one-world
Western world policy not so much for us
though I love to enjoy it but
understanding that the Middle East as
much as I don't like the term bTW
because it is so colonial it is as if
somebody sitting in London and looks to
the east the Middle East I take it
somebody is sitting in Bombay and he
looks West we are the Middle West but
it's a very colonial positioning but my
feeling is that we are the outskirts of
your system in Europe for me and the
West for me and not just continents
their value systems in Europe since the
end of the Second World War I can take
it much earlier with the disruptions of
both wars since I was Serena Johnson on
expanded not just a physical met Raj or
kilometres of mileage of Europe but the
value system up until 2008 which is a
different crisis all over the world and
my expectation was wow if we want to
promote the European Western values into
our region we need some tranquility out
there so please export to the region
more of the human rights and civil
rights of your way of life rather than
weapons in army and military industries
and when you make a list of the ten
leading
best human right societies in the world
in the world and the ten leading
military exports in the world you will
see many similarities and I say why do
you export the wrong product for us keep
your arm your arms for yourself and give
me your civil rights and human rights
not the other way around
and please don't see my country as they
as the military base of the outpost of
the Western system in the Middle East I
don't want to be all this for you I want
to be something else so these were my
expectations as for today it's very
complicated I don't see one Europe I
don't see one Middle East and I don't
see one problem only and among the many
problems I see in the Middle East
fortunately or unfortunately it's in the
eyes of the beholder the
israeli-palestinian conflict is not the
most burning one in the eyes of the
world it's an opportunity to say wow
know that people do not pay much of
attention let's solve it and on the
other hand is it's a missed opportunity
because nobody pays attention so nobody
is motivated my expectation is that
strategically speaking and I'm sorry for
what I say but I'm minute seriously that
in 100 years time we shall have a
solution and I'll tell you what I mean
and I'm serious about it if I would have
told you ten days after the six days
warm June 15 60 seven ask your friends
how long would it would it go all of
this occupation out there they will say
a month somebody more moderate will say
three months
Gudrun was a brilliant analysis of the
Middle East we say come on you
and this that six-month but if I told
you in 67 it will go 52 years from you
out of your mind
it will never happen that a state which
is part of the Western coalition a
democracy like Israel will be permitted
to occupy another people that's against
their will deprive them from all of
their democratic democratic rights we
the west we shall never allow it
now we're 52 years into it and I'm fed
up with tactics give me a strategy for
the next 50 years I live the last 50
years of occupation
I want a slow responsible button-up
construction that will end up by a
solution not for a tactical deal
tomorrow a visit yesterday and
manipulation the day after yesterday I'm
not interested in this anymore I want a
world strategy original strategy and a
process towards it these are my
expectations but I think you didn't
answer a Frances question regarding
Germany or the DT if it was completely
clear what you mean by Germany cannot
act like okay let's put let's let's call
the elephant into the room and put it on
the table and let's have fun
the current generation in Germany the
current leadership generation of let's
say the Martin Schultz's and the is ma
Gabrielle and the and the Angela Merkel
and whomever is still a generation
molded by the Holocaust and by the
horrors and the atrocities of the Second
World War in a big picture will say that
all of us in this room were born into
the era of responsible politics and
leaders Eastern Bloc Western bloc Europe
America even middle-east even Russia
were responsible their own way we are
now in a transformation period in which
in more and more and more places leaders
are taking a new leadership role they
don't know anymore the history the
history is far away the responsibilities
coming of the horrors and atrocities of
the last centuries and looking for them
like the Mongols or the Turks at the
gates of Vienna faraway history totally
redeemed from politics of responsibility
and we are living in an era of
irresponsible politics in this
transformation Germany because of its
power economy centrality stability plays
a huge role in Europe as long as the
German politics is connected to the era
of responsibility which is the outcome
of the first and the second world war it
will not move a millimeter beyond what
is doing today visibly Israel some will
say rightly so some will say not rightly
so I'm not here to judge I'm here to
look at it to analyze it but once the
next generation will take over and you
will hear more and more voices say well
yeah Holocaust was not nice Second World
War was not nice but it's not us it's
too far away we don't know even even our
our part parents were not there our
grandparents were not there we never met
anybody who was there it's for history
and at the same time say the German way
of life like the European Way of life is
supporting whomever is like us tolerant
containing civil rights centered etc etc
and whomever is not a democracy we do
not support so if Israel will
deteriorate toward less and less and
less and less democratic behaviors and
at the same time more and more and more
people in Germany will not know the
responsibility
the past we shall face a day in which
the bank of credit from which Israel is
borrowing so generously would be
bankrupt and I believe we're very close
to it your name please do you hear me
now my name is Nadine psychic Mustafa
I'm a half Palestinian half Lebanese
very fortunate to live in Austria for
more than 40 years I'm actually amazed
to meet an Israeli with views like yours
I have to say because it is very rare
for me to hear you slug yours a couple
of weeks back or was a couple of months
back I think you dr. Hajra you invited
Hanan Ashrawi to come to Vienna and she
spoke about a relatively similar topic
at the billabong Institute I think it
was and she was it was a very bleak she
had a very bleak view and frankly I
remember going home I had my parents who
had come with me and actually were quite
pleased to see you and to meet her again
but it was very depressive and frankly
what you say today in in my view is also
a little bit depressive as seen from the
eyes of the Palestinians because I see
that we are really relegated at the to
the outposts of relevance I still don't
understand how people in Israel can
actually let's say we have talked a lot
about the Israelis to the end Israeli
view how do you see what is the outlook
of the Palestinians actually in Israel
on their current situation how would
somebody who's 20 years old envision
their life for the next 30 years for
instance without despairing I want to
add a question I'm very grateful for
this question in for example in this
vision of a bi-national state or
whatever I mean that if different role
models what's what what would heaven
happen for with Gaza with the Gaza Strip
you are sorry I'm sorry there first I
really hate to upset you I mean I didn't
come here to ruin another afternoon of
yours okay so let me let me share with
you a smile but it's a serious one okay
we used to ask my mom my mom was born in
Hebron bill Halil and she she she didn't
have easy life she lost her mother when
she was six she was half the family was
massacred in 29 in Hebron then later on
she lost my eldest our elder sister I
mean she had difficult life but she was
a very very optimistic person she was a
nice full of humor full of happiness and
one day we asked her mom tell me what
are you are you an optimist or a
pessimist
she said me of course I'm an optimist
today is much better than tomorrow so I
would like to offer you something which
is not that kind of optimism okay the
situation I'm sorry for the museum and
for the evm and for Vienna and Doisneau
Kreisky and no maverick the situation is
 up I'm sorry okay it's an awful
situation still
and this still is crucial many people
are still in the business of counting
states one state Tuesday's five-stage 22
states Federation Canton's whatever it
is I stopped counting states
I count rights and I believe the minute
the conflict will move from state
counting to rights counting we have an
opening for a different conversation
entirely I do not go to Gaza because it
is forbidden for us I go a lot to
Ramallah though it is forbidden
okay twice twice a month I'm in Ramallah
and and I listen I listen what's going
on there and I listen to the younger
generation and I listen to some of the
intellectuals and the businessmen etc
there is a deep profound understanding
among at least the intelligentsia elite
layer that violence leads nowhere
doesn't impact the Israelis just give
them another excuse not to move and in a
kind of a very tragic boomerang effect
comes back and impacts negatively the
inner fabric of the Palestinian society
and I hear more and more and more voices
saying the following finger a we don't
care they care deeply but we do not care
rhetorically what will be the
manifestation of it we want to vote we
understand democracy we learn democracy
from you Israelis and we understand that
the notion of the democratic idea is
that it's impossible that there will be
an individual who doesn't have the right
to vote who will impact his or her life
we want to vote now I believe that the
minute that the Palestinian leadership
beat Abu Mazen or beat whomever will
come to the Israeli Prime Minister and
say mr. prime minister
here are my keys these are the keys to
the MU Katara
okay it's all yours I want one thing
only I'm here not as a subcontractor for
your security I'm here not as a
subcontractor for the occupation I'm
here not to give European and other
money to hundreds of thousands of
Palestinian employees I'm here for my
people my people want to vote tell me
were to the Knesset in Jerusalem or to
the Majlis in Ramallah tell me when tell
me where the minute this discourse will
happen it's a whole new ballgame open
something very private
we Israelis because of whatever reasons
historic and existential reasons we know
what to do with violence the abuse child
became a violent parent and we feel
comfortable in a violent environment in
a way so do the Palestinians the one
thing that I personally believe will
bring down the Israeli system is a
non-violent civil disobedience we don't
have an answer for it here we are at the
beginning of 2017 I have a meeting with
my dear beloved friend Abu Mazen and he
said the room what are we going to do in
the celebration of the commemoration of
the June 67
I said yeah hey here it is here we are
the 5th of June 2017 you wake up in the
morning you dress up very handsomely you
eat a good breakfast you go to the Moo
cotta 8 o clock in the morning you open
the doors and you start walking slowly
because you're not a young man anymore
from the mikata 5 kilometer south toward
Columbia which is the checkpost
you walk you don't say a word people
from all corners from all the allies all
the little streets will join you and you
march you come to the fence to the check
post you sit down and you say I'm
sitting here I do not eat I'm fasting
hunger strike till the Israeli Prime
Minister comes here and negotiate with
me the fate of both nations and tens of
thousands of Palestinians will sit next
to you and we hundreds of thousands of
Israelis will sit with you at the other
side of the wall and the world will come
down he thought and felt and thought and
then smiled his beautiful loving smile
and said and what about dinner
what about dinner and that was the end
of the conversation
now it's bitter it's painful but I
believe that's the key and it's possible

but of course you know what Netanyahu
would tell you he would say we want to
negotiate they don't want to negotiate
listen the the main problem in Apple any
political limbo and you covered more
political Limbo's that I were in any I
mean whatever I have is a tiny little
thing to your limb both pedia you know
that we whenever we try to predict the
future we think about the present we say
ah the future will be exactly as today
and I believe that what is needed is two
different paradigms a different
paradigms of the value and a different
part I'm of the imagination the minute
you think differently is say wow it's
possible hey who said it's impossible
why because yesterday it was impossible
because the day somebody doesn't want it
Sakhi slowly but surely let's change the
attitude till eventually we live a
reality which is beyond petition but
it's about sharing we don't have to
share immediately with the Palestinians
the nuclear arsenal of Israel let's say
we do this day five can we share
infrastructure can we share environment
can we share Natural Resources can we
share Health System can we share roads
can we share education system can which
civil rights monitoring okay give me
five years of what is only then we
should move on the Israeli will be the
chief of stuff the Palestinian will be
the head of the police some power Wow
a Palestinian having the police go and
order and ever thought is possible let's
see how it works
could you ever imagine could you ever
imagine in Germany a female counselor
wow she's good
I mean she is the ayran counselor I mean
the second one you just need some
imagination for it and all of the sudden
you have a different paradigm and that's
the offer people like myself I'm not in
practical politics anymore I have the
right to have intellectual curiosity and
intellectual imagination and offer it
for people as a political food for
thought I mean we have to close but I
think this is a perfect point to close I
mean we could not have chosen a better
moment because we are not closing on
this pair but we are closing on hope now
true thank you very much for the measure
thank you very much




## Keywords:
