---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Hk59luySfg
---

# Video
Backwards Induction Game Tree
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Hk59luySfg)

## Transcript:
i'm going to show you how to solve a
game tree
using backwards induction
and this is basically just a way of
setting up a sequential moves game where
one player moves the other observes
their move and then makes their own move
etc etc
and this sort of format the game tree
format is also referred to as extensive
form now first of all i just want to set
up this particular game we have three
players in this game jenny voldemort and
harry and jenny is deciding should i run
or should i hide voldemort is observing
what she does and deciding should i
bring my pet snake along with me or not
bring my pet snake and then harry is
observing what both of them did and then
at that point he's deciding do i bring
my cloak or do i not bring my cloak
that's the game and of course we can
number our players from left to right
just like we always do player one player
two player three
and that allows us to interpret the
final payoffs as player ones payoff
player two's payoff and player threes
payoff
where
i've color coded this but usually you're
not going to get the nice color coding
so let's get started all right there's
actually one thing i want to do before i
start and i'm doing this just to make
some points
so if jenny is looking forward into this
game and she's looking at all of her
payoffs
she's going to see this 25 payoff down
here and say oh i would love to get to
that 25 payoff
and same thing voldemort is going to
look um through this and he's going to
say
looking at my payoffs i really want to
get this 25 payoff and harry of course
will do the same thing now the point i'm
making about this is that these players
actually have no control over getting to
the payoffs they want and you'll
understand that in a second so what's
the process process of backwards
induction is to start at the end of the
game
where
we're going to solve every last node
first so this is the last node since
there's no other decisions after it and
we're going to look at this node and ask
ourselves if harry finds himself at this
node
what decision will he make and we can
see that if he brings the cloak he gets
a payoff of negative 5 if he doesn't
bring the cloak he gets a payoff of 12
he prefers the 12. so if we get to this
node we know we will never reach this
this outcome so we can actually cross it
out
so
well actually jenny and voldemort also
don't like that but we know even if they
loved that even if jenny had a payoff of
100 up here
she would never be able to reach that
node because we know if harry gets to
this node he is not going to bring his
cloak and that's the key logic here so
we'll solve every single end node which
in this case is all harry's if harry
ends up here he's going to look at the
negative 10 his payoff if he chooses
cloak and he'll look at the eight his
payoff if he doesn't bring his cloak he
prefers the payoff of eight so he
crosses so so everybody is going to
cross out that
end node as being something that will
never be reached
and then we do the same thing for his
other two nodes
all right now we have four end nodes
left in the game and we can move one
step backwards so we're going to move to
voldemort's decision and voldemort is
going to say if i choose to bring my
snake
then we're going to end up here for sure
my payoff is negative 15.
if i choose not to bring my snake we
know we're going to end up down here and
my payoff is negative 9. he prefers the
negative 9 more than the negative 15
so
he will choose not to bring a snake if
he ends up at this node meaning this
node will never be reached regardless of
how much jenny likes that payoff of 15.
and then we do the same thing down here
if voldemort brings his snake he knows
he'll get a payoff of 18 because we're
going to end up here if he doesn't bring
his snake he knows we're going to end up
down here with a payoff of negative 5.
so if voldemort finds himself at this
node he will choose to bring his snake
meaning this end node will never be
reached even though this was actually
jenny's favorite end node she knows if
she uses backwards induction that even
if she chooses hyde there's never going
to be a situation where voldemort will
choose not to bring a snake voldemort
will bring his snake in response to her
hide down here so now we're left with
two possible end nodes and we move back
one step to the beginning of the game to
jenny's choice and she's deciding do i
run or do i hide and if she runs she
knows for sure based on voldemort's
decision and harry's decision if they're
using backwards induction that will end
up over here and she'll get a payoff of
10.
if she chooses to hide then she knows
exactly how things are going to play out
she knows voldemort will choose to bring
a snake harry will choose to bring his
cloak and her payoff will be negative
five in that case
so she likes the 10 better than the
negative five so she's not going to
choose to hide and therefore the
solution to this game is for ginny to
run voldemort to not bring his snake and
for harry to not bring his cloak
and this will be the final payoffs for
the three players in that game let's do
one more example all right this is going
to be an example of capture the flag
where there are two players left and
you're trying to decide
uh what to do what your move right now
should be given that the other player is
going to observe your move and respond
so the three options are
you play defense you just sort of hold
your fort and sort of
try to follow them to stop them from
coming in you guard your flag or you
play offense and the other player has
the same three options so of course
we're going to solve this using
backwards induction by identifying the
nodes at the very end of the game that
lead to the payoffs
and seeing what will the player do in
each of these cases
so if player 2 is sitting here player
looks at the possible options and the
payoffs here are going to be 0 10 and 0
so if you choose defense then player 2
will definitely choose offense
so we will never reach these
and
once again if you guard
if you as player one guard
we know using backwards induction that
player two will look at these three
options and between the zero the nine
and the zero
player two is going to choose offense
and so we will never reach these two
situations if you choose to guard the
other player will
choose offense
and then at this one we can look at the
payoffs and notice that player two is
choosing between the one the five and
the two player two chooses the five
that's offense
and therefore we will never reach these
so we actually noticed that offense is a
dominant strategy for the other player
now you have to decide your best
strategy
so if you choose defense you get
negative eight if you guard your
expected value is negative four if you
choose offense your expected value is
five so
the best of those three is of course the
five
and what's going to happen is both
players will play offense
now the actual payoffs at the end here
are going to depend on which of these
last two players is a better runner
which of the last two players is
better at sort of sneaking up on the
other and running around them
like the payoffs are determined by the
actual skill set of the two people
involved and maybe also the terrain or
something like that
but in any case that's backwards
induction that's two examples of how you
use backwards induction to solve a game
tree it's an excellent tool for
sequential moves games in game theory


## Keywords:
