---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fK1gWMgkCO0
---

# Video
Battle of the Sexes in Game Theory
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fK1gWMgkCO0)

## Transcript:
what is the battle of the sexes in Game
Theory and this is one of the classic
games where we have a specific story in
a weird scenario a little bit weird but
it represents broadly other scenarios
you're going to observe in the real
world if you can recognize these Game
Theory patterns
so the setup for the classic game is you
have a man and a woman in a relationship
they want to be doing the same thing and
they would much prefer to do something
together than than separately but the
two possible options ballet and football
the woman prefers ballet the man prefers
football so if we solve this this
situation like if we're at ballet they
both like this better than being alone
but the woman really likes it and the
man just sort of likes it whereas the
reverse is true on football now let's
solve for Nash equilibrium
and we can see that we have two Nash
equilibrium but that one person prefers
one equilibrium the other person prefers
the other equilibrium and that the off
equilibrium scenarios are worse for both
players than either flash equilibrium
and those are going to be the three
traits of a bottle of the Sexes scenario
so let me write those down
now if we look at this second trait the
fact that each player has a different
favorite Nash equilibrium what that
means is that there's actually kind of a
winner and a loser and what makes this
really interesting is that this is a
Cooperative game the two players are
trying to cooperate with each other to
avoid these off equilibrium each person
going off and doing their own thing but
at the same time while there's
cooperation there's also competition
because there's kind of a winner and a
loser between the Cooperative outcomes
and you see this all over the place for
example in any scenario where you have a
group of people who are making a
decision and they know they have to work
together for that decision but some
people have one opinion about what they
should do other people have another
opinion about what they should do
um it's this exact setup where there
will be a winner and a loser even though
there's cooperation deeply built into
that game
and I think sometimes economists will
think of cooperation and competition as
opposites like Polar Opposites this
really shows us actually in a lot of
scenarios where there is cooperation
there's also competition going on and in
a lot of situations where there's
competition there may actually be
cooperation as well and how those two
things are intermeshed is really really
important
and then of course I do want to point
out that if you just go with the first
two traits of this game two Nash and
each player has a different preferred
Nash that's actually not enough to get
you a Battle of the Sexes game because
the game of chicken which is a different
Classic Game Theory setup actually meets
these first two criteria so if you want
to distinguish it from the game of
chicken you need this third criteria
which are that the off equilibrium are
actually worse for both players than
either Nash meaning they both really
want to avoid these off equilibria and
in Game of chicken that's not
necessarily going to be the case so the
off equilibrium does matter it matters
for how games play out
um and that's just a quick overview of
Battle of the Sexes and Game Theory


## Keywords:
