---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RIUhOICscg4
---

# Video
Becoming a Multidimensional Thinker - Ken Wilber
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RIUhOICscg4)

## Transcript:
in Western Philosophy for example we
have the good the true and the Beautiful
and everybody's heard of the good the
true and the Beautiful and they're
always mentioned as three but why are
they three they're three because they
each represent a first or second or
third person

perspective
okay Ken welcome to the
show nice to be here to get started one
of the things I wanted to ask you is
when and how did you realize that you
were developing a theory of everything
and was this your intention whenever you
left juk
University yeah
um it wasn't really a a a terribly
self-conscious
desire or goal but ever since I was
about
15 or sometimes even earlier I I mean I
remember in like their fourth or fifth
grade when we started getting report
cards I got all
A's and I was looking at it and I was
going well that's interesting is
geography mathematics chemistry biology
and and they're all A's but why are they
all separate I mean why do I have an A
in this thing and an A in this thing and
then what's the difference between this
thing and this thing they should all fit
together and I remember that becoming a
really burning question for me is how do
they all fit
together and as I continued going
through school I continued asking that
question and then I remember um M I got
on to studying developmental
psychology and that is now it's it's a
very recognized discipline very
widespread there are dozens of
major modelers and contributors to Child
and Adolescent and adult behavior and
what they all found is that everybody
goes through a series of stages of
development and of course they each give
them a different name so there's like
preconventional conventional
postconventional uh Chan gster probably
gave them some of the most colorful
names he called them the archaic stage
the magic stage the Mythic stage the
rational stage the pluralistic stage and
the integral or integrated
stage and and the more I looked at that
the more it became a obvious that each
one of those stages of development had a
different
worldview it looked at the world
differently so it wasn't just that
chemistry was different from biology it
was different from algebra it was
different from music it was that each of
those went through an archaic stage a
magic stage a Mythic stage and when they
were at those stages they all looked
essentially similar so if you had a
magic View the world and Magic is a very
very early stage it's right after the
archaic stage so it's a fairly primitive
stage and at that stage the mind is not
yet fully differentiated from the world
around it so the word you use to
represent a thing is not clearly
differentiated from the thing itself so
if you change the word it's sometimes
called word magic then you actually
change the
F so in in Voodoo for example if you
make a doll that looks like a person and
you stick a pen in the doll which
represents the person so it's a word or
symbol for the person and you stick a
pen in the doll you'll actually make the
person sick that's what you believe
that's what word magic believes
so whether you're doing algebra or
chemistry or biology or history and
you're at the magic stage you'll tend to
use you word
magic and so when you put all of those
stages together you got all of the
worldviews that were
possible and that struck me as
profoundly important because here is a
way you could see how everything
actually fit into one holistic big
picture
um and when I came up with that I became
sort of semi obsessed with developmental
models and I actually did a book called
integral
psychology where I took over a hundred
developmental models from around the
world and I put them in charts in the
back of the book and what's amazing is
you can see each of the stages and how
they resemble each of the other models
version of the stages so one might call
the Mythic stage conformist another
would call it
conventional another would call it
concrete
operational um and these were you can
just see a hundred similar stages in the
back of the book in these charts um so
that that sort of started dawn on me
when I was like 14 or
15 and then right at that same time or
when I was maybe 15 to 16
I had a
profound Spiritual Awakening uh
Enlightenment experience what Zen calls
a
Satori and it was really sort of new to
me but the essence of a sator is that
you feel you're one with everything
you're looking
at and so you're one with the entire
universe and that's the classic mystical
experience a Oneness with the ground of
all being Christians of course call it a
Oneness with God or more commonly
godhead because they don't want godhead
or this ground of all being confused
with a particular Jehovah person that's
clearly a myth like Zeus or Apollo or AF
Di and they all live in this place
called Olympus and Jehovah all live he
lives in this place called heaven but
that's all nonsense and so the mystics
generally speak about godhead which is a
head of God oread of that Mythic
Ness um and so I eventually ran across
this writer called DT Suzuki who was a
writer from Japan and he was a basic Zen
fairly accomplished Zen student or even
Zen master himself and so he wrote books
like with titles like essays in Zen
Buddhism which was a three volume set of
books a quite substantial treatment of
Zen Buddhism and as I read that I kept
running across this word
sator and I of course this the whole
concept was new to me even though i'
recently had a sator like experience
what DT Suzuki was telling me is that
that was a real experience and that was
the entire aim of Zen Buddhism is you
practice you meditated to get a Satori
and you weren't a real Zen Buddhist
until you had a
Satori and so I realized hey I'm a Zen
Buddhist I I get this this now makes
sense um
and I then looked at the Zen models of
what they themselves were doing and the
very famous one is called the 10 xan Ox
hering pictures and there s the ax
represents your real mind what Suzuki
roshi not to be confused with DT Suzuki
Suzuki roshi was a very famous zen
master who came to America and started
the Zen Center of San Francisco and he
wrote books like Zen M beginers mind he
was enormously influential and had a
tremendous number of students including
myself
um and but
um the 10 Zen oxf foring pictures the ox
represents what Suzuki roshi call
bigm which is the mind that's one with
everything and there's only one big mind
in the entire world you have the same
big mind as I have it's the same as
saying your real self is the same as my
real self we're both have this witness
that looks at when we're aware of
ourself like right now if you're aware
of yourself I'm aware of myself that's a
small self that's the self you can look
at that's a self you can be aware of
that's an object but it's not the real
subject it's like who is looking at this
small self who is aware of this small
self of mine well that's a big self
that's a real self that's a Brahman
Atman that's God and wow that's my big M
and when I realize that I've got a
Satori and I'm an honest gods and
Buddhists I mean this is all working out
great and so but I made a big mistake
stake at that point because I just
looked at the 10 stages of the 10 Ox
herting pictures and I confused those
with the stages of development that the
developmental psychologists use so I saw
archaic magic Mythic rational
pluralistic and integral as being a
version of the 10 Zen oering
pictures but that's not it at all so for
example the a e Zen oerting picture is
just an empty circle it's a nothingness
it's it's a vast void a vast emptiness
and that's a very high Zen achievement
to realize as Buddhism has the Ultimate
Reality is an emptiness it's not it's
void of any particular thing but it
includes all things it's the ground of
all being and that itself can't be
qualified IED or characterized it's
empty because any word that you and I
might use is makes sense only in terms
of its
opposite but godhead doesn't have an
opposite it's all
inclusive and so you can't even use the
word all inclusive because that even
makes sense only if it's contrasted with
all exclusive and that God's not all
exclusive he's all inclusive except he's
not all inclusive is isn't really an
inclusive enough term so the best thing
is to have no ideas about God at all and
then you just rest in your pure
awareness which is your big one
so
I had written several books up to that
point um as I aged and went on into my
early
20s and when I was 23 I sat down to
actually write my first book and it was
called the spectrum of
Consciousness and the idea was that each
of these stages of Developmental
Psychology was like a band in a spectrum
they were different colors of the same
stuff the same electromagnetic Source
but they were expressing themselves
through different worldviews or
different
colors and I strangely managed to
avoid making any comparison with all of
the mystical Traditions all of which I
found had models that were very similar
to the 10 Zen Ox hering pictures because
all of them had the same goal which is
discovery of your true self of godhead
of bigmind of Oneness with the absolute
entire universe and I I was astonished
to find that just like all the
developmental models psychological
models were similar virtually all of the
same stages in the mystical Traditions
were similar so we had two different
things going on here and I would
eventually call the mystical Traditions
the traditions of waking up and the
developmental psychology traditions the
traditions of growing
up so that was when I first really
started using the term integral and I
referred to what I was doing as integral
psychology because what I was doing was
pointing out the importance of the fact
that human beings wherever we look
around the world and for however long we
look in history have always had two
different versions of going up or waking
up
and if you look at the mystical
religious Traditions which are almost
always the first versions of the
religion because a waking up experience
is what's known as a first person
experience and the first person means um
the person who is speaking the Viewpoint
of the person who is speaking so that's
an i a me a mind something like that
then there's a second person which is
the person being spoken to so that's a
pronoun like you or thou um and then
third person is the person or thing
being spoken
about so that's a he she they them it or
its
and as I was writing this
um book at that time which was sort of
my major breakthrough book and it was
called sex ecology spirituality and it's
a monster it's a big 800 page monster of
a book um but that's why I started to
realize that there was a difference
between waking up and growing up and
they didn't really fit together at all
you could be at virtually any stage of
waking up and be at any any stage of
growing up they they just
didn't grow together they were usually
quite different most people in the west
H can be highly developed in the model
of growing up so they can be at a
rational pluralistic or even integral
stage of development but virtually none
of them have had a mystical
experience they haven't gotten very far
in the T and hurting pictures um they
haven't found the ox they their Big
M
um and
so I
started at that point I would
get
um I noticed that these stages when it
came to the growing up model that the
stages of growing
up had um
well there were at least four different
models generally different models of
growing
up and it turns out that they were
referring to first person second person
and third person viewpoints of the
stages of growing
up and that's what I eventually called
the four quadrants and now I recognized
what the four quadrants were as I was
looking at all these different models of
growing
up they somehow sounded like they were
vaguely going talking about the same
stages but they were somehow really
different like archaic magic Mythic
rational pluralistic integral that sort
of sounds like an interior something
that you would think or a world view
would have but there were several stages
in third person that were like um geard
linsky's stages of technoeconomic
development and these are very real
stages they the archaic stage the
hunting and Gathering stage the
Horticultural stage which means
agriculture done with a simple digging
stick or a hoe then there's the agrarian
stage which is agriculture done with a
heavy animal drawn plow and that came
considerably after the Horticultural
stage and then after The Agrarian stage
was the Industrial stage and then after
the industrial stage was the
informational stage now those are all
very real stages and I included them in
my overall scheme but they weren't at
all the same as archaic magic Mythic
rational uh pluralistic or integral
um and so I started to take each
developmental scheme that I became aware
of I would write one of them down on
those big yellow sheets of legal paper
and I would spread them out on the floor
and I eventually
had basically a hundred of these Yellow
Pages spread all over my apartment floor
I mean just covered in and each day I
would walk by and I'd say okay what's
the how are these related to each other
because they even though they're very
different some of them are are very
different
sounding like Horticultural agrarian
industrial informational and archaic
magic Mythic rational um they do seem
that they're covering similar types of
of advancement or
Evolution um and one day it just dawned
on me that
several of these were dealing with an
individual
interior um like archaic magic Mythic
rational pluralistic integral those turn
out to be the stages of for example
cognitive growth that we go through and
these were later verified by P studies
and he called them natural intelligence
pre-operational intelligence concrete
operational intelligence formal
operational intelligence and then
systemic
intelligence um and so as I looked at
all of my Hundred pages about half of
them were stages of interior development
and half of them are stages of exterior
development like our agricultural Styles
but those weren't to be confused with
the same identical stages is our
interior psychological iCal or cognitive
growth and so that gave me the first
major distinction which was inside
versus outside or interior versus
exterior and when I finally got the
second set of opposites that gave me
four quadrants this
interior uh I I wrote them all down on
one sheet of paper and they turned out
to be just four
quadrants like that and the upper the
leftand quadrants were all interior
stages and the right hand quadrants are
all exterior
stages and about a month later I was
still looking at these because I I
wasn't just happy with them being
divided into two major different groups
and it dawned me that about half of them
we're also dealing with a singular or
individual developmental hon what I
called holon um by that time I was using
author
kesler's invented the term holon and he
said everything in the universe is a
hoon and a whole a holon is a hole
that's also a part of a larger hole so a
whole letter is part of a whole word
whole word is part of a whole sentence
whole sentence is part of a whole
paragraph whole paragraph is part of a
whole book or magazine or something like
that um so this gave me four
quadrants the upper quadrants were all
singular or individual holons the upper
left was
an interior of a single organism an
individual organism so a single human
being or or single dog or single worm it
didn't matter that was represented by
the upper left quadrant and that was
where um gser terms primarily apply an
individual human being goes through
stages that are first archaic then magic
and word magic then Mythic Zeus Apollo
and so on then rational mathematics
logic algebra and so on and then
pluralistic which is a
postmodern
multiplistic set of worldviews and then
those are drawn together at the highest
stage the integral
stage um
so the upper right was
the objective individual view of a
single ho on so you those went from
quarks to atoms to
molecules to cells to
multicellular animals and that was
entire tree of life going from
amphibians to fish to reptiles to
mammals to humans primates to humans and
then humans themselves on their upper
left went through AR AIC magic
Mythic rational pluralistic and integral
forms of
development um and then the lower
quadrants were the collective or the
plural
so
um so you'd have like systems theory
would work with the lower right quadrant
because that's the plural of atoms
molecules cells organisms and so on they
come together into
like multicellular animals come together
in ecosystems and they always exist
there's always a plural every individual
comes together with under other
individuals of its type and so atoms
come together to form molecules
molecules come together to form multi-
molecular cells cells come together to
form multicellular organisms organisms
come together
into families families come together
into species groups and so on so that's
the lower right and then the lower left
is the plural of the individual
Interiors
so that's what we call culture is a
multi
listic collection of our individual
interiors that comes together to form an
inner subjective
cultural
condition um so that's also any group
contains an i and a u so that's a second
person the upper left is the first
person the interior of an i or me or
mine and then lower left includes second
person you and both the right hand
quadrants are exterior objective its so
a single atom is an it um a single
ecosystem a single planet um planets
form
when large
molecular surfaces come together and
then they form a huge planet and then
planets come together into solar systems
and solar systems come together in the
galaxies and so on um so
that was when I actually had a picture
of what a truly integral framework
looked like and I thought it was very
interesting that they did represent
first person singular second person it's
also singular but I and you come
together to form a we or an us or an
ours and then third person is an it or a
he or she or they or them or an it or an
its and
um I thought that was interesting
because these two different Polar
Opposites the inside and the outside the
interior and the exterior and the
singular or individual and the plural or
Collective all of those first second
third person pronouns were present in
every major language
that humans develop because words were
representing real
things and so the pronouns were first
person pronoun second person pronoun and
third person pronouns and every language
had examples of all of those and of
course there you could go to fourth
person and there's actually Jane
linger who has developed the most widely
used model of developmental psychology
which she calls ego
development and
she actually found that each of her
major stages of development she has
seven eight or nine of these stages each
of them added a another person
perspective so she has first through
seventh person perspectives that are
each coming off of one of these seven
major stages of growing
up um and that gave it a real sense of
universality for me because I could see
that these three or four quadrants and
because both of the exterior quadrants
are exterior its there sometimes the
singular upper right quadrant of atoms
molecules
cells um are treated as
the same third person it so whether you
have a planet or a star or
Galaxy that's generally they're all
treated as third person its so I
sometimes call those three the first
second third person The Big Three
because they're found everywhere in
Western Philosophy for example we have
the good the true and the Beautiful and
everybody's heard of the good the true
and the Beautiful and they're always
mentioned as three but why are they
three the three because they each
represent a first or second or third
person perspective so the good
represents how am I supposed to morally
treat you the second person so it's the
first to second person relationship so
that's the lower left quadrant the true
represents General speaking objective
truth of Science and science mostly
deals with the right-and quadrants
things that can look at objectively and
impartially and therefore
truthfully and the Beautiful beauty is
in the eye the first person of the
perspective and so the good the true and
the Beautiful are the second person the
third person and the first person
realities and that really sort of
started bringing the whole world
together for me because every one of
those perspectives were found in every
single language that we had ever
developed and the languages that we
developed were because we had different
words that represented real things so a
tree represented a real tree a mountain
represents a real mountain and so on and
a first person pronoun represents a real
existing reality called I we or I me or
mine and that's in the singular version
and then its plural version is this
inner subjective cultural we or us or
ours um and then third person it
represents
any truly object as an object separated
from a subject so every right hand hold
on is separated from the left left hand
hole on but all
hoons and this is
a assumption I came to make and is part
of integral Theory every holon has four
quadrants or the big three so according
to Whitehead for example even an atom
has an interior which whad call
prehension which means feeling so every
atom has a small ounce of Consciousness
a small small amount of feeling or small
amount of awareness even a quark and an
atom have an interior of
prehension so each of them have a first
person and they are themselves third
person its with a firsters
prehension and naturally atoms come
together they come together to form
molecules so they have a s their senses
of prehension are drawn together
together and so a molecule is a plural
of an
atom and so the atoms individual eye
prehensions are
interwoven in a big molecular
wave um so that started to draw the
framework into a
truly reality representing framework so
we have the four quadrants upper
quadrants are individual lower quadrants
are collective or plural and each of
those has a leftand quadrant an interior
and a rightand quadrant an exterior now
if you look at those that means each one
of those has a different type of
epistemology and therefore a different
type of
ontology so the epistemology for the
upper left eye we call that
introspection and it's a form of
knowledge where we look within we
introspect and we report what we see we
report all the objects we see in our
subject and
that's basically known as
introspection the lower left the we
space the I plus u is known the study of
that is called hermeneutics which means
the Art and Science of
interpretation and we mostly know
interpretation when we interpret one
language into another when we interpret
German in French terms or French terms
in English terms that's what
hermeneutics means um but it also means
you and I right now are interpreting
what we each other say and that's
because we're interacting in this lower
left quadrant we formed a we space as we
talk talk um and so that's a very real
different epistemology the rightand
quadrants all have what's known as well
the upper right the individual it has
what's called empiricism which is
sensory of objective knowledge and
empiricism is thought to be the sort of
one especially real epistemology so we
say we want empirical truth we mean we
want science scientific truth we want it
confirmed we want evidence for this
belief and the sequence in the upper
right quadrant quarks to atoms to
molecules to cells to multicellular
organisms is thought to be a really
real series of events whereas
empiricists always question the reality
of Interiors they question the reality
of introspection it's not a real
knowledge it's not real like an external
atom or molecule is although what they
Overlook is Whitehead and many Western
philosophers who generally call Pan
psychist Viewpoint that even an atom has
prehension it has an interior friend so
don't don't knock Down Interiors too
fast and you'll erase all atoms from
existence all atoms have preh mention
they have a little spark of awareness a
little spark of Consciousness and that
incidentally answers one of the most
difficult problems in Western
philosophy which is often called the
hard problem and it's the relation of
so-called mind and body well mind is a
spark of Consciousness and body is the
exterior matter that it appears in and
the answer is every rightand quadrant
has a leftand quadrant because they all
fit together and
so a really sorry but a really good way
that I heard in your book I think it was
the the history of everything um you you
give the example of meditation a really
way that I find that helpful was like to
talk about you know on the left quadrant
there you have the subjective internal
experience with the person deeply in the
meditative state but then also in the
right quadrant you've got the the neural
coret of someone if you put them in an
FM or ice scer you can actually see um
that activity happening you know that's
right and that's a the that's a very
good example of the upper right and
upper left quadrant because many people
of course many present day scientists
maintain that the mind is actually just
the brain and the brand is is it well it
looks like a crumped
grapefruit and it's about that big and
you can actually cut your head open and
see it as an object because it's an
upper right sensory object and you can
see it it's right there and anybody else
watching that operation can also see
your brain so it's a real object it's a
real upper right
reality um but
those objective reality
have electronic States they have Alpha
States beta States Theta States and
Delta
States uh Delta state is a pure formless
deep dreamless sleep State and when
you're in that state which by the way is
an upper left quadrant phenomena because
you're it's something that your
subjective mind mind is going through
and the mind doesn't look like the brain
your mind doesn't look like a crumpled
grapefruit you can't see your mind like
you can see your crumpled grapefruit
brain the mind is only known by
introspection you have to actually look
within and then you'll see mental
thoughts and ideas and images and states
of Consciousness you'll see a deep
dreamless formless State when you're in
deepam of sleep when you're in a Theta
State you're actually dreaming the real
images going across your mind when your
brain is in a Theta
state but the brain itself is not
experiencing a deep or a a dream state
that's your
mind the brain is experiencing a actual
feta electronic State and that state can
be seen objectively it can be measured
objectively that's what we do with the
EKG um
electrocardio
um e EG Electro enil graph and where
they put electrodes on your forehead and
your head and they measure the
electronic patterns that the brain is
actually going through and that's all
correct that's all brain States they're
not mind States mind states are also
happening that are correlated with those
brain States but they're happening on
the interior you can only see those you
can't the EEG won't measure what you're
dreaming it won't tell you what you're
dreaming at all it'll just tell you that
there's a dream state going on and to
know what that dream state is you have
to see it from within you have to look
within and of course that's what you
your mind is aware of what you're
dreaming so when you wake up you can
often remember what you were dreaming
because you can actually see it and
remember it um but otherwise the mind is
going through stages of development from
aric to Magic to Mythic to rational the
pluralistic to integral and that's
something that you can see by looking
within
and it's not easy because you generally
have to know what the stage is and what
it's like and what it's made of so for
example if you study developmental
psychology and you learn what an
archaic mental state looks like and you
learn what a a magical stage looks like
and you learn what a Mythic stage looks
like then when you move from the magic
stage to the Mythic stage you will know
that when you look within you want to
look for Mythic forms you look for Zeus
Apollo Mount Olympus and so on and when
you see those you'll recognize the
Mythic stage of development that you're
at but you won't be able to see any
reason if you're only at the Mythic
stage you're not yet at the rational
stage
but when you move into the rational
stage you'll start to think logically
you'll be able to do mathematics you be
able to do algebra and you'll see how
these algebraic symbols fit together in
equations and all of that you can see by
looking
within you can't put an electro inogram
on your head and see any mathematical
equations they just they're not in the
upper right quadrant so they can't be
electrically spotted but those those are
two very good examples of how very
different quadrants nonetheless always
go together even though they don't look
like each other they don't sound like
each other they don't smell like each
other they don't taste like each other
um and that's a very real important pie
of information because you can do the
same thing with each upper quadrant and
its lower quadrant so every time you
find a Planet you're going to find
molecules but a molecule is not a planet
a planet is a collective exterior lower
right phenomenon as is a star as is a
solar system they're all made of
collective hoons come together to form
these larger holes
Ken I think it'd be really cool now to
like whenever the penny dropped for me
on on what the four quadrants is it made
me realize that you can almost take any
phenomenon in the universe and you will
see it then in multiple Dimensions
you'll see you'll see incredible depth
to it because you're seeing from these
these four different perspectives right
but it seems that as human beings we
have a tendency if we're not aware of
this to sort of usually have one
quadrant that we might stick to for
example a materialist scientist might
stick to the the top right someone who's
really into psychology and spirituality
top left for example right so what I was
wanting to ask you in this conversation
is how
can understanding this or how can the
four quadrant help us understand
something like let's say something like
Council culture like how you can that be
a provide a useful lens on something
like Council culture yeah well cancel
culture itself is a
subjective
attitude that cancels whatever is
supposed to be
true so it's an upper left quadrant
phenomena but every upper left phenomena
has corresponding phenomena in the lower
and right hand quadrants so this
cancelling impulse that we generate with
our brain comes together it to form an
inter subjective plural lower left
phenomena and that is the sum total of
the whole cancer culture cancer culture
that's what we call cancer culture is
several different Minds all having a
cancelling attitude coming together and
communicating this
cancelling subjective judgment that
they've made
and while they're all doing that they
have a
lower well they have an upper right
brain
state that is um a beta or an Alpha
Brain state which are the states that
the company actual thinking in the brain
and so if if
we did an electro
enphr on somebody who's practicing a
leftand cancel culture then we would see
the corresponding brainwave patterns um
and of course if you're a
neuroscientist you'll think that's the
what that's real that's what's causing
this cancel culture but it isn't I mean
when you cancel somebody you're not
going well beta altitude beta altitude
beta altitude on you
that this is not happening it's cancel
you you're wrong your faults all upper
left Sensations or awarenesses and then
in the lower right we still have to have
some form of
collective
communication and that's why cancel
culture came into existence only with
the computer and forms of social
communication and all of those social
forms of communication are lower right
objective plural or Collective events
they're all transmitted through
electrical wires they all show up on
computer screens that's all they are in
the lower right is a series of computer
Communications but without those
computer computer Communications we
wouldn't have any cancel culture we
never had it before computers and we
wouldn't have it if computers all
disappeared and all electrical forms of
communication vanished and and that's
the important part because you can find
different schools of Western thinking
that each believe just one quadrant
alone is real we call that quadrant
absolutism but there are people that
think that all that we're communicating
through these computers is our brain
wave patterns that's what's getting
trans
ferred into electrical patterns and
those are what our cancer culture really
consists of it's just all these
electrical Communications that we can
measure um objectively because they're
all in the right hand quadrants but
they're not I mean it's clearly not just
an electrical series of impulses it's
thoughts and ideas and feelings
especially feelings it's a very negative
feeling space and you're getting very
negative about a person and you're gonna
just cancel them I mean you're gonna
erase their existence which means
basically you're gonna attack their
upper left quadrant and you'll do that
by thinking everything that their
upper left quadrant has ever produced by
way of a thought you're going to deny
you're G to attack it and so you're
upper left quadrant is at war with their
upper left quadrant and that can occur
only because there are three other
quadrants that are
involv and if you're an
electrical neurologist you'll just
believe it's the upper right quadrant
some neurologist course believe that
that the upper right exists only as a
part of some
collective state so a single computer
doesn't contribute to communication
unless there's actually a computer
network uh and and so my computer is
transmitting to your computer through
electrical Network and that's true but
that doesn't mean it's only that
electrical Network it's still uh
consists of a collective culture and an
individual mind and all of those have to
be operating at the same time in
generally the same place or nothing
happens including cancer culture do you
so you mentioned earlier about stages of
development do you feel that or do you
think that someone who is further along
these stages like at a higher stage they
can more flexibly move between the
different
quadrants yes um and you can actually
only get a good really good
understanding of the four quadrants from
the integral stage of develop velopment
which is why I call it integral
psychology or integral
Theory um and although you can you can
understand the words that are used at
starting at the magic to Mythic stage
you can understand somebody can explain
to you well your belief in Zeus exists
in one place and while you're thinking
that your brain is undergo and you'll
hear all those words and you'll sort of
understand them but you won't really get
how they all fit together and what
they're all actually doing until you get
to the rational stage and then from
there you'll tend to move to a
postmodern stage which is pluralistic
and that's what postmodernism is is a
series of pluralistic
ideas um but the problem with pluralism
is each of those individual
ideas the pluralistic mind can't
actually fit them together into a single
framework because that takes the
thinking about well how does this piece
go with this piece go with this piece go
with this piece and that's what integral
thinking does is also called systemic
thinking because it can think of whole
systems and how each of their parts
contribute to the whole system so and
integral point of view can see the
validity in all perspectives yes whereas
previous ones can't yes previous ones
can sort of have a thought about what
that might mean but their thinking is
limited to Magic forms or Mythic forms
or simple rational forms or even
pluralistic forms um and pluralism in a
sense even though it's higher than
rationality it's more fragmented than
rationality because what it does is
rationality tends to form think in terms
of universal systems so whenever we're
thinking rationally about a country we
think of it as a system connected with
other countries and so on um but
pluralism so effectively divides up
rational systems into their
subcomponents it can really only picture
those subcomponents as separate
individual parts and it can't figure out
how they go together but that's what
rational and that's what integral
thinking does integral thinking looks at
all the parts and immediately sees how
they all fit together so when I was
looking at through all my Hundred yellow
pages on the floor I fortunately was
using integral thinking because I could
see how they fit together or how they
didn't fit together and that eventually
gave me the inside and the outside of an
individual and a collective and those
turned out to be universally present
quadrants or realities and they all
intimately fit together and that creates
of itself a very integrated system of
thinking and that's why when we people
use integral Theory they create things
like integral art integral history
integral biology integral chemistry
integral philosophy integral business
integral religion integral spirituality
because they they have categories that
all fit
together You' there's even like an
integral Psychotherapy there's some
interesting work been done in that field
too um I've heard you say elsewh k that
it only takes 10% of a population to
take on uh a worldview for it to sort of
to become widespread so that's what
happened in the in the Enlightenment and
right uh with the rational the rational
worldview so I wanted to ask you we've
only got five minutes left so just
before we wrap up
um how close do you think we are to
reaching that 10% and what what's what's
the world going to look like whenever we
do we do reach it yeah well one of the
first things that will happen when we
reach 10% of the population capable of
thinking
integrally and that might be a fairly
long time because according to Jane
levenger's model of her seven to nine
stages of development her ninth stage is
what I call turquoise integral thinking
um and although the previous and and
they're both part of what I call Second
Stage because there's a previous stage
to turquoise integral that is called
teal and it's about 5 to 7% of the
population right now but the highest
turquoise integral fully integral stage
is only
0.5% of the entire population is at an
integral stage of the development so
that's not
encouraging and that could take um in
order to get to 10% it could take 50
years it might even take a hundred years
um as best as we can track it what
happens now is most integral truly
integral thinkers end up being
professors at
universities um if you take a study of
the population of professors that have
integral turquoise modes of thinking
you'll get um close to
10% um
so but those aren't growing at a
terribly fast rate we I mean professors
are sort of a steady group of people um
and we're not seeing them Skyrocket and
their development um so um I'm always
sort of ambivalent about how I think of
the future um one thing is for certain
we will get to an integral stage of
development because these forces of
evolution that drove I mean think about
it we started at an archaic
stage of cellular almost development and
we went from there there were forces
that drove us into create a magical
stage and that meant that through all of
our dozen or so intelligences we have
cognitive intelligence emotional
intelligence aesthetic intelligence
spiritual intelligence business
intelligence all of those had to develop
magic
forms in order for us to truly evolve
into a widespread worldwide magic
culture and it was a very magic culture
and we still see remnants of that magic
culture in cave art because cave art is
has numerous pictures but they're often
drawn over each other because they don't
understand the perspectives separate
things and so all of our cave art has
pictures of buffalo on top of Buffalo on
top of Buffalo or antelopes on top of
antelopes on top of antelopes and the
archaeologists who discovered this they
they describe it as magical painting
because they realize sort of because
they themselves went through a magical
stage once in their childhood they still
have vague memories of what it's like
and so they recognize magic when they
see it and they actually call it vast
majority of them call it magic pain pain
um and there are caves around the world
that are famous for their magical
painting and then and then that same
Force which we call a force of Aeros
which is
transcend and
include transcend means you go beyond
and you make a hole that's greater than
the previous hole but this greater hole
transcends and includes the previous
hole just like atoms transcend and
include quirks they actually they're
real quirks inside of real atoms and
then real atoms are transcended and
included by real molecules but if you
look at a real molecule it's just a
bunch of atoms and they're all still
there but some force force them to come
together and join each other to make a
huge molecule and something made those
molecules come together and an absolute
Miracle of evolution occurred when a
cell wall fell around all of those
molecules now you could still see each
of those molecules inside a cell but a
cell transcended went beyond a molecule
and it could do things that molecules
couldn't they could mitotically divide
and reproduce themselves for example
where no molecule does that and then
these cells came together into
multicellular animals and each of those
plants or animals could do things that
individual cells couldn't they could
create photosynthesis for example or
they develop muscular systems and they
could walk and run and of course chase
down their food and eat it um and then
those animals also got increasingly
complex and more talented so we go from
anbian to fish to um reptiles that when
when the amphibians crawled on land they
formed
reptiles uh and the reptiles still
didn't have warm blood they were all
cold blooded um and then warm blooded
mammals succeeded the reptiles and they
could also do things like fly and um
some of them could actually form what's
called paleo symbols or some mammals
like great apes could actually form
primitive types of thought
processes um and then that evolved into
various grades of human beings and until
here we are reflecting on every stage
we've gone through because we're that
sophisticated in our thought processes
and the people that thought that up were
all at integral stages they were one of
the
0.5% like Darwin who is thinking
integrally and that's why they came up
with all of these various stages to the
whole system of evolution and if you
think about it that's remarkable that
going through this little brain of ours
are these complex mental symbols it is
just
amazing um and we're g to keep going and
when we get to integral one of the main
things that's going to happen is almost
all forms of warfare will
stop because Warfare is generated by
Magic and Mythic stages almost
entirely
and historians have
calculated that because humans spent so
much time at those early stages that it
actually comes out to for every one year
of Peace humans have gone through 13
years of
war and that's just alarming well all of
that
when the integral thinking has
permeated the culture and that happens
when we get 10% of the population
actually at integral that doesn't mean
everybody's at integral but somehow
integral thoughts and symbols tend to
permeate and just sort of sift through
the whole culture so people most people
will know be able to describe even if
they can't fully picture it they'll
they'll know what integral thinking
means and they'll know that it binds
things together and they won't be able
to think fully inly but they'll be able
to be aware of what it
is um and what it is is it's not magic
and it's not Mythic and therefore it's
not war likee it just wouldn't think of
going to war with somebody it like you
and I talking now we neither one of us
had a thought about going to war with
the other person while we were talking
because we're both ingly communicating
and there's just no thought of War at
all well I I think this is a this is a
hopeful note to end on I would love to
arrange a part two at some stage because
there's about hundred things I didn't
get to ask you today but um if you're up
for it I would love to arrange a part
two and
where can people find like there'll be a
lot of people listening this
conversation and maybe want to do a
deeper dive after and like where would
be a good starting point for the for
getting learning more about your work uh
probably the book that I've got coming
out in a month or so it's called finding
radical
wholeness and what it does is it goes
through the entire integral model which
in addition to waking up and growing up
components has cleaning up opening up
and showing up components the showing up
components means showing up for all four
quadrants to make sure we're using all
the methodologies that we have available
because each of those forms of
empiricism uh or methodology knowing
knowledge
creation creates or sees a different
type of object so you have the objective
Interiors in the upper right you have
the subjective Interiors in the upper
left you have the inter subjective
Interiors in the lower left and the
inter
objective exteriors in the lower right
and so um it lays out each of those
waking up growing up a chapter with each
of each of them cleaning up cleaning up
is by the way the making whole
of a mind that we've otherwise split and
divided and
repressed various aspects that we're
uncomfortable with this is generally a
recent discovery most people credit
Sigman Freud with sort of really diving
into this and making it a sort of
scientific um approach um but he was
dealing primarily with the upper left
quadrant
and when we split something off from the
upper left and we make it an object and
push it into our unconscious it
basically becomes an it so we'll say the
anxiety it overcomes me or the obsession
it controls me and Freud himself
recognized the these quadrants because
he was asked what does this new
psychoanalysis of yours do and according
to his translator Freud said where ego
where libido was or where ID was let ego
be and ID was Latin for
it and the ego was Latin for the ey so
what Freud and what and he Freud always
used those terms he never once used the
term ID or ego for himself didn't use
those terms his translator James stroy
introduced those terms into Freud
because they were Latin and he thought
it made Freud quote sound more
scientific if he was using a Latin term
so when what Freud said was where it was
there I shall
become it the split off repressed it the
it um becomes one re integrated reunited
with the odd and James stroy translated
those is where it was their ego shall be
but what for it said was where it was
there I shall become those are exactly
the terms you and I have been talking
about this whole time is the it third
person split off and repressed and when
they're repressed we can only know them
as because they're not part of I anymore
they become a third person a split off
he she they them or it which is the
general term that we use for our
unconscious processes like I said we
said the anxiety it overcomes me or the
fear it overtakes me or the hunger I
can't control it or my lust stat I can't
control it um and so Freud founded this
methodology of
introspecting and looking Within
and that's a very important methodology
we said introspection is how we know the
upper left and that's what Freud himself
introduced was a form of random
associative introspection say whatever
comes into your mind but that means look
into your mind and see what's coming
into it and so that is a form of
introspection um so we go the book goes
through cleaning up which is the term I
use for any forms of psychotherapy or
psychoanalysis we generally talk about
cleaning up our mess our its um and then
opening up which is a wholeness that's
created when we recognize that we have
multiple intelligences not just
cognitive thinking but we have emotional
intelligence spiritual intelligence
aesthetic intelligence moral
intelligence and all of those think in
different ways and so they're called
multiple intelligences and psychologists
generally say that there are between
eight and 12 multiple
intelligences but if you spend time just
reading through a list of them and then
each time you read a type of
intelligence you look for it in yourself
so when you read about aesthetic
intelligence you realize that you can
look at things as being beautiful and
some things are more beautiful than
another and you'll go through stages of
recognizing that beauty or spiritual
stages the tenen oerting pictures are
classic spiritual stages of development
as are any of the stages Christian
Mystics come up with uh and those all
most all Trace back the Plato who
introduced the
transcendental sphere of forms or
archetypal
ideas and they come down and project
themselves to create objects that we
know by naming them basically um and so
uh and and then it goes through showing
up and then each time after it
introduces a chapter introducing each of
these times of creating wholeness it
talks about a radical wholeness or a big
wholeness or a full wholeness and that's
when we bring together and realize we
have the capacities to create waking up
wholeness growing up wholeness opening
up wholeness cleaning up wholeness and a
showing up wholeness and we talked today
about waking up and growing up and
showing up and so maybe next time we can
talk about cleaning up and opening up
and then we'll have a complete full big
Hess I'd love to I'd love to and I can't
wait to read the book as well so um I'll
be in touch about arranging part two for
this and hopefully hopefully I can get
the book before then and I'll have a
good read and then I'll pled to askas
you about all right so Ken it's been an
absolute pleasure I want to wish you the
best with your continued efforts to get
inter integral Theory to the 10% of the
population thank you and we'll talk soon
all right okay I appreciate it bye-bye
thank you for listening and I hope you
enjoyed the show if you'd like to hear
the full version you can do so with the
weekend University premium membership
this gets you access to your mastered
library of over 5 years of psychology
conferences including over 230 talks
interviews with the words leading
psychologist professors and authors
unlimited CPD certification transcripts
quizzes premium passes for annual
conference online courses with Richard
Schwarz and Deb Dana
and more the cost is £97 for one year
which breaks down at around 27p per day
the best bit is you can try it out for
30 days completely risk-free as all
orders come with 100% money back
guarantee if you're interested please go
to tww members.com for more
information


## Keywords:
