---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y6eSPnigdqQ
---

# Video
Biden FINALLY Speaks About University Protests | Hasanabi Reacts
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y6eSPnigdqQ)

## Transcript:
you could really you could really hear
it you could really hear the conviction
coming from Joe Brandon bro that is like
like that is George Orwell okay I mean
I'm sorry I feel like that's a bar
directly ripped from
1984 I'm saying no we're not going to do
Clementine yet we I haven't even covered
all the stories I wanted to cover let me
we got to do Joe we got to do Jim Crow
Joe and what he had to say
okay yeah but how do you feel about
Kendrick you'll hear it in a second
let's let's go to Jim Crow Joo for a
second okay let's let's let's take it
back to what truly matters jimothy Joe
jimothy Crow Joe I'm gonna pee President
Biden few moments about what's going on
on our college campuses here we've all
seen
images and they put to the test two
fundamental American principles excuse
me the first is the right to free speech
each and for people to peacefully
assemble and make their voices heard the
second is the rule of law both must be
upheld we are not an authoritarian
Nation where we silence people or squash
descent the American people are heard in
fact peaceful protest is in the best
tradition of how Americans respond to
consequential issues but but neither are
we a lawless country we are a civil
societ society and Order must Prevail
throughout our history we've often faced
moments like this because we are a big
diverse freethinking and freedom loving
nation in moments like this there are
always those who rush into to score
political points but this isn't a moment
for politics it's a moment for clarity
so let me be clear peaceful protest in
America violent protest is not protected
peaceful protest is it's against law
when violence occurs destroying property
is not a peaceful protest it's against
the law vandalism trespassing breaking
Windows shutting down campuses forcing
the cancellation of classes and
graduations none of this is a peaceful
protest threatening people intimidating
people instilling fearing people is not
peaceful protest it's against the law
descent is essential to democracy but
descent must never lead to disorder that
was a banger line the desent was must
never lead to disorder is like directly
ripped from I feel like it it is a
direct like Donald Trump line if Donald
Trump could get that poetic you know
what I mean this is like desent must
never lead to disorder is just straight
up 1984 okay oh yeah this is a
great take from lesbi writes Rosa Parks
was supposed to be in the back of the
bus by law and she said no I will sit in
the front she violated the law and that
law supposed to be in the back of the
bus by law and she said no I will sit in
the front she violated the law and that
law was unjust which is why she should
have sat in the back of the bus don't
forget I also said that I don't want my
children growing up in the racial Jungle
of desegregated America that's why I as
a Democratic senator from the state of
Delaware did all I could to stop forced
busing from occurring that's right
that's not Rosa's bus get off the bus
Rosa Rosa get off the bus you better go
back to the to the back of the bus
Rosa don't do it now don't do the
Montgomery Bus ciens for 300 plus
days descent must not come
disorder it is the law after all are you
reading something asmon no I'm not I'm
preaching to the choir over here
everybody knows I Jim cro Joo looked at
the civil rights movement and I bra
bravely and boldly declared don't do it
or if you're going to do it don't do it
in a way that causes
disorder or to denying the rights of
others so students can finished the
semester and their college education
look it's basically a matter of fairness
it's a matter of what's right there's
the right to protest but not the right
to cause chaos people have the right to
get an education the right to get a
degree the right to walk across the
campus safely without fear of being
attacked let's be clear about this as
well yeah no that's right which is why
we should kill the students uh who are
being attacked in order to save them of
course let me tell you jack Chancellor
of UCLA said it best when the beautiful
Brave bold Defenders of Israel stored
the disgusting anti-semitic Pro
Palestinian tents in the encampment as
those students were dancing and singing
Kumbaya the brave Defenders of Israel
stormed that encampment and beat the
out of those students and I thought
to myself that's wonderful but we got to
bring in the state
there should be no place on any campus
no place in America for anti-Semitism or
threats of violence against Jewish
students I mean he ain't wrong the
problem is that's not what's going on in
these campuses or at least in the
encampments there is no place for hate
speech or violence of any kind whether
it's anti-Semitism islamophobia or
discrimination against Arab Americans or
Pal I remember this oh my God I'm so
glad someone found this is yeah he was
also at least he was consistent he was
anti- anti Vietnam war protest too look
this was B his perspective during the
anti-war protest Vietnam he professed
the lack of moral outrage at the war he
described walking through campus with
law school friends one day and seeing
other students occupying Office
Buildings and
protest why do you support anti-Semitism
so did any of the officials get
prosecuted in Turkey after World War I
for the armanian genocide bro the
funniest thing is Israel Defenders
coming in here to tell me that I deny
the Armenian Genocide bro your
government denies The Armenian Genocide
okay what the are you talking about
you're talking to a Turkish guy who
doesn't deny the Armenian genocide in an
effort to defend a government that
literally does Israel does not
acknowledge the Armenian Genocide
you mean anyway like why do you think
that's a good talking point for you
anyway both your governments deny
technically yeah the difference is I
don't dick ride the Turkish government
in the way that that is dick
riding the Israeli government do you
understand the point anyway they were
taking over the building Biden said and
we looked up and said look at these
that's that's how far apart
from the anti-war movement I was in
Biden's words the war had just been a
tragic mistake based on a faulty premise
in many ways we are so back in the 60s
baby is it might as well be 1968 okay
you got the DNC in Chicago you got a the
the same Vibes overall against the
anti-war movement and we got Jim Crow
Joe leading the helm maybe we have made
America truly great again music ain't as
good true and there is nowhere near
enough like radical Black Liberation
groups that are all maist and armed to
the goddamn teeth and of course no seeks
these USSR to counterbalance and offer
material support to revolutionary action
globally what are you biting is that
edible huh is that edible is that edible
oh my God oh my God oh my God oh my
God anyway at least he's consistent it's
simply wrong there's no place for racism
in America it's all wrong it's
unamerican I understand people have
strong feelings and deep convictions I'm
not sponsored byas I'm sponsored by the
topof the hour ad break dude I'm
sponsored by you and others like you at
which who at the top of the Hour come in
here and they're like oh man I don't
want to see a three minute ad break got
to do what I have to And subscribe for
$5 or for free with a twitch Prime by
connecting my Amazon Prime account to my
Twitch account in uh May 4th 1970 Nixon
blames Vietnam War student protest for
police brutality leading up to four
student deaths stating when descent
turns to violence it invites tragedy May
2nd 2024 Biden blames antiwar College
protest for police brutality and violent
attacks by pro-israel nationalists
stating descent must never lead to
disorder history might not always repeat
but it often Rhymes but in this
circumstance in particular history also
repeats like literally it is repeating
it's not even a joke history is straight
up repeating right
now it's not even rhyming it's
repeating he's woke
Nixon excuse me are you talking about B
base Mau third world is Nixon he ain't
nowhere near as woke as Nixon on
China you better stop it now in America
we respect the right and protect the
right for them to express that but it
doesn't mean anything goes it's just
funny cuz he was alive back then you
know what I mean he's so old he was
there and old enough to give a quote you
know what I mean like he was old enough
to be like yeah these these peaceful
protesters Jack they're pinkos I hate
him oh it's so funny it needs to be done
without violence without destruction
without hate and within the
law you know I make no mistake yeah yeah
remember when he was running and he
would just like lie every week wait this
was from the Howard Stern interview oh
my God he's so back this literally was
remember when he was like yeah Jack I
went to I went to meet Nelson Mandela
and I was arrested they killed
me H what is this this this right here
is why people don't trust the media
right here no the president didn't post
a picture of a notepad on X reading I'm
stroking my right now what
what the bro why is that a Snopes
article I will never look at another
Snopes or PolitiFact article ever again
they're lying to us he definitely did do
that as president I will always
defend free speech and I will always be
just as strong and standing up for the
rule of law that's my responsibility to
you the American he didn't just say I'm
stroking my right now he said I got
oil on my I'm stroking it
ferociously that's what he said yeah he
wrote all of that people my obligation
to the
Constitution thank you very much Mr
President have the protest forced you to
reconsider any of the policies with
regard to the region no thank you Mr
President do you think the National
Guard should intervene no
Mr stud are calling for Mr President the
former president all right president uh
Biden giving some comments about the
unrests we've seen on College C campuses
talking about uh how these protests
bring and odds two uh important American
principles one of course the right of
free speech to demonstrate peacefully
and the other one of course the right of
students to feel safe and wait wait wa
wait yeah one one a fundamental American
value two some we made up to
violently suppress that fundamental
American
value I love that he's like yeah one
fundamental American value enshrine to
the Constitution perhaps the most
important one the second
just some we made up to to kill the
people exercising that secure in an
academic establishment uh he did on his
way out of the room also say uh that he
didn't think the National Guards should
be uh dispatched to college campuses
which of course has been going on uh in
Texas for one as well as other law
enforcement agencies in other states uh
let's talk a bit about this before we go
back to the Trump trial uh Dana Bash um
I know that there has been criticism of
President Biden uh for waiting until
today
uh quite late uh in all of this uh to uh
give a statement um what were are your
thoughts yeah he we have heard from his
spokespeople uh yesterday on the at the
White House Podium and the deputy press
secretary before that since the unrest
really started but there have been calls
not just from his political opponents
but from his political supporters to go
out and to say something that is that
gives Clarity and a uh very solid
argument for what is okay and what is
not okay and it's hard to imagine that
anybody heard that and didn't hear a
very very clear uh argument that as you
said Jake you can be uh somebody who
opposes any policy and you should have
the right that is a fundamental right in
the United States of America dude dude
this is such a funny come on dude
they're literally
they're literally showing just the
direct definitional clearcut violation
of the rights that they claim to care
about like the timing of the rubber
bullet being fired in the background is
hilarious like you're dude dude dude
what's up with our parents well I mean
my parents are are Turkish so it's
different obviously they don't they
don't with this at all like they
are very much uh Pro Palestine okay but
it is like how are you like a like an
American parent you know over the age of
like 50 and you're watching this and not
going like the what do you mean like
you're saying you care about Free Speech
while I'm I'm watching the opposite
happening and you're you're seemingly
justifying it like what's what's that
about but you can't intimidate you can't
do anything to stop people from going to
classes or from feeling unsafe and it is
it is complicated it is uh something
that is steeped in Nuance but it's also
something that a leader can and should
and I think probably in this case did be
yeah okay Dana fash obviously you like
what he had to say we saw your dumbass
coverage able to clarify and make easier
to understand for the American people
that's what a leader is supposed to do
and let's also be clear we went way past
new wants with the violence that we've
seen the last two days I mean break and
that is I think the distinction that
President Biden was trying to make yeah
those things are bad and it's great that
they aren't happening yeah those things
are bad a violent suppression of free
speech would be really bad and
unconscionable which is why I'm saying
that the president the president
capitulating to to such anti-democratic
uh interests from a select few rich
people and and uh I guess like people
that pay uh not tuition but people that
donate to the college campuses their
demands have been met uh and my my own
demands as Dana Bash has been met and I
think that that's great actually even
though it goes against what I was just
saying earlier about the free speech
thing which was something that is a
fundamental value make I mean breaking
into the building at Columbia the images
that we uh saw out of UCLA we were just
showing some of them uh on the screens
here uh there have been all these
conversations about these very in many
cases terrible signs and messages that
have been on these college campuses in
terms of anti-Semitism but the
escalation uh in recent days I think is
clearly what motivated uh the president
to come out now even after I will say
every morning I have gotten up looking
at the previous day what did the
president say about this because I've
been waking up and covering at 5: in the
morning these protests breaking out on
these college campuses and the answer
has always been until this afternoon
well no here's some paper here's some
off camera comments from the
administration clearly they felt like
they needed to finally say something and
I think you could really hear you know
for President Biden and and Dan and you
were talking about this as we as we
listen to him you could hear the
conviction in his voice in this speech y
so uh uh when you were doing your show
this morning uh Casey uh 5:00 a.m. East
Coast time uh is 2 a.m. Pacific you
could really you could really hear it
you could really hear the conviction
coming from Joe Brandon when he was like
we should kill the
students when he said descent must not
lead the disorder bro that is like like
that is George Orwell okay I mean I'm
sorry that is such a I feel like that's
a bar directly ripped from 1984 descent
must not lead to disorder I feel like
this a this what villains say when
they're trying to when they're trying to
stop civil liberties from and and civil
movements from happening yeah George
Foreman
1998 time and it was at 1:00 a.m.
Pacific time I believe uh that law
enforcement went into the encampment uh
at the campus of UCLA in Los Angeles uh
to clear out the encampment there uh
which obviously uh is generally not a
smooth and easy process uh Josh Campbell
uh is there our our law enforcement uh
correspondent um and a former FBI
official oh my God we we brought a
resident boot licker on on to talk about
how wonderful the cops were and how
restrained they were and then I suspect
he's going to talk about the guy how how
how nasty the ground is now because of
the students and not because of the cops
that beat the out of them uh
looking at the well that does not look
ready for graduation I'll just say that
uh Josh
gell no it certainly doesn't and you
know after that Clash that we saw last
night with law enforcement here
ultimately deciding that it was time to
go in they did this in uh steps uh they
issued an unlawful assembly order and
then asked this crowd to disperse and
then they went in the California Highway
Patrol uh there were some skirmishes uh
we talked to some of the officers inside
who said that they had things that were
thrown at him I saw one officer who was
covered in the powder from a fire
extinguisher uh but no injuries being
reported uh at this point we are
learning and I'll I'll tell you as we
kind of zoom in about what's left here
you can see behind me there were 250
protesters approximately in this Camp
that's what the CHP tells us uh they
brought in 250 officers of their own uh
so essentially one officer for one
protester uh bringing all of those
individuals out uh we are told that 132
of those protest ERS were taken into uh
placed under arrest uh we're waiting to
see what those charges actually are now
overnight we we started to get a sense
that this was about to go down because
late yesterday this gets to you know
what the president's point about lawful
versus unlawful the university itself up
to the point of last night didn't ask
the police to come in and actually clear
this camp but that all changed we
started seeing resources come in we saw
the FBI field office which is about a
mile from here essentially turned into a
staging point for dozens and dozens of
Law Enforcement Officers multiple
prisoner buses were brought in and as
you mentioned Jake just around 1:00 a.m.
time uh we are a little earlier than
that but that was the time when they
actually made entry into the actual Camp
itself going in conducting those arrests
right now it is really quiet where
you're seeing uh I don't know if you can
see in the background there but a line
of LAPD officers just showed up along
with private security for the University
here and essentially did a complete
sweep there were a few protesters um
that were still Milling about uh there
was a standoff of sorts early this
morning between the CHP and protesters
on that perimeter then the CHP just left
but now the the officers are back
they're clearing that camp the
university tells us that this is the
beginning of the cleanup process after a
very very tense several days here Jake
yes and that's usually I should note a
beautiful spotless campus in uh in uh
Los Angeles uh not what it looks like
right
there did you cover this genocide
gatekeeping no isn't this just um isn't
this just fascism
yes what toys were you playing with my
uh my little plushy
pigs are newer diversion
King there and then well I was having
fun what do you mean what's your
response to people saying that the
arrests are for people that don't go to
the collage is not true
this is it destroying property is not a
peaceful protest it's against the law
Joseph Robin at Biden don't scroll down
no I won't um oh yeah Manhattan da says
that a gun was
fired uh an officer fired gun during
Columbia University
confrontation officers summoned R gear
entered the campus no one was injured um
the shooting was first reported by news
out of the city and confirmed by
Manhattan DA's Alvin Bragg's office
I mean dude dude there that's why the
other cop was texting Bernie Sanders
this may be Biden's Vietnam we're we're
skipping all this uh we're done
we're doing some fun finally okay
yeah but that's why the cop was texting
uh we thought we shot someone oh dude
here here here here this is
awesome um before we get to C chance of
the prop Palestinian riers on campuses
are calls for Israel's destruction we
always knew knew that Hamas hides in
schools we just didn't realize that it's
not only schools in Gaza it's also
Harvard Colombia and many Elite
universities chance of the
propal why have you made your Camp so
large on stream wait is it that large I
don't get it that's right it's Kamas
it's Kamas scuba bipartisan group of
senators held a confidential virtual
meeting Wednesday with senior officials
at the international criminal court to
express concern about the possible
arrest warrants against Israeli leaders
F yeah dude that's what I'm talking
about oh uh Senator John fedman agrees
with Ronda Sanz and um and as a member
of the Senate uh a Dems he's decided
that lab grown meat should be banned
which is so stupid and I hate these dumb
animals okay lab grown meat should not
be banned at all it is literally good
for the environment the only reason why
you would be against developments in
this field is because you are deeply in
the pocket of the the uh agricultural
producers specifically on on the you
know meat and poultry side and that's it
it's ironic because like all of our meat
is technically kind of lab grown meat
anyway I hate this do you do they
think lab grown meat is some lip
bro they think anything is lip this
is like this is akin to the George W
bush era Commerce about stem cell
research that greatly set back American
research on the field and people had to
go to like Germany to be able to get
like stem cell uh stem cell procedures
done so annoying so dumb so anti-science
suck my dick you okay I'm in the
lab growing my
meat nyaho getting invited to the States
oh my God I hope they arrest
him to address Congress oh my God
imagine he comes to America and we
arrest his ass dude that'd be so sick
it's not going to happen but let let a
boy dream you know what I mean let a boy
dream Mr President what what song are
you listening to folks America I tell
you why you see Donald Trump your Pizza
Hut no what song song I'm Listening oh F
I've listen to my favorite song since I
was a little boy folks it's called two
wood blocks click click two wood blocks
click click that's click click we are
the BL click take care
America that's not a door Mr President
Delaware
Delaware oh Jesus Christ look at your
body you've been eating diseased
American Meat your entire life and you
have two trapezoidal tits that are
facing in opposite directions every time
you wear something smaller than a
quintuple XXL it looks like you're
smuggling logs of
baloney Senator dag has something to say
about Burger King's impossible Burger
I only eat real food that's why I'm so
healthy that that I nearly Dro dead at
age 50 Jesus Christ we look got the
smoke for feder
anyway okay




## Keywords:
