---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rfRpLUrOVqE
---

# Video
Bounded Rationality: Gateway Drug to Behavioral Economics
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rfRpLUrOVqE)

## Transcript:
bounded rationality is basically a
gateway drug into behavioral economics
and the reason for that is because it
points out the fact that if we were to
optimize every single choice in our life
that would probably be irrational so we
might consider the decision about what
Jam to buy for your toast and if you
imagine all of the possible jams that
you can possibly buy within a hundred
mile radius of your house it's going to
be a lot of them and we could think like
an economist and think of what are the
vector of factors that you would have to
consider so this might include sweetness
tartness how watery is it how many
chunks are in the jam what are the size
of the chunks are there strawberry
berries in there
what flavor grape peach strawberry
there's so many decisions that are part
of that one decision that could get you
to the optimal Jam but if you spend all
of your time doing taste tests of
different jars of jam against one
another maybe testing them according to
your mood different time of day how long
do they last there's so many factors
you're going to be putting so much
effort into a decision it just isn't
that important now alternatively you
could just try a bunch of jams until you
get one that's good enough and then move
on and let that be the jam you have
every day even if you could get a better
Jam if you put more effort in to try
that's the idea behind bounded
rationality now think of all the
decisions you make every day of your
life and what if you put the same amount
of effort into every little decision you
made just to make sure that decision was
optimized would that optimization be
worth it I mean for one there's probably
not enough time or effort in your life
to even be able to do that but if you
try to live like that that would be
completely irrational and so you have to
ask the question do we need
irrationality to live a rational life
and we have some tools for thinking
this in behavioral economics one of
those tools is what is the frame of your
thinking what do you have a broad frame
or a narrow frame in your
decision-making and an example of broad
versus narrow framing would be how much
coffee do you buy every week so there's
two different frames for making this
decision one frame is as you're walking
down the street on the way to work how
much coffee do you buy today how
expensive is that coffee how much do you
want to pay for it what size of cup etc
so that would be one decision and it's
going to give you a certain weekly
budget a certain monthly budget of money
you spend on kaki a different frame for
basically the same decision is how much
do you want to budget for coffee in your
monthly budget and that's a decision
where you're sort of looking at your
whole life and making the decision in
the context of your life with other
trade-offs that are not necessarily on
your mind as you're walking down the
street on the way to work and you're
probably going to get a different answer
if that is your frame if you have this
broader frame of the entire budget for
your life as opposed to the narrow frame
of decision making how much coffee to
buy when you're walking down the street
so broad versus narrow framing is going
to help us think more clearly about
bounded rationality and about how much
your rationality do we need to live a
rational life and when you consider the
coffee example it becomes fairly clear
that zooming out and doing a broader
frame overview of your life how should
you allocate your money how should you
allocate your decision-making energy how
should you allocate your mental energy
that zoom back is really really valuable
and really important in living a good
life and sometimes we find that the
narrow frame and the broad frame are
mutually exclusive just like you can't
perfectly optimize the jam that you buy
and also perfectly optimize the
allocation of your mental energy across
your life and that's what bounded
Russian
is all about it's about acknowledging
that we have limits on our ability to
make perfectly optimized decisions and
there's various types of limits we face
I mean one type of limit is the limit on
the amount of information that we can
get or at least the amount of
information we can get without an
unreasonable amount of effort that's one
type of limit it's the informational
limit another type of limit at play is
the limit on the total amount of
decision-making energy we have in a day
cognitive effort is a scarce resource
decision-making energy is a scarce
resource and you might ask the question
is decision-making energy really a
scarce resource like when we make
certain decisions does that use up our
ability to make other decisions because
of course you might imagine making more
decisions could make you more efficient
at making decisions and maybe that's
true but there is actually some evidence
that decision making energy behaves out
at least a little bit like a scarce
resource so one of the books you should
read if you're interested in Haverhill
economics is Thinking Fast and Slow by
Daniel Kahneman and let me just read you
a quick quote from this book a series of
surprising experiments have shown
conclusively that all variants of
voluntary effort cognitive emotional or
physical draw at least partly on a
shared pool of mental energy and the
chapter goes on to talk about ego
depletion and to describe some of these
experiments where people are having to
make decisions and then their cognitive
efforts and other tasks are measured and
often times of course as you might
expect based on this video their
performance on these cognitive tasks
goes down if they have to make a bunch
of decisions or if they have to resist
temptation and there's other conditions
where it seems like they've used up some
of their cognitive efforts doing
something and therefore have less for a
new task and the concept of satisficing
is closely related to the concept of
bounded rationality satisficing is
basically you saying good enough when
you're trying to optimize instead of
getting to the
perfect optimum you try a few jars of
jam and then you pick one you pick one
that's good enough as long as it's above
a certain level of satisfaction
you'll go with it and put no more effort
into the decision-making that's
satisficing so we can look at a
graphical depiction of bounded
rationality
now of course we know that our jamming
decision has many different components
one of which is sugar density we know
there's all kinds of other components in
that vector but for each of those
components there would be a perfect
optimal amount of sugar and we've
already talked about it might not be
worth the effort to find the very
perfect sugar don't city in in a jam in
which case we could have a cut-off we
could say so once we reached any
particular jam that was above are good
enough cutoff we just say this is fine
we're not going to put more effort into
getting near the very very top of our
possible utility function where we are
now is good enough for the effort we put
in so this is a graphical depiction of
satisficing so satisficing is a concept
that is closely linked with bounded
rationality it's a strategy for us to
handle our limits on our optimizing
capacity so why do I call them in
rationality the gateway drug to
behavioral economics well once you've
realized that fully optimizing things is
closer to irrational than rational and
then you need these tools these rules of
thumb to say good enough that's the
right amount of energy to put into that
decision making that opens the door for
what kinds of rules of thumb are gonna
help people most and that will be one
category that behavioral economics looks
at it's not the only category


## Keywords:
