---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cr75x7Ql3Hk
---

# Video
Brian Eno and Yanis Varoufakis | THE MOST IMPORTANT QUESTION TO ASK | Podcast 3
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cr75x7Ql3Hk)

## Transcript:
this podcast accompanies the acclaimed
new docu series in the eye of the storm
which follows the remarkable journey of
Maverick Economist politician and
whistleblower Janis
veracis both the series and podcast
explore the connections between power
democracy capitalism and the deepening
crisis of
civilization the series is available to
watch now details in the
description enjoy the
conversation before anything else I just
wanted to acknowledge that you've been a
really great supporter of this
documentary series from the beginning
and apart from anything else I think it
really benefited from including your
music in in the soundtrack for the
series um and indeed the last time I saw
you was at a screening of the series in
your own Studio how have you been since
then
very very busy because we had this great
big event in
Manchester which uh was the most
exhausting thing I've ever done I think
it's it's in the most beautiful venue
you can imagine but the downside is that
the lifts are very slow and everything
is on different floors so you spend a
lot of your time traveling in
lifts with uh Charming members of Staff
chatting to you so you're naker
I'm completely macked yeah I've never
felt so none nonetheless I shall try to
be sparklingly
interesting well that'll be easy for you
that's that's just your default um yanis
how are you how's it going well I've
just come from a very large
demonstration um the Hall of the center
of a is uh taken over by youngsters
primarily who have a complete breakdown
of all Commons of all public goods
universities are being privatized as we
speak uh they are National Health
Service if you think you have problems
come and have a look at
ours and at least you know people are
turning the streets into parliaments and
um courts cour houses passing judgment
on uh the powerful that's
something we we have a situation here in
England at the moment which is really
getting bad now where some of the big
cities are close to bankruptcy or in
bankruptcy they they just don't have any
money left you now have a situation
where Birmingham has decided to cut all
funding for the
Arts they have no choice they're broke
so they're cutting
everything in half next year and then
completely the year after that um that
means for everything that covers you
know Under the Umbrella the Arts things
that kids do things that clubs do all
that sort of thing and as always as so
often happens it's the Arts that get cut
first and you know it reflects um it
reflects the completely conventional
idea that the Arts are the sort of
luxury the last bit you put on after
everything serious is done then you pour
a little gravy on the top and that's
called the Arts you know
and I have to say that infuriates me but
what infuriates me more is that artists
do do so little to present any argument
against
it I I think we are really our own worst
enemies we've always assumed that what
we did was important and therefore it
would continue to exist forever and
everybody would understand that and they
don't we it
up and most of the people who write
sorry go on well I just want to come ask
you Brian what your thoughts were in
terms of well first of all why the Arts
are important and then also just why
they might be important to politics
itself like what the relationship is
between building movements and arcs I
know that's something you're you're
directly involved in in trying to get
off the ground is sort of cultivating
that
relationship yeah
so if you think about what it is that
artists do they deal in the world of
feelings all right art isn't about
information it's about feelings it's
about presenting opportunities for
people to have feelings about something
and if you take a very obvious example
um say 1984 George O was
1984 that was a chance for him to depict
a world that didn't
exist that could feasibly exist and to
give you a chance to have feelings about
it to see what you thought about that
possible fure future and it's a very
kind of textbook example of what Arts
can do in the most literal sense where
it can present you with another
possibility another possible
world uh and then interrogate your
feelings about it is this the world you
want um you know my friend John Hassel
the musician used to say that the most
important question you can ask yourself
is what is it I really like
um that sounds like such a trivial
question but actually that's sort of at
the foundation of everything you think
about every choice you make and every
decision you make about the
future and there's a huge industry
devoted to telling you what it is that
you really
like to tell you that you really like
$399 trainers or holidays in Hawaii or
whatever um finding out what you you
really like is a very important issue in
your life finding out the thing that
pulls you
forward you know we we might know what
we really
dislike it's easier to register those
things but to know what we want what we
treasure is is much harder to discover
and I think one of the experiences of
art is to enable you to hone in on those
things that you do treasure and that you
find beautiful and moving and meaningful
and since we're creatures who live in
and by our
imaginations it's extremely important we
know how to navigate those things um as
I said the the whole history of
capitalism is designed to tell you the
answers to those questions and those
answers of course always
involve buying products
consuming and consuming particular
things that producers happen to
make um well to get past that you need
the Arts you really need the experience
of Art and I'm using art in a very broad
sense you know I don't mean just
Symphonies and theater and so on I mean
Fashions and pop music and earrings and
hairstyles all of those things that we
do that we don't actually have to do but
which we love doing
uh the things that we engage in because
we like them now like is one of those
words that has lost its value because of
clicking likes on Facebook and so on but
like is important it's how we navigate
it's how we navigate towards the things
we want just as pain is how we navigate
away from the things we don't
want so that's the beginning of an
answer to your question I I I I want I
want to bring out however another
dimension because you said that because
you're an artist you have a certain uh
inert modesty about yourself but I think
that that you selling art short when you
say that it doesn't convey information
it does it's not only about a discovery
you playing around with your own uh
understanding of your own likes and what
really matters to you that's crucial
absolutely so this the question that you
mentioned what is it that I like is
important but also as David Graber put
it you know a realization that
everything could be different uh art art
allows one to depict the present reality
differently um and and and and to enable
and Empower our imagination to think of
how we could have done things
differently uh and but also in terms of
actually just information transmission
it's also crucial I mean think about it
that you know take the Spanish Civil War
tering Gua um it wasn't until Picasso uh
painted the dam picture that suddenly we
have a picture in our minds which is
full of information um of exactly the
horror that went down there and which we
can connect to to what's happening in
Gaza today for instance and then think
of what is it that we truly like and
dislike and also what um how things
could have been done differently to the
way that they're being done so you know
art is um art is for
me the capacity of the human mind to go
beyond the limits of analytical
reasoning you know when our mathematical
thinking and our analytical reasoning
hits a wall yeah and computers stop when
computers competing power hits a wall
they can't go beyond but we are
different in the sense that we have art
or music or you know imagination that
allows us to go beyond and and and to
and to grab knowledge real tangible
knowledge uh from Beyond the limits of
our analytical reason and that's only
because we have a capacity to appreciate
and practice
art yes I I I like what you're saying
and I agree with it um however I would
say that what makes art valuable is that
it's safe and it's harmless so that you
can have experiences in art that are
easy to retreat from it's it's a little
bit like going into a simulator you know
when you want to learn how to fly a
plane you don't get into a 747 and crash
it that's very expensive but you can
crash the flight simulator and in that
simulator you have all the feelings I've
been in one you have the feelings of
Terror when you realize you're going to
crash you sweat it's the most
extraordinarily real experience but of
course you don't crash you you get out
of the thing and you walk home and think
about it um and I think art is more that
kind of experience it is the reason it's
valuable is because it engages our
emotions in a real way but in fact it's
artificial so you can have strong
feelings about something and trust those
feelings and know that they're
those feelings are something like what
you would experience in that real life
situation if that situation were real
life I should say um but it's the it's
the lack of reality it's the fictional
nature of the experience that makes it
use useful it's a model it's a
simulation so I'm not disagreeing with
you here I'm just saying that I think
that's that's how the that's how it
works it works by not being real um so I
always argue with
the the trend of art history that says
that Art Is In Search Of
Truth I don't think that's a useful way
of thinking about it I think it's in
search of Engagement it has to have
enough apparent connection with reality
for you to believe in it just like the
flight
simulator I I don't know if you've ever
been in one but they're amazingly
carefully designed so that it really
does feel like sitting that you're
sitting in an airplane and you really do
feel the all the Motions of the airplane
and the sounds the one I went in had 180
loud speakers in it so that the little
sound of that door and that coffee
making machine and this thing up here
were all separately transmitted so it
felt very realistic but of course I knew
I was sitting on the ground I wasn't
going anyway but nonetheless I
sweated profusely during this experience
when I managed to crash the
747 um so so
the it's not really
about reality in the in the normal sense
of scientific reality as you say it's
it's po it's it's past an postanalytical
if you like um it's it's a way of
convincing you enough of a world for you
to be able to have the experiences of it
whilst not being in that
world yeah but you know what I mean I
agree entirely with you that as a
practicing artist it it is harmless
experimentation in the same way that the
flight simulator is a a harmless
experiment to see if you can fly the
damn thing uh but once you've been
through this flight simulator through
this experience and you produce a work
of art that work of art is very
dangerous for the powers that be if it
speaks to people's hearts and if it
speaks to realities out there uh and if
it is a an honest work of art which is
done for no reason it's not done in
order to you know to change the world or
anything like that it's there there
because it captures whatever it is that
you know all these sweat and tears and
emotions that you're experiencing while
you're doing it captures but then if it
is
genuine if it's authentic in that way
and then it's transmitted out there then
it's always a weapon of class war
against the powerful because the
powerful do not want for the same
reasons that you outlined before Brian
they do not want you to have these
experiences they want you to Simply
assimilate uh the preferences that are
in their their interest for you to
have yeah I completely agree with you
there's yeah there's no doubt at all
that's true and this
this is I think there are two reasons
why Arts funding always gets cut one is
because it's considered irrelevant but
the other is because it's considered too
relevant it's considered you know so so
there there are two constituencies that
both want to cut art funding for their
different reasons and the effect of it
is that it's always being pushed to the
margins of our society and you have to
think that in many societies art making
if you if you work with the very broad
definition of art that I'm proposing
that it includes things like religion I
think religion is a a form of art
actually I've become more and more
convinced that that's so though I've
never written a good paper about it yet
um but I think that is a way of engaging
Us in an act of surrender and being
overwhelmed by a set of feelings uh
the those are the activities of most
societies most of the important activity
of most societies isn't making trainers
or or driving trains or anything like
that it's it's doing celebrations of
various kinds of of um caring about
things like uh um your community and and
the symbols within your community and
how they're being reassessed you know
how does how does a community rethink
its values um well I had a very good
example of this a while ago I was on a
bus from Kilburn and I was sitting in
the top deck and there were two ladies
sitting behind me and they had been
watching Crossroads or East Enders or
something on
TV which is a piece of art okay they
they'd both separately seen this piece
of art and they were discussing it in
very
very deep terms actually they
workingclass women on their way to work
and this particular episode had in
involved um a girl coming out and saying
that she was gay but the girl had a
fiance and she had told the fiance's
parents before she told the fiance and
they were discussing whether that was
good whether it was whether you should
be gay whether you could be gay and have
a relationship with a fiance who she
still intended to marry there was a
whole lot of stuff going on and I
realized that what they were doing was
they were sounding each other out they
wanted to know where they should Place
their opinions where how do we feel
about these things now at this moment
not how we felt about them 10 years ago
where are we now together and I realized
that a lot of popular art like soap
operas and Cinema and even pop music has
that thing of being a way of
recalibrating of seeing where everything
is now it's sort of an acceptance that
things are changing all the time and
that our values change with them and we
need to know we need to feel out each
other on this what's the
consensus what how do we behave how do I
understand what you believe as AOS to
what I thought you believed or what I
used to believe myself um and this is
really really important information for
for everybody you know if if you going
to try to uh live in
complex Dynamic societies such as we do
you need lots of ways of resynchronizing
if you like of finding out that you're
on the same page that you agree about
certain things of shared experiences yes
sh which we don't have because once upon
a time we used to watch the same series
seral now this is becoming becoming
increasingly um fragmented and age split
up in in tiny little bubbles but you you
remind me when you were talking before
about um religious practices uh and
shared experiences allowing us to sense
together uh to um you know grope into
the dark together for uh meanings that
matter to us collectively uh you
reminded me I was reading some years ago
I can't remember the details but the the
essence is still with me uh the Diaries
of some of the uh the sailors who ended
up in botany bay uh when the British
disembarked in Australia and they
couldn't believe their eyes when they
were um when they approached the
aboriginals Aborigines the local
Aborigines they they envied them deep
down because the Aborigines um had
plentiful um food to eat and they only
had to work for a couple of hours a day
and the rest of the time they sat around
the fire or you know wherever it was on
some rock and they told stories to one
another they sung they performed their
rituals their Collective dreaming and
the Brits were simply
at a loss to understand what was going
on and they were demanding they really
needed to segregate the aborigin
practices between work and Leisure and
what they found was that most of what
they were doing in terms of the the
chanting the dreaming the the rituals
were neither work nor Leisure they were
important practices for constituting
their lives is this having fun is this
simply Leisure or is it work uh and of
course it's neither and both at the same
time but of course with
capitalism uh that that segregation
became really very important because of
the labor time that you sell to the
capitalist which is very specific and
during which you are not uh a ruler of
your own life and then suppos supposedly
the rest of the time but now with uh
what I call Cloud Capital with um all
the devices that we have the digital
device we have that separation has gone
so we are far worse off than even the
people in the industrial revolution or
the origins are because now 24 hours a
day is us being
commodified yeah there's there's a very
nice bit in your recent book where you
talk about your father being at work but
then going to the museum or the
archaeological sites Somebody's
knocking at the door I'm so sorry do you
mind if I get that cut it
Outcast let's see who he going to be
this is interesting yeah it's like a
game show a special guest Brian in his
studio and
announced sorry I'm here on my own today
so there's always no worries we can cut
it it's all good okay good yeah so uh so
it's I was in your book techn feudalism
I you tell a story of your father and
how he obviously like everybody else
went to work and did his work but when
he finished he was a free man and loved
his separate intellectual life of um
studying archaeology or history or
whatever it was he was doing and yes
you're quite right this was a sort of
Separation that people could make my
father for instance um who wasn't
academic but his his private life was um
repairing watches and clocks he did it
as a hobby and he loved doing it and he
was very good at it and he charged
almost nothing for it because he enjoyed
doing it um and it was you know just his
separate life it was completely natural
to everyone at that time that when you
left the office you left the
work
nowadays it's absolutely not true any
longer
I mean people have the bloody nerve to
call me at 2:00 in the morning sometimes
about some work issue because they're in
California and they've forgotten that
there there's eight hours difference
between
us it's worse than that Brian it's not
just that you know the work day extends
uh into your home because we have email
we have um you know zoom and and so on
uh it's I I noticed that with my
students um long time ago but it's much
much worse now you see they know that if
in three years time they get interviewed
and they really want a job the
interviewer is going to have a complete
log of their social media presence of
every post they have posted every tweet
they've tweeted every video they've um
uploaded and which means that
subconsciously they don't even need to
be aware of this every time they play
around on Snapchat or on Tik Tok every
time they do that they have to keep in
mind um on what a you know a future
interviewer will think of what they're
doing so it is no that that that is a
even
deeper merging of work and play work and
communication work and
expression yes I think if if I remember
rightly you also quoted a student as
saying um something like I I can't get a
job yet because I haven't discovered the
real me I have to discover the real me
something like that so it's as though
you have to kind of manufacture yourself
before you can present yourself you have
to manufacture this you know cre ated
figment of yourself this living Avatar
always always with a view of what Google
will want you to be never yeah yeah
never
autonomous never in the way that
Robinson Cruiser would on his Island um
it's always with a view to what the
interview and if you think that
now most interviews I don't know whether
you know that I'm sure you do but I'll
mentioned for our audience most
interviews in in United States at least
but also in other countries uh by large
corporations take place by AI bots so
the first interview that uh you
participate in uh to make any short list
is um is done by an AI
bot and that is y yeah well I wanted to
just jump in with a comment about art I
think it's a fascinating exchange that
that you've had
um just to say that I think one of the
crucial roles of
art is as a sort of response to the
billion doll industry as you were saying
Brian that is that exists precisely to
Define what is valuable for us and our
likes and and our
preferences and are it can be a response
to that where we actually try and
explore the and to navigate within
ourselves what is sacred what is at the
heart of things why is life
meaningful and vicariously through a
narrative we can see what a life might
look like if we pursue certain things
yeah and where it leads um and more
abstractly maybe a piece of music can
connect us with something in ourselves
the sense of the Sacred which can then
Express itself um through actions and
politics in various ways but I was
reminded also
of a rather depressing stat but very
interesting there was a survey a couple
of years ago in the UK um of the
population and people were
asked do you think life is
Meaningful 80% said no they they found
no meaning in their own life Wow and
that is a huge crisis I mean some people
have lab labeled it the meaning crisis
and there's there's a lot of work on
this and I think that's something that
art does need to speak to is that a
failure of the artist anyway that's
something I want to open up and then
just one more question
um there's the role of Art and then
there's the role of the artist engaging
directly in politics and I just want to
ask you Brian as someone who's been in
public life for many years
um you've always well for many years
you've engaged directly in politics
while also being an artist who's well
known was it like that from the
beginning of your career or was that did
that grow with time that you became more
politically engaged publicly and what's
that how do you see that dynamic between
the kind of artist in public life and
speaking directly through the art
itself well I certainly started out with
a very
strong abhorrence of
propaganda so I was always I was always
aware that one of the things that
artists could do is manipulate
emotions you know we that's that's what
we deal in we deal in feelings
essentially so artists quite can quite
well understand how to make somebody
feel lifted or or down or up or excited
or calmed or those kinds of things are
are the vocabul the repertoire of an
artist probably and so I always thought
it was
um cheating really a kind of Deceit to
be to use those to persuade somebody to
change their opinions um and I thought
the opinion should not be based on those
kinds of
feelings um I've started to change my
mind about that actually and I'm still
in a state of a little bit of confusion
about where to go and the the beginning
of the change of mind really was I lived
in Russia for um a year in at the end of
the 90s and I became very fascinated by
this painter called helium
Kev um who was was a socialist realist
painter particularly active during and
after just after the second world
war um and of course what his paintings
were about in that context was
persuading people that the fight for
Russia was a sacred and holy fight and
that you know women had to accept their
sons and and husbands going off to um
die um and remember Russia had by far
the biggest casualties of Any Nation so
you know they they won the second world
war in many respects for us um and I
started to
think that what halum Kev was doing
making these incredibly beautiful
paintings very moving pictures was
actually important that um somebody
needed to engage people's commitment to
that cause of fighting fascism effective
what they were doing um the other thing
that happened was
that having been sort of an arts for
Arts sake person thinking that just in
itself art was a good thing in that
vague kind of way that we arst tend to
have
um and that we shouldn't fiddle around
with it or try to direct it we should
let it direct us us
artists I started to see
something happening which was the rise
of the right and the rise of the right
was not the rise of people who were less
aair at all it was the rise of people
who very actively gripped the vacuum
that had been left by people like me
people like me who didn't want to engage
who said oh politics is sort of
meaningless and boring and the important
things are happening in science and
technology and in art and Humanities
politics is for small-minded people
uh that was really rather what I was
thinking if I had to put it into writing
and I thought you know just because
we're playing l a fair it doesn't mean
that the opposition are and there was
this huge Chasm opening up where all the
clever intellectuals particularly the
ones I knew in Silicon Valley were
saying oh we don't do
politics and then there were a lot of
other people like Trump and so on saying
well it we
will and and all the power was there to
be taken and they took
it and uh we complained about it as
though they as though it was their fault
it was actually our fault we abandoned
the whole game we said politics doesn't
matter anymore well it turned out that
politics did matter and it still does
bloody matter so so I thought I can't
play that game anymore with any honesty
I can't say oh I'm an artist that's
that's what I do and that will
automatically solve everything um but
it's a it's still a an issue for me you
know
the the degree of
Engagement is is a an everyday question
for me every morning I have to get up
and think what am I going to do today am
I am I going to be an artist that means
sit in my little room in there which I
love doing and having a really nice time
experimenting with new pites of music
and new bits of software or am I going
to do the much less attractive and for
which I'm much less well prepared work
of trying to engage with real world
issues you
know uh I don't have an answer really
for you um I'm hoping well on a daily
basis on a daily basis you have because
you actually make a choice every day I
mean you do time between the two and I
feel entirely for you because look um
before
before the great financial collapse of
2008 I was a bit like you Brian not an
artist but uh I spent
decades cooped up in my own little room
playing around with mathematical models
which I knew to be of no use
whatsoever no political use no economic
use no Financial use you know it was
it's called Game Theory what I did I was
not one of the game theorist who
believed in the applications of G I used
to say that whoever tries to apply it to
real problems is is
dangerous it shouldn't be allowed it's
like to trying to you know to to solve
the Ukrainian War by lessons you have
drawn from chess it's
ridiculous very dangerous and I was
having the time of my life you know I
was writing books um that would take me
six years to complete that I knew that
if 10 people read them I was
luy if 10 people read them and
understood them right so I was writing
for myself really it was great fun um
but you know as you say
um there's nothing more toxically
political than the statement that
politics doesn't matter uh it's cre
contradiction and um and
every to this I have to tell you that
especially after last the last general
election which was um the beginning of
the lengthiest period of depression I've
ever experienced um I wanted to get out
I wanted to stop doing politics I wanted
to to to write my book you know whatever
I was going to put in it just to
make myself happy to experiment in your
flight simulator as you put it um but
then again he takes one young person or
older person to say to you don't give up
because we need you because we need you
to
speak yeah and then you speak
yeah yeah and then every day you wake up
in the morning you say okay now can I
steal a couple of hours to do my own
thing that's right yeah it's it is very
much to do with kind of time budgeting
but is there is there is beyond it a
kind of also a kind of realizing that
you have to do your own thing because
that is your that's where you're in
touch with some kind of navigational
load star you know something that says
yes that choice rather than that one and
and you I think you do have to keep
doing it you just have to try to make
some kind of a balance you have to
say I can I have to do a certain amount
of that and I have to do a certain
amount of that so how do I a portion it
uh I'm I'm not in any doubt that I have
to be engaged politically because I just
cannot face being one of those many
people I know who haven't engaged
politically and are now seeing all their
power taken away from them because they
never used it they never defended it
they never treasured it actually and
they become complicit to their own
uh to their own uh downfall essentially
yeah they become cynics actually they
they Retreat into a kind of sour cynic
cynicism um which allows them to not
admit that they are
complicit it yeah they they don't have
to take any responsibility for it you
know I I I keep referring to Silicon
Valley people I happen to have some dear
friends in in that area of things but
they are now completely baffled the
world has changed
and they don't accept any responsibility
for the way it's changed um they think
it just all sort of happened and they
were doing the right thing and some
someone came along doing really wrong
things um but you know they have we have
to all accept that perhaps that idea
of the sort of libertarian less aair
thing turns out to be the most toxic
idea that we've ever had
um the notion that there was some sort
of automatic
logic at work and that we just had to
trust in that you know the EXT all the
extensions of Adam Smith and this idea
that if we just let the system run it
would turn out it's it's bloody pangloss
you know it's um Vol y wrote that story
a long time ago and I think you see in
California now a kind of nation of
panglossian
who who are still sitting on the on the
deck as they're being raped by Pirates
saying we're in the best of all possible
worlds I mean yeah I I think one of the
most perhaps the most dangerous
worldview of our times is the progress
narrative put forward by a number of
people but it's probably most associated
people like Steven Pinker yeah Bill
Gates and a number of Foundations I
think it's it's extraordinarily
dangerous and it's
presented as a defense of rationality
reason and science that here we have a
bunch of graphs pie charts and stats
which prove inverted Keras that things
are getting better you know on all these
metrics um and it's just the irrational
the overp politicized the uninformed who
can't quite see that so we need to stick
with the present system and we need to
stick with basically centrism and the
assumptions of of free market you know
deregulated capitalism um and we'll be
fine and I just think it I'm genuinely
amazed at this point in our history
anyone with two brain cells to rub
against each other could see the world
through that lens I find it fascinating
as well as scary Yiannis what's your
take well you see I I I agree entirely
with you but you see here is our
conundrum here is the The Dilemma not so
much dilemma our difficulty our
difficulty is that on the one hand you
have somebody like Trump who uh denies
science who denies statistics who deny
you know he's a climate deny because he
he will manipulate the data the way he
wants it um he insists that we should
accept his emotions and his data as
authentic just because he says so right
and he he he rejects science he rejects
statistics we clearly need to fight
against that to crash that anti-
scientism but at the same time we need
to crush the vulgar scientific pseudo
science of pretending that you can
quantify human
qualities uh you can quantify the
weather you can quantify the climate you
can quantify the relationship between
CO2 and other gases methane and so on
and the temperature of the planet and so
on and you can prove that there is a
cality between you know the the the
emissions that we have created under
capitalism and global warming you can
prove that because that's independent of
subjectivity but when it comes to for
instance you know you mentioned Pinker
and Bill Gates coming out and saying oh
you know we've had huge increases in
prosperity now how do you measure that
mate and they what they do is they point
to GDP they point to income or average
income okay look if I mentioned the
Aborigines before I'll go back to the
origins in Australia right what was
their their per capita dollar or pound
income when the Brits arrived
zero when were they happiest
then when were the most prosperous then
when did they have to work not not at
all and they didn't die of diabetes and
they didn't die of Al alcohol poisoning
then so to try to tell the world that
there's been a massive Improvement in
the Aborigines wellbeing because today
they make you know $3,000 per capita
whereas in 1776 they made nothing is to
Simply violate basic principles of
science through the quantification now I
cannot quantify how happy they were in
1776 but I I know that they were happy
compared to how they are today
especially after the genocide that they
reduced their numbers from five and a
half million to
170,000 okay um so this is that's why I
am I I believe in the strict separation
of natural science which is quantifiable
and should be treated with statistical
sophistication and computers and data
and things that have to do with human
humans because when it comes to us there
are no facts free of ideology and they
can never be facts free of ideology when
it comes to human uh prosperity to uh to
human emotions to human
well-being the idea which starts with
Jeremy benam that you can quantify human
feelings and emotions and that you can
project all our passions and our
satisfaction levels to some Metric which
he called utility which he by the way
Jeremy benam did it for all the good
reasons because he wanted to prove by
means of a mathematical theorem that you
need to redistribute money from the rich
to the poor uh and he used it in
instrumentally but the fact is that you
know the Liberals and the ne liberals
after that effectively the IDE
ideologies of capital accumulation grab
the idea of unity enemis and reduced all
our passions to a single passion for
utility which is the equivalent of the
capitalist passion for
profit
yeah yeah I would just add very quickly
to that and then Brian please respond um
it seems to me as well Central to
understanding why GDP is such a terrible
measure and why neoclassical economics
and a justification for for the free
market fails is a concept of
externalities that the whole system
depends on prices having accurate
information providing and sharing
accurate information about social costs
and benefits and the Assumption at the
heart an economist my goodness you sound
like you know what I say in my
class we're
externalities sorry is externalities are
basically minimal we can assume them
away you can brush them under the carpet
and the system largely works as our
models say they work but it turns out
not only are they minimal they are are
they not minimal they are ubiquitous
yeah they are so significant can I give
you an example from say that like the
entirity of of the destruction of the
natural environment and you know ecocide
is essentially an economic externality
that's how totalizing totalizing a large
scale right because you see the way that
that they did economics to students is
by assuming that everybody is a Robinson
Cruiser who is never in touch with
anybody before Friday comes into the
scene in the novel you know when
Robinson Cruis is on his own he's got to
make choices between you know fishing a
little bit longer in the Sun and getting
a headache resting a bit more but eating
fewer fish right these are of course
that's what Robinson Cruiser had to do
when he was on his own but this is the
model of Economics for the world we live
in so everything is external to himself
because there are no human beings so
essentially economics is
a is is a is a pseudo model a pseudo
science which presumes that each one of
us live in Splendid isolation of
everybody else we trade through some
kind of interface where we never see
each other we therefore so you know we
can never recognize any you know pain or
happiness in anybody's eyes because we
never see each other and we simply trade
apples for oranges from some kind of
membrane which prevents us from seeing
each other that's economics for you
right um and and let me give you an
example because you know there is from
my game theoretical past and I used to
run experiments with real people just in
order to annoy economists because you
see you know the idea here is take
there's a a little game called the
ultimatum game right uh and it it works
as follows imagine you have two people
an and beatric and they are in different
A and B in different rooms right and
what you say is okay look we have 100
quid here um and we will split it
between A and B but we will ask a to
divide that 100 quid between herself and
beatric and it it's it's take it to
leave it so an will say I want so many
of the 100 quid and the rest goes to B
and then B is asked without any
interaction with a this is what a is
offering you do you want it if you say
yes you take it if you don't nobody gets
anything um the The Economist says okay
well in that case um an is going to
propose that she keeps 99 quid because
then be has a choice between one quid
and no quids no no no money and she will
accept whatever is she's given because
that's it it's I'll take her take it or
leave
now if you carry this out exactly under
those experimental conditions with
people never meeting one another just
one off and so on you find that any
offer less than
35% by A to B is
rejected and why is that because of a
sense of what is just and it's a shared
sense even amongst people who've never
met each other you know one is in New
York the other one is in Cala right and
if somebody offers me take five quid out
of the 100 right I'll say off I'm
not going to take it because I much
rather you got away with nothing given
but you see this is this is where the
externality comes in because the way
people think is completely the opposite
of
externality you are internal to my own
thinking what happens to you matters to
me in both ways if you suffer right it
matters to me
I can suffer as a result of your
suffering that's called solidarity or I
want you to suffer if I think that
you're being ridiculously unfair and
toxic and I'm prepared to punish myself
to see you being punished and so in in a
sense we live in a world where
everything is internal and where
economics is modeling everything as if
it is external but you see don't blame
the messenger economics is simply the
ideology of capital accumulation by
people who own the majority of the means
of production you know resources and so
on therefore think of Economics as the
Bible in the Middle Ages it yeah it's if
you wanted to solidify your power as the
hedgemon the ruler the king the baron
the Lord the Earl and so on you use the
Bible you did a lot of Bible bashing you
Ed the language of the Bible in order to
explain to people why was God's will
that you are the Earl you are the baron
and they are the peasants so this is
exactly the same with economics don't
place too much emphasis in economics um
economics is just the
B but um R is completely right to say
that
the the problem has been for such a long
time that we've been able to treat the
rest of the world everything outside of
ourselves or our clan or the people who
we know are on our side as um either
static that's that's mistake number one
to act as though none of it ever changes
um and it's sort of a Terrain that we
can plow and Fiddle around with as we
want um or dangerous you know therefore
it needs to be subdued um and one of one
of the reasons the I'm sure that the
Aborigines you mentioned earlier um
enjoyed 50,000 years at least of
comparative um social stability it
appears that they did was because they
didn't believe either of those things
they they saw the landscape as a living
force and they saw themselves as part of
it as not separate from it I mean it
sounds like a kind of platitude to say
that kind of thing now but I believe
that's true that if you can't subdue uh
or control your environment you have to
come to AC accommodation with it you
have to surrender to it to some extent
this is why I always keep going on about
control and surrender the more technical
a culture you live in the more you
believe that everything is
controllable because that's you know
we're the man with a hammer who sees
everything as a nail and because we're
technically so brilliant we think that
every situation is amable to that kind
of solution
and and one of those kinds of solutions
is this sort of mechanistic view of
Economics that we have um and that we
are completely stuck with and I should
say that one of the going back to art
for a moment I think one of the things
that art
really teaches you is the pleasure of
surrender the joy of letting go of that
part of yourself that says I can be in
control of everything um I I always
think that surrender is the most
underrated human activity surrender is
what is what we do when we have sex when
we take drugs when we engage in art when
we engage in religion those are all
activities where we deliberately let go
of some of our agencies some of our our
need our um obsession with control and
say I'm going to let myself be
controlled I'm going to let something
take me over I'm going to become not me
but part of something else and that is I
think such an important human activity
and for me that's actually the main
reason that I think that um all
governments should really support and
encourage as much art making as they can
because it helps humans use the whole
repertoire of behaviors that they have
from
control to active surrender I I think of
surrender as an active verb not a
passive one it's a choice you make to be
to submit to being part of something to
become an active part of an organism so
it's the it's it's recognizing that
you're part of an
ecosystem that you're not alone it's
it's not just you and your decisions
it's what the ecosystem needs and
demands and will tolerate and won't
tolerate can can I recommend can I can I
mention two books which I think are
completely in sync with what you were
just saying Brian one is my friend's sh
shco horvat's the radicality of love in
which he is talking about how radical it
is to fall in love for the exactly the
same reason what you're saying because
you know the whole notion of
falling you lose control and therefore
falling in love is such a radical thing
such an
anti-authoritarian anti-regime thing and
such an anti- capitalist thing and the
other book which um I think changed my
life when I read it in the 1970s late
70s 80s is a tiny little book by Iris
Murdoch which is not a novel it's her
only philosophical book which is called
the sovereignty of good it's time
excellent the sovereignty of good and in
it she makes many of the points that you
made Brian and in particular the she she
draws a parallel between the good
mathematician the good scientist and the
good artist which I think is valid even
though I do believe in the strict
separation of analytical reason and art
as we were saying before Point she makes
is that the good mathematician the good
physicist the good
artist drop their ego the moment they
get lost in the beauty of what they are
discovering and it's a process of
discovery uh they forget who they are
yeah and they managed to escape their
ego y The Sovereign good Iris m i look I
really look forward to that book um
there's the reason I said earlier this
I'm playing with this idea now that
religion is actually a form of art um I
it's up for discussion you know I don't
know um it's it's sort of a shocking
idea to me because I've been so
anti-religion
or atheistic I should say for most of my
life but I realized that it wasn't that
I didn't believe in God I don't believe
in God but I find I do believe in
religion in a strange way um I got
fascinated by gospel
music quite shortly after I realized I
was an atheist and this this sort of
paradox of loving the music that was
produced by a kind of set of beliefs
that I couldn't tolerate uh this is a
bit of a mystery how how do you how do
you handle that and I've been dealing
with that for a very long time and it
was this surrender idea that sort of
solved that for me because I thought
what I
want uh particularly gospel music as an
example of this is to be part of
something that I'm not in control of but
which I know there is a cumulative
self-generated control it it comes out
of everybody
and it's an amazing feeling you know
it's it's the feeling everyone feels to
an extent when they go to a big concert
and they're all having the same
experience at the same moment it's it's
an amazing thing uh it's of course also
the root of fascism I'm quite aware of
that as
well it's not necess it's not always
good in terms of its results but but it
it made me realize that the concept of
belie Bel in God is not necessary for
the the feeling of religious experience
they can be separate things course yeah
I I have an a religious experience you
know that we've been together when I'm
at AA the temple the Ancient Temple in
AA or the pathon or even a cathedral I
have a religious experience um a
spiritual
experience even though I am a committed
antitheist not only atheist
antitheist uh and that's but Iris Mur
explained this to me why I mean I'm
going back to that book because the
artist who created the music The Gospel
the music the musician who created The
Gospel the the you know mozzer who wrote
reim which I think is one of the most
fascinating and moving pieces of music
at least in in my estimation uh you know
iktinos and CES The Architects of the
paron to have done what they did they
must have overcome their egos and when I
am experiencing their work um you know
that that that's infectious the the way
in which they dropped their ego in order
to achieve that beauty infects me and if
you want to call this a religious
experience I'm happy I'm happy to you
know to call it that yeah I I'd love to
just jump in and um tie together a
couple things that you've been saying so
I I love what you're saying Brian about
surrender and Janis when you
referenced the kind of the Revolutionary
power almost of of love and falling and
love um and Link that to my comment
earlier about the meaning crisis and so
many people feeling their their life
lacks lacks meaning and I think part of
the issue part of the way to understand
that is we have a culture which pushes
us into our discursive analytical um
left part of the brain and we try to
answer questions like what is the
meaning of with that part of the brain
but actually through surrender through
love through feeling that we belong to
something larger the question itself
dissolves it just simply doesn't arise
find me a person who's just fallen in
love who would even think of asking the
question what is the meaning of life no
because everything is saturated with
meaning every aspect of life and
wherever you
look or what's or what's in it for me
that is exactly that
right
disappears and and so I like this note
that perhaps we could end on because I I
think we we've got to the hour and I
know You' got so many things to do but
the relationship between yeah the
diminishment of
ego doing good politics and actually
finding meaning in life that there seems
to be a relationship between between all
of those things um do either of you have
any final comments I I'll just make a
quick comment I'm very impressed by this
little diagram that I'm sure you've all
seen the iagi diagram which is the
intersection of four circles it's like a
vend diagram of four circles and they
are what I love doing what I'm good
at how can I make a living and what does
the world
need and when I when I talk about my
confusion when I get up in the morning
and decide what I'm going to do that day
I'm mentally checking those boxes
you know if if sometimes I really really
want to have a good time then I might
not bother about checking the box of
what does the world need from me I might
just say I'm going to have a good time
but in general I'm sort of trying to
make an
equation of trying to keep those four
things on board because actually that's
the life I want to live that's when I
feel happiest when I'm when I've got all
of those four checked to some extent so
even even at quite a selfish level I
want to be doing all of those four
things including something for the world
if you like um so that's that's my
contribution
Janis might have
one I don't know whether it's a
contribution but I can tell you when I'm
the
happiest when I catch a glimpse of
something I didn't know about myself in
somebody else's eye
uhhuh what do you mean Yan sorry could
you unpack that yeah you know some
people look at
you
and by looking at them looking at you
you recognize that they discovered
something about you which you didn't
know was true about yourself and you can
even actually occasionally work out what
that is and so it's a dialectic of
recognition which for me is the essence
of of of Being Human and of being you
know being a citizen being in the police
yeah which which of course the city and
therefore it allows us to escape the
idiocy of um of
nature there what
about to to to annoy lots of people
with because I'm so prop
Centric well look I I gave my summary
remark um few few minutes ago I just I
just want to share my gratitude and say
Brian thanks for all that you do and who
you are and how encouraging you are with
so many people and the activism and the
art it's just a huge huge contribution
um and once again Janis it's it's always
a pleasure to have time to speak with
you and hear your thoughts so yeah thank
you both of you thank you both very much
thank you and I look forward to seeing
you soon if you enjoyed this podcast
please like And subscribe to our Channel


## Keywords:
