---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0UbvyK6LmJ4
---

# Video
Byung-Chul Han â€“ Beyond Disciplinary Society (The Burnout Society, 2010)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0UbvyK6LmJ4)

## Transcript:
Beyond disciplinary
Society today's society is no longer
fuko's disciplinary world of hospitals
mad houses prisons barracks and
factories it has long been replaced by
another regime namely a society of
Fitness Studios office Towers Banks
airports shopping malls and genetic
Laboratories 21st century Society is no
longer a disciplinary Society but rather
an achievement
Society L gel shaft also its inhabitants
are no longer obedient subjects but
achievement
subjects they are entrepreneurs of
themselves the walls of disciplinary
institutions which separate the normal
from the abnormal have come to seem
archaic fuko's analysis of power cannot
account for the psychic and topological
changes that occurred as disciplinary
Society transformed into achievement
Society nor does the commonly employed
concept of control Society due Justice
to this change it still contains too
much
negativity disciplinary Society is a
society of negativity it is defined by
the negativity of prohibition the
negative modal verb that governs it is
may not by the same token the negativity
of compulsion adheres to should
achievement Society more and more is in
the process of discarding negativity
increasing dereg ation is abolishing it
unlimited can is the positive modal verb
of achievement Society its plural form
the affirmation yes we can epitomizes
achievement society's positive
orientation prohibitions Commandments
and the law are replaced by projects
initiatives and motivation disciplinary
Society is still governed by no its
negativity produces madmen and criminals
in contrast achievement Society creates
depressives and
losers on one level continuity holds in
the paradigm shift from disciplinary
Society to achievement Society clearly
the drive to maximize production
inhabits the social unconscious Beyond a
certain point of productivity
disciplinary technology or alternately
the negative scheme of prohibition hits
a limit the heightened productivity the
Paradigm of disciplin is replaced by the
Paradigm of achievement or in other
words by the positive scheme of can
after a certain level of productivity
obtains the negativity of prohibition
impedes further expansion the positivity
of can is much more efficient than the
negativity of should therefore the
social unconscious switches from should
to can the achievement subject is faster
and more productive than the obedience
subject however the can does not revoke
the should the obedient subject remains
disciplined it is now completed the
discip disciplinary stage can increases
the level of productivity which is the
aim of disciplinary technology that is
the imperative of should where
increasing productivity is concerned no
break exists between should and can
continuity
prevails Alan Arenberg locates
depression in the transition from
disciplinary Society to achievement
Society quote depression begins its
Ascent when the disciplinary model for
behaviors the rules of authority and
observance of taboos that gave social
classes as well as both sexes a specific
Destiny broke against Norms that invited
us to undertake personal initiative by
enjoining us to be ourselves the
depressed individual is unable to
measure up he is tired of having to
become himself end
quote problematically however Aaron bur
considers depression only from the
perspective of the economy of the self
the social imperative only only to
belong to oneself makes one depressive
for aronberg depression is the
pathological expression of the late
modern human being's failure to become
himself yet depression also follows from
impoverished attachment bind which is a
characteristic of the increasing
fragmentation and atomization of life in
society aronberg lends no attention to
this aspect of depression he also
overlooks the systemic violence
inhabiting achievement society which
provokes psychic inunctions it is not
the imperative only to belong to oneself
but the pressure to achieve that causes
exhaustive depression seen in this light
burnout syndrome does not express the
exhausted self so much as the exhausted
burnt out Soul according to aronberg
depression spreads when the Commandments
and prohibitions of disciplinary Society
yield to self-responsibility and
initiative in reality it is not the
excess of responsibility and initiative
that makes one sick but the imperative
to achieve the new commandment of late
modern labor
Society aronberg wrongly equates the
human type of the present day with
Nature's Sovereign man quote Nature's
Sovereign man his own man was becoming a
mass phenomenon there was nothing above
him that could tell him who he ought to
be because he was the sole owner of
himself end quote in fact nature would
say that that human type in the process
of becoming reality on mass is no
Sovereign Superman but the last man who
does nothing but work the new human type
standing exposed to excessive positivity
without any defense lacks all
sovereignty the depressive human being
is an animal laborin that exploits
itself and it does so voluntarily
without external constraints it is
predator and prey at once the self in
the strong sense of the word still
represents an immunological category
however depression eludes all
immunological schemes it erupts at the
moment when the achievement subject is
no longer able to be able ni
K first and foremost depression is
creative fatigue and exhausted ability
shaffin
Mite the complaint of the depressive
individual nothing is possible can only
occur in a society that thinks nothing
is impossible no longer being able to be
able leads to destructive self- reproach
and autoaggression the achievement
subject finds itself fighting with
itself the depressive has been wounded
by internalized War depression is the
sickness of a society that suffers from
excessive positivity it reflects a
Humanity Waging War on
itself the achievement subject stands
free from any external instance of
domination H inston forcing it to work
much less exploiting it it is Lord and
Master of itself thus it is subject to
no one or as the case may be only to
itself it differs from the obedient
subject on this score however The
Disappearance of domination does not
entail Freedom instead it makes freedom
and constraint
coincide thus the achievement subject
gives itself over to Compulsive Freedom
that is to the free constraint of
maximizing achievement excess work and
performance escalate into Auto
exploitation this is more efficient than
aloe exploitation for the feeling of
Freedom attends it the exploiter is
simultaneously the exploited perpetrator
and victim can no longer be
distinguished such self-referentiality
produces a paradoxical Freedom that
abruptly switches over into violence
because of the compulsive structures
dwelling within it the psychic IND
positions of achievement Society are
pathological manifestations of such a
paradoxical
freedom


## Keywords:
