---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=meRvbzhP0GQ
---

# Video
Chris Hedges & Ben Norton on New York Times, Media and independent media.
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=meRvbzhP0GQ)

## Transcript:
so I purposefully even before I was with
the times because I covered the war in
El Salvador for five years but not for
the New York
Times as a reporter I put myself in very
extreme situations where there was
horrible oppression being Meed out
towards uh a particular population
whether that was in El Salvador
Guatemala Gaza um and I of course ended
up in Saro so I was physically there
where people were being butchered and uh
deprived of food and uh any kind of
security so uh that was a conscious
decision on my part um to use the
megaphone or the platform of the New
York Times to give those people a voice
remember American
journalism unlike Indian journalism is
very constrictive in terms of its
form um
it's it's really basic uh
facts um and you're not allowed in any
way to
editorialize uh which I would say or
even put what you're seeing in much
context but for instance if Israel sorry
you are talking about the reports of the
correspondents and not not necessarily
the Thomas fredman and the BR yeah yeah
those people are col and those people
are all cheerleaders for Empire of
course
so but I I used it as a weapon uh
against uh these often us backed forces
like Israel like the Salvadoran military
where I would at often at some risk uh
be at a place where people were killed
and if I had the dates the times the
names I mean I can remember covering the
war in Kosovo and there was a charge
that uh I think it was 24 men had been
seized from a village and they'd all
been tortured and the bodies were
supposed to come back to the village and
the serbs because you don't travel in a
war zone you don't travel at night it's
too dangerous you travel only in
daylight hours so they didn't bring the
bodies back until Nightfall and in the
end I was the only journalist who stayed
I had to stay there the whole night and
when the truck came in I climbed into
the back of the truck with a MAG light
and rolled back the uh blankets that
were covering these dead bodies to
actually look at every single face to
see whether they were mutilated or not
they were they had been horribly
tortured that that there's the times is
forced at that point to publish a story
like that uh and it deeply angers the
serbs Wes Clark who was the head of NATO
told me the serbs were going to
assassinate me um it deeply angers the
israelies when I did that uh but the
times will run it that that that's how I
worked with within the institution my
problem came when I went back to the
United States and started denouncing
publicly the calls to invade Iraq that
was a red line I I knew I what I was
doing I mean I'd been there 15 years the
that was a red line of reporters not
supposed to cross I was given a formal
written reprimand told not to speak out
about the war and then left the paper so
um but I I uh because I put myself into
extreme situ ations um I was able to do
journalistic work that I think had
Integrity but yeah you're right of
course the most of the reporters I
remember when I told the executive
editor that I wanted to go to Saro he
said well the line starts and ends with
you uh because European correspondents
had actually sent a letter said they
saying they wouldn't go to Saro because
it was too dangerous um but I never did
that kind of reporting I was never in
London or uh I didn't interview I when I
was the Middle East Chief yes I had to
interview heads of state Mubarak King
Hussein I interviewed Gaddafi a couple
times but that was not a part of the job
I particularly liked or felt was
important but you have journalists of
the New York Times who their entire
career is spent as
stenographers uh for the powerful um but
that that isn't what I
did who who calls the shot uh is it the
editorial board who internalizes the
world through the lens of what they
offer or are there direct interventions
from shareholders who might necessarily
have uh you know monetary interest with
the larger Empire and so
on no it doesn't work like that the the
editorial board is largely separate you
don't get on to the editorial board
unless you're going to parot back the
opinions they want first of all uh the
the big Nemesis for those of us who are
reporting overseas was the Washington
Bureau because uh the Porters in
Washington they uh you know they they
have sources within the power structure
that leak them material it's often wrong
um and they don't want those sources
alienated so you're often if you're
reporting out of the war in Salvador if
you're reporting out of Gaza you're in
Conflict directly with the Washington
Bureau um I mean my favorite story was I
covered Ron Brown's plane crash and I
was actually got to the crash sight very
soon was pouring rain up in the
mountains and everyone was dead and uh I
called it into the New York Times and uh
the foreign Des said oh well his name
was Johnny Apple his sources in the
Pentagon say it it crashed in the sea
and people survived and I go no no I
just was at the CRA but they the first
edition they ran with his story so he
wasn't even there so uh that is kind of
classic the power of the mandarins
political class intelligence community
in Washington to influence the coverage
of the paper is quite pronounced and you
would often have reports that I would
write out of the field and then uh to
quote unquote balance it out uh you'd
have reports based on Administration
officials that said the direct opposite
so it was a way to kind of neutralize
the reporting but all the good foreign
correspondents were in constant conflict
and the Nemesis was Washington it wasn't
the editorial board in terms of of the
influence I mean the shareholders not so
much because the uh the the uh the the
uh publisher and the senior editors will
have direct contact with the highest
levels of government and what they will
do is then mount a campaign against an
individual reporter which happened to me
in Bosnia through the Clinton
Administration that they will attempt to
discredit and they will do that by
having meetings with the executive
editor or with a
publisher um and this this is how good
reporters who won't Ben finally get
driven out David halberstam in Vietnam
etc etc that's how it works cydney
shanberg who was a friend of mine
covered Cambodia when the Pulitzer came
back and they put him as the editor on
the Metro desk and he started writing
about all the uh real estate firms and
developers were driving out the working
in middle class from Manhattan uh and
then all these real estate developers of
course were friends of the publisher and
he was pushed out so that's that's how
it is not so much the shareholders and
the influence of the money classes is
opaque you don't see it directly it's
not like the the way the rich Zionist
donors will get rid of the president of
Harvard that's all very public this is
all very quiet because of course it
would tarnish their journalistic
credibility but that's how it works
internally I mean and I would just say
at the end most reporters who get to the
times are careerists they understand
internally how the system works and
they're not about to damage their career
so the primary form of censorship is
self-censorship and then it's those few
reporters like myself who are management
headaches who they eventually get rid of
would you say they still exist uh and
it's a constant process like these uh
few reporters that you refer to or do
you think they they don't exist
anymore no there are probably some there
but the times has changed I mean that
that gets into the issue of the economic
model of the of all newspapers has
collapsed so the Monopoly that newsprint
once had to connect sellers with Buyers
is gone with the rise of the internet
classified ads which used to be 40%
newspaper revenue is gone so there the
papers are economically far more
distressed um they don't want to lose
what advertisers they have so uh they
become far far more cautious um there
used to be in The Newsroom place for
kind of renegade reporters like myself I
don't think that place is there uh
anymore um I mean the example would be
Steve doniger who the lawyer who won the
settlement in Ecuador for the indigenous
uh Chevron mounted this incredible
campaign to get him disbarred under
house arrest on on on and on
and the times never covered it they
never covered it because they run an
advertising agency called T I think it's
called T-Mobile or something and uh
where they produce the in-house ads and
their biggest client is Chevron I mean I
actually confronted the executive editor
over it and he got very indignant um but
yeah they just the way they did it they
I mean or like when the case was settled
it was like a very short pro-a story but
they never covered the campaign of
Chevron against donziger I mean I used
to say that the real motto of the New
York Times is do not significantly
alienate those on whom we depend for
Access and money uh because reporters
who have spent their entire careers
writing propaganda do extremely well if
they have access the times hates it when
you lose access they I mean the Mubarak
government got angry at me it wouldn't
give me interviews I mean what did
Mubarak ever say that anybody wanted to
read nothing but the fact that I didn't
have that access hurt me
this is very interesting because uh one
of the impression that the times offers
unlike uh the cable TV uh media which is
very transparent that they are based on
access um uh you know access to uh
personality figures uh the times also
give this impression that they produce
very meticulous reports and they also
have apparently a large uh subscriptions
uh which is very perhaps very unique
because a lot of uh newspapers don't
have that model uh but but you are
saying that it's basically access uh
journalism which is not different from
what we see in the television cable
media the the CNN and other the
difference is the the the the New York
Times sets the agenda so the television
reads the times then they decide what to
report at least that's how it was in my
day well in terms of subscriptions their
print subscriptions are way down they
have digital subscriptions right U
number one they don't bring in as much
money but number two they're far
more uh unreliable in terms of the long
term so uh with the rise of trump their
digital subscription base Rose
significantly again they're still not
bringing in the kind of money that they
used to bring in um and from surveys
they knew that most people signed on uh
to the times because they hated Trump so
that's the siloing of the media now
where you you cater to a particular
demographic that's the new model of
media
uh essentially driven by the Internet
it's they become Echo Chambers so uh
they do two years of you know Trump is a
Russian asset and Russia gate all of
which is false but they don't pay a
price for it because that's what their
readers want to hear they're catering uh
to uh to a base that is important to
them economically and that's
deteriorated uh the quality of the
journalism we had the caliphate which
was this ridiculous podcast because of
course are trying to be hip now and do
podcasts based on a con artist who said
he was a member of I believe Isis or
something I mean I listened to a little
bit of it having spent seven years in
the Middle East and you knew instantly
it was fiction I mean it was just kind
of audio porn nailing people to crosses
I mean it's ridiculous it just wouldn't
happen um so and then of course we have
this uh unsubstantiated stories of
systematic rape uh on October 7th so I
mean a series weapons of mass
destruction I mean there's been uh a
series of horrific I mean they went
through a whole thing with the rise of
trump they decided that the reason Trump
uh took power was because of race um uh
and because America white Americans were
racist no it had to do with the fact
that 30 million Americans have lost
their jobs in Mass layoffs since 1996
and the Democratic party with full
throated support uh
of the this Outsourcing and
de-industrialization so I mean that's
but the the but of course if they went
that route then they would have to go
after their corporations or and private
Equity firms and everything else that
are their major advertisers so I would
say there's been a terrible
deterioration I mean the paper was
always elitist it always it was care it
used to be careful about facts I mean
you wouldn't it it I mean that's what we
do as journalists let's be clear we
manipulate facts I can I can take a set
of facts and spin a story any way you
want it's factually correct if I'm
honest and I care about the truth I will
select those facts that seek to impart
the truth but if I'm a careerist or I'm
serving money interests or power I will
select those facts and manipulate them
in such a way to serve the interests of
the powerful and that's the difference
between good and bad journalism but we
all manipulate facts we select the facts
we want for the story and we spin it I
mean I can spin a story with the same
set of facts any way you want um so yeah
the times used to be careful about the
facts it used to be careful just uh in
in terms of copy editing you didn't see
grammatical errors you didn't now you do
now you see factual errors and that has
been you know as theyve drained the news
room every desk used to have its own
copy desk the foreign desk had a copy
desk which honestly saved me innumerable
times for making mistakes because those
men and women had been on that desk for
often years uh when I wrote about Oslo
they knew what Oslo was um so it wasn't
just grammatical and
typographical uh or factual but it was
also context they understood the story
now all those desks have been eradicated
and there's just one Central copy desk
uh with probably uh not a lot of
expertise on those issues and a lot more
gets through so there's been a a decline
in the quality of the
journalism uh I think that's pretty for
those of us who follow the times closely
very very pronounced and very you know
disturbing what are your thoughts about
the rise of the internet as a uh as a
media space as a space for uh
independent
journalism uh there's a lot going on uh
on on India but also uh you know uh a
whole range of issues all over the world
uh do you see the internet primarily as
a uh space of disinformation or do you
think that uh there are progressive um
channels podcasts uh individual voices
that uh that that that are that have
been able to impart any positive
influence on our politics well of course
there are I mean programs like yours of
course and I have my own program the
Chris edger report which gets hundreds
of thousands of views on YouTube I'm
often over a million but that's
commentary the problem with the Internet
is we're not getting reporting because
reporting is expensive I I wish I could
do more reporting um but especially
investigative reporting after 911 I was
based in Paris uh I covered Al-Qaeda I
think I only wrote five stories I mean
some of those stories were 5,000 words
but uh it took weeks and weeks and weeks
to put it together and all the expenses
of being in a hotel and travel and plane
and everything else Plus my salar so
unfortunately that's the problem
internet we've not found a system which
we can sustain good reporting and all
these newspapers Regional newspapers
that have collapsed and you know again
they were constrained by commercial
interests however they had a reporter
who covered the courts went to police uh
covered the mayor Town Hall that's gone
they're gone and and and when you shroud
centers of power even small centers of
power in secret see that's when uh
corruption runs rampant and abuse of
power runs rampant and that's what
worries me the most the internet is not
found a way to remunerate reporters to
do their job is there good commentary
yes there is um but my commentary you
know when I I'm almost 68 I mean so I
spent decades uh as a reporter uh in
places like Gaza like Latin America six
years in Latin America and I can build
on that but I don't know that young
young reporters are gonna I don't know
how they're going to have that
experience because you especially if
you're covering a war covering a war is
very expensive unless you have a suicide
wish I mean it requires Armored Cars my
armored cars were running 100,000 a
piece body armor satellite
phones Etc so I uh I I've seen
especially in foreign reporting we have
very courageous I want in any way
diminish the very courageous reporting
of the Palestinian journalists in Gaza
um and of course Israel's locked out the
Foreign Press and I went to Cairo to go
with the Egyptian press Syndicate up to
Rafa uh to protest but the CCE
government which is uh working very
closely with Washington and Israel
blocked us um uh so uh and then of
course we had over a 100 Palestinian
journalists killed uh
and that's not an accident I mean these
people have been targeted so uh yeah
it's that's what worries me on the I
mean the internet people people go to
their own Echo chamber the right
wherever they are I mean self- selective
that's the difference in the old media
model where you would get a newspaper
and the newspaper would try to serve a
broad
general you know kind of middle brow
public to reach as many people as they
could but at least you would would uh
not always have your belief system
reinforced that's changed and it's
changed at the New York Times uh it's
changed at uh you know it's I think what
94% or something of people who watch
MSNBC which is garbage uh are identify
as Democrats this roughly the same
percentage who watch Fox identify as
Republicans but what you're creating are
these uh divides these so social
cultural political divides where you
have competing narratives which are
often both false uh but make it
impossible to communicate so Trump did
not become president because of Russia
um but that is something that uh the
Democratic party and liberals will grasp
onto uh and and and so that's kind of
their non-reality based belief system I
mean you have Paul Krugman in the New
York Times a columnist attacking the
white working class they've written them
off as deplorables and racists and
bigots um and of course some of them are
uh but that's not why they voted for
Trump that's not why Trump Rose to power
it was the trail on the part of the
liberal establishment and the Democratic
party that uh that made people very
legitimately angry and half of my family
comes from the working class in Maine
their towns are a wreck I mean the Mills
are gone the banks are boarded up Etc so
um you have two competing systems that
uh essentially are grounded in
non-reality based belief systems and
that's very very dangerous because
you're never going to confront the
problem I mean after Trump was elected
the New York Times decided the issue was
race so all they did was run stories
about identity and race and as if you
know that's why Trump was there uh and
they ignored the issue they ignored the
fundamental issue uh and of course they
ignored it because uh they're dependent
upon the very forces that betrayed the
working class these large Cor
corporations in the billionaire class so
uh that that worries me I mean I saw the
same thing in the former Yugoslavia
where people groups broke down around
ethnic
identities uh and created their own
narratives all of which were false but
we're doing the same thing here and then
of course we'll add the fact that uh uh
the country is a wash in assault
weapons can you tell us a little bit
about how the Western mainstream media
has been complet it in manufacturing
consent for this ongoing genocide in
specific and the Empire us Israeli
Empire if you like in the Middle East in
general well I'm glad you framed the
question that way of course the media in
the United States has always played a
key role in helping to manufacture
consent for Wars of aggression for
whatever kind of imperialist
intervention that the US wants to carry
out abroad and I'm glad you also
mentioned that the g-word genocide this
is absolutely a genocide and we have so
much evidence going back months now from
very very early on in this new phase of
the war in October un experts repeatedly
warned that there was the risk of
genocide and this March the top un
expert on the right to food said very
clearly that it's a genocidal situation
he said that Israel is intentionally
starving nearly 2 million Palestinian
civilians and we also of course have
this very important historic decision
from the international court of justice
the top legal authority of the United
Nations located at the heg that ruled in
late January that Israel can be
investigated that there is sufficient
evidence to charge it with genocide this
is the South African case but many
countries in the global South have
joined this case and Nicaragua sista
government has also officially joined
and expanded the case to include
multiple European countries including
Germany the UK and also the United
States South Africa said the United
States is being added to the case so
this is a western sponsored genocide and
I mean it really is in many ways
symbolic of the fact that these Western
so-called capitalist democracies they
were founded on genocide the Primitive
accumulation that led to their extreme
wealth that led to their Economic
Development was predicated on
colonialism and genocide and slavery and
we now see this continuing the Western
so-called civilized so-called
democracies are continuing to sponsor a
colonial genocide to try to ethnically
cleanse an indigenous population just as
was done in Manifest Destiny in the
United States in Australia in New
Zealand in Canada it's not a coincidence
these are the same Colonial Powers
sponsoring this genocide today but of
course the media has always played an
important role in this and in the case
of United States you can go back 100
years and further to the famous era of
yellow journalism and the
1898 us span Spanish War over Spanish
colonies in which the US took a series
of Spanish colonies including the
Philippines Cuba and Puerto Rico and of
course Puerto Rico remains a US colony
to this day in in that war we we saw the
role of media oligarchs you know people
today who would be the billionaire
oligarchs like Jeff Bezos back then you
had William Randolph Hurst and other
oligarchs who use the media to spread
lies and propaga to justify these wars
of course people know a lot of people
probably know about the Gulf of tonan
incident in the leadup to the Vietnam
War in which the US media blatantly lied
or that is to say the US media was used
as a vehicle to spread the lies of the
US government to justify this war of
aggression against Vietnam
and then of course you can you there are
so many other examples in the Gulf War
in 1990 1991 we saw that the daughter of
the Kuwaiti Ambassador in the United
States naira testified before the US
Congress and spread blatantly false
claims that the Iraqi military was
taking babies out of incubators and
leaving them on the ground to die that's
completely false but that was used to
justify the first Gulf War I should add
as a note by the way that Israel
actually has been doing exactly what
Iraq was accused of attacking hospitals
destroying hospitals repeatedly and of
course the media in the US and not just
in the US around the world because of
course the US media has massive
influence all around the world it's one
of the most powerful parts of us soft
power and we've seen that Israel has
been attacking hospitals repeatedly and
yet the media has said you know it was
actually you know Hamas or Palestinian
Islamic Jihad rockets that hit these
these hospitals like the the B Hospital
Etc which ended up being proven to be
false and Israel has repeatedly attacked
many hospitals as even Doctors Without
Borders has said repeatedly so of course
I should add that the the most famous
example is wmds right the media was used
as a mouthpiece to spread these lies to
claim that Iraq had weapons of mass
destruction those false claims
originated with the CIA and that was
used to justify an illegal war of
aggression the UN secretary General
kofan said very clearly the US violated
the UN Charter and yet there were no
consequences now we talk about you know
the war in Ukraine today and Russia well
when the US blatantly violated the UN
Charter committing an act the the most
egregious Act of aggression a war of
aggression there were no consequences
but I you know I mentioned that the
media is used as a tool by the
government I think that's it's very
important to understand it in that way
and in fact one of the founders one of
the co-founders of the CIA famously
referred to the media as a mighty
worlitzer now he was speaking in the mid
20th century so people probably don't
know what a warzer is but it was a
company that made musical instruments
including a big organ that had all these
different sounds so the point is he's
referring to the media as an instrument
as a musical instrument and and the CIA
the US government can use it to spread
fake claims disinformation War
propaganda to justify all of this and
the media is full of people who
willingly do this for a variety of
reasons there are many incentive
structures first of all the media in the
US is ostensively independent but it
belongs to many large corporations and
oligarchs who have Investments and in
and contracts with the US government the
most blatant example being Jeff Bezos
the founder of Amazon one of the richest
human beings on Earth in human history a
CTI
billionaire and he has huge contracts
with the CIA and other US government
agencies Amazon has always been a US
Government contractor along with Google
and all the other big Tech monopolies
and Jeff Bezos is the personal owner of
the Washington Post it is his property
and you can see many other examples you
know not just Murdoch but you go down
the list and that's the kind of easiest
thing to point out but there's also I
know as a journalist and I've worked in
some newsrooms in the culture of the
media in the United States there
absolutely is this journalistic culture
where you don't want to rock the boat
you can be fired very easily job
insecurity is very high there's very
little job security and we see with all
these journalists constantly being laid
off the pivot to video all this stuff
now with AI it's going to be another
huge um attack attack on journalists I
mean they're just going to you know the
the model that Huffington Post
popularized of like rewriting articles
and all that it's just they're going to
have ai it so and listicles and all that
so anyway the point is is that there's
there are economic incentives for
journalists not to to rock the boat
furthermore if you want to get promoted
You Don't Rock the Boat clearly you
don't want to cause trouble when I was
for instance working at Salon I was
constantly and this was this was back in
2015
2016 a decade ago now there were con
every time I wrote about Israeli
apartheid and all of that there would be
these smear campaigns by these groups
like CA which is a pro Israel group they
would just like spam the editors with
messages and all this stuff so there's
incentives journalists don't want to get
in trouble with their editors they don't
want to get fired and furthermore if you
want to get promoted and you want to win
Awards you don't bite the hand that
feeds you and most so-called journalism
in the US is not really journalism it is
actually controlled leaking what do I
mean by that US government agencies
allow selective leaking or controlled
leaking in order to push US foreign
policy interests in particular ways
right so when there was a move to
potentially withdraw the US soldiers who
are illegally occupying Syria the media
spread these false claims that originate
with the CIA claiming that Russia was
spreading these bounties right and the
bount it was Bounty gate and they were
they're paying paying not only you know
the Taliban and forces of Afghanistan
but also forces in Syria and Iraq to
kill the US soldiers that were occupying
their country as if you as if Russia
needs to pay people you know
nationalists in their country whose
country is being occupied by a foreign
military occupier they need to be paid
by Russia to attack them anyway what
happened is there were this series of
Articles published these fake claims and
then the and then Congress refused to
withdraw troops from Syria we see many
examples of this and many of the
journalists who win pulitzers and big
prizes for the reporting at the New York
Times and the Wasington Washington Post
they're simply given this information by
the CIA the Pentagon other you know the
the defense intelligence agency and they
they develop sources by being Reliable
Tools right they they know that if they
make friends and drinking buddies with
you know feds and cops and spies then
they'll be they'll you know develop
these networks and be given these
stories and if they bite the hands that
feed them then in the future they're not
going to get these big scoops and
they're not going to get the poiter and
they're not going to get all the awards
and they're not going to get more money
right so there there are many different
incentives so it goes from US Government
propaganda simply you know manipulating
the media the journalists who have their
own in interest in doing this the fact
the owners of the media are deeply
invested in this imperialist structure
and then finally we have this new era of
social media and you know it's a
double-edged sword people say well it
does allow people like you and me to
have our own platforms that's true but
these platforms are tightly controlled
by these big Tech monopolies which are
all US government contractors like
Google which owns YouTube and has for
many years had huge contracts with the
CIA they were also involved for instance
in mapping for the the US military
during the Iraq War Yasha LaVine a great
journalist friend he he he showed this
in his book surveillance Valley of how
the Pentagon was created by sorry the
inter internet was created by the
Pentagon and all these big Tech
corporations are inextricably linked
they have you know anilic umbilical
chord linking them to the Pentagon and
the CIA so we see massive censorship in
direct and indirect ways and this is
especially for foreign journalists and
analysts and critics you know Russian
media has all been banned Iranian media
is constantly being banned I have know
many Venezuelan journalists who have
been banned and anyone who challenges
the Empire so you know again I should
invite people who think that social
media has democratized media well maybe
in some ways but you should also
consider that it has made control of
information even easier not to mention
the propaganda and F false you know
claims and disinformation that is spread
through social media by intelligence
agencies as I listened to you I I was
reminded of Harmon and chomsky's
manufacturing consent and all the
pillars that they mention including
location you know the biases that creep
in um by D of where you are located
situated and so on I
think I
have two questions basically from what
you said one
is the big media houses are
essentially the ones that have money and
to do real journalism to collect data
you really need money because you have
to go to the place and you have to
collect all these information this is
one of the reasons why I read the
Financial Times Daily even though I know
there is a huge liberal bias because it
is one of the only sources that can give
you real data on the economy because it
has the money to go out there Ben Norton
doesn't have the money to collect all
the data so obviously then you have to
correct for biases and so on so we used
to believe that there is a lot in the
liberal press in terms of data that one
can collect from and then correct them
against their biases but lately the New
York Times in particular it it has
become a kind of a joke especially when
it has come to when it's about the
foreign policy so I want to get your
response particularly on this Narrative
of beading of babies and the case of
sexual VI
violence I was very suspicious of the
sexual beading of babies I mean everyone
was suspicious I mean no one really
believed it but the sexual violence was
you know people would like to be serious
about it and I was very suspicious
because I read in Indian history and
there was this great Revolt of 1857
against British colonialism and the
massive counter reaction by the British
State against that re Revolution was
justified uh among many planks but one
of the planks was that these backward
peasants were basically raping British
women which turned out to be completely
false uh as historians have looked at it
on Hinds side gryon and others pushed
back against this narrative right from
the start but now we are increasingly
seeing with the new leaks from within
the New York Times can you tell tell us
a little bit about these two narratives
of sexual violence and behaving of
babies yeah well I'll just add a quick
note before that you mentioned the Ft I
agree the ft is one of the best sources
of information and it's not only because
they have more money that's definitely
part of it but I would I would say
actually the main reason is simply
because who reads the financial times
it's written for the capitalist class
it's for investors people who want to
make money and they need good
information so it's it's not written to
manufacture ideological consent in the
same way in fact it's hard to read the F
because you have to pay a lot of money
it's very expensive and and almost all
the articles are behind a pay wall
unlike you know the New York Times And
The Washington Post or the guardian or
whatever which exists too you know for
ideological management right whereas the
ft is it exists so the capitalist class
can get actually good information to
make money and you also mentioned the
issue of little funding for journalism
this is another huge factor of the
political economy of the media right
which is that if you go back to the as
recently as the 80s and 90s there were
many small newspapers you know the
Christian Science Monitor and all these
things the Los Angeles Times Chicago
Tribune that still exist but sorry there
were a lot of Labor press presses in the
50s and the 60s all over the world oh
yeah yeah absolutely I mean this goes
back much much further yeah but I'm
talking about even as recently as like
the 90s you had these kind of
medium-sized newspapers that had the
budget to send correspondents abroad and
now none of them has a budget the only
newspapers that really have a budget are
the huge ones like the New York Times
And The Washington Post and even in
their case most of their correspondents
are in an airconditioned office like in
Beirut or Mexico City they're not out in
the field risking you know their lives
to do investigative journalism and talk
to people on the ground most of the time
again they're just being fed press
releases and disinformation by
intelligence operatives but now to get
to get to your question which is a case
study of this which is the the New York
Times reporting absurdly claiming that
that Palestinian armed groups Hamas
largely carried out supposed this Mass
sexual violence as you I'm glad you
talked about the historical precedent
this has been the colonial Trope for the
entire history of European colonialism
that black and brown men are you know
sexually assaulting white women and that
the colonialists need to defend them
this is always
scotsboro
trial yeah absolutely I was going to say
you know in the United States you can
see this Legacy as of this colonial
Legacy in the form of lynching right
where you have EMT till and all these
people who are accused of like looking
at white women in the wrong way right
and so in the case of Palestine we can
see very clearly this colonial precedent
but let's look at the so-called evidence
of which there is none now you mentioned
that the intercept has developed some of
these ources inside newsrooms in in the
New York Times and elsewhere and they
have people in the New York Times who
have been saying yeah the story was
completely bogus there was no evidence
it was that's why the podcast version of
it was retracted by the New York Times
and the so-called journalist who was
hired by the New York Times anat Schwarz
is not a journalist she has no
journalism experience and she who is she
she's an Israeli filmmaker and an
Israeli Former Intelligence officer so
once again I mean in this case they're
not even being fed the the fake claims
from Israeli intelligence they're hiring
former Israeli spies to write these
articles and in The Intercept uh scoop
on this it's a great story people should
check out they show they show quotes
from this so-called journalist this
Israeli intellig Former Intelligence
officer hired by the New York Times in
which she admits that she called all of
these you know health centers and
hospitals in Israel asking about sexual
violence and did not find a single case
not one case and yet the story still
went through because again this
originated with Israeli intelligence and
then was laundered through the New York
Times the same thing with the false
claim of beheading babies it originated
with Israeli intelligence and then Joe
Biden heard it and he was and you know
he's obviously his mental health is very
weak and he he can he forgets where he
is most of the time so he can't he can't
remember what is the fake you know
propaganda from Israel and what's the
real intelligence so he he regurgitated
that and then the White House had to
come out and say actually that's that
has not been proven there is no evidence
that Hamas beheaded baby so again this
is this is the same Colonial tactic
we've seen again and again where the
colonialists make out outrage make up
outrageous orientalist claims about the
the colonized subjects whether it was
the French in Algeria the Germans in
southern AFA Africa the the us against
the Native Americans and now Israel
against the Palestinians this is this is
the same old Colonial
history meanwhile the IDF is
incinerating thousands of children uh
using us bunker
Busters I think this this is a good
segue to move into Ukraine and look at
the media a little bit I as always read
the financial times today and Francis
fukuyama has a long piece today he is
basically concerned about the potential
loss of the democratic party we'd get to
some of them later but one of the things
that he is writing one of his major
concern is if the Republicans come to
power the funding to Ukraine may not
sustain I mean he's view of the and this
is all over this is in the Foreign
Affairs this paranoia about Republican
coming so that the war in Ukraine cannot
be continued even though like that's not
necessarily a right reading because as
we know the Republicans are e equally
hoies even more when it comes to China
and elsewhere than the than the
Democratic party um can you tell us a
little bit about the media's Western
media's role uh on the Ukraine uh
conflict in ukra
well it's the same thing the US media
Western media acts as spokespeople for
Western governments laundering the
claims of anonymous officials we
constantly see look at most of the major
newspapers especially in the US the New
York Times will constantly quote
according to three senior officials
they're always left unnamed which means
that there are also no consequences when
their false claims are shown to be false
as we have seen again and again and
again and in the case of Ukraine I mean
this is journalistic malpractice we've
seen this from the very beginning um and
we now know we have so much evidence
showing that from day one and before day
one the United States always wanted War
they opposed peace opposed negotiations
we have this now from so many sources
including the former German Chancellor
uh Gard Schroeder who admitted in an
interview with the German media that he
was involved in trying to help negotiate
an end to this war in March of 2022 and
that the US and the the Western Powers
opposed any peace talks we know this
from even Israel's former prime minister
naali Bennett you know a genocidal
Maniac but even he was also involved in
trying to to negotiate peace in March of
2022 and he says that Russia wanted to
sign a peace agreement they all they
wanted to sign a peace agreement before
this new phase of the war right but it
was the US that opposed it and then of
course we have one of the closest allies
of the Ukrainian western-backed leader
seninsky um and he said that the head of
the Parliamentary wing of zelinsky's
party servant of the people which is not
a real political party it was created by
a billionaire oligarch in Ukraine who
funds all of zelinsky's operations who
funded the TV channel where zinski
became well known for being a TV star on
the show of the same name servant of the
people in which he plays a teacher who
accidentally becomes the leader of
Ukraine and then after that show became
popular he created a political party
with the same name funded by the same
billionaire oligarch who funded his TV
show and he became president so I mean
it we we're living in a reality TV show
meanwhile you have Donald Trump who is
also on reality TV I mean it's like
we're living in a
farce and meanwhile so we know that that
from the very beginning that
Ukraine some people in Ukraine actually
did want to sign a peace agreement but
was being they were being told by the US
and the UK and the EU not to sign a
peace agreement and you know Boris
Johnson was dispatched by Washington to
Kiev to tell zilinsky not to sign a
peace agreement after the negotiations
were held in Istanbul and also in Min in
Belarus now this war did not begin in
2022 and this is another huge part of
the media propaganda that just erases
history this War began in 2014 when
there was a coup
that overthrew Ukraine's democratically
elected geopolitically neutral
government of Victor yanukovich who was
the president and he was not he's he now
when he's referred to in the media he's
called a pro-russian leader or puppet or
whatever he was geopolitically neutral I
mean he was trying to act you know he he
was certainly corrupt in many ways he
was not on the left but he was a kind of
you know bgea nationalist who was trying
to act in Ukraine's interest and in
2013 he was is considering an a move
toward an accession agreement to join
the EU which included a trade agreement
with the EU in late 2013 and in order to
move toward the accession to the EU the
IMF demanded a series of neoliberal
structural adjustment policies as it
always does and he said this is
intolerable largely not because he was
ideologically committed to Socialism or
something but because it would have
caused political instability the end of
subsidies always leads to protests you
know privatizations people losing their
jobs and their pensions Etc and he said
no I refuse to do that Russia recognized
there was an opportunity and Russia
offered Ukraine a much better much more
favorable trade agreement and in
response to that the US activated a
color Revolution and all of these you
know us-funded Nos and so-called Civil
Society organizations that are funded
through CIA cutouts like the Ned the
national alement for democracy and the
US Agency for AAL development they
launched a color Revolution then you had
far-right extremist elements that were
the the violent muscle behind the coup
in maidon and in early 2014 the
government was overthrown and a puppet
regime came to power we have leaked
recordings likely from Russian
intelligence of the then a top state
department official Victoria nuland
who's now back and was until recently
deputy secretary of state the second in
command under under Tony lincol and we
you can hear her on the recording back
in 2014 speaking with the US ambassador
to Ukraine Jeffrey Pia and who's now the
assistant secretary for energy policy
and overseeing you know sanctions on
Russia selling expensive LG to Germany
and Europe the destruction of the
nordstream pipelines Etc well Victoria
nuland who repeatedly threatened the nor
stream pipelines can be heard in this
leaked phone recording with the
Ambassador the US ambassador discussing
who the leaders of the post coup regime
in Ukraine would be that started this
war and then according to the United
Nations from 2014 which the coup set off
the Civil War from 2014 until late 2021
before Russia invaded according to the
UN 14,000 ukrainians died and they've
been completely erased from history and
then we should also keep in mind that
before Russia invaded Russia repeatedly
act asked for written security
guarantees from NATO from the US and
from the EU and they all said screw you
we're not going to sign anything with
you and then a few days before Russia
invaded the US government repeated it
was KLA Harris repeated the Munich
security conference which is a NATO
conference that Ukraine is going to join
NATO which always was a red line for
Russia and when when the Soviet Union
was invaded in World War II by Nazi
Germany it invaded through Ukraine it is
geopolitically it is an existential
security problem for
Russia if there was an invasion of
Russia it would almost certainly go
through Ukraine to cut off Southern
Russia and its supply lines and cut off
its access to the caucuses and and then
furthermore let's not forget that if you
go back to 2008 it was US President
George Bush who famously declared at the
NATO Summit in Bucharest he said that
Ukraine and Georgia are going to join
NATO which was a clear violation of
Russia's security redlines despite the
fact that until that point Russia under
Putin first yelton and then Putin since
you know the overthrow of the Soviet
Union 1991 which was of course another
color Revolution back by the US and then
there was an and you know then there was
the shelling of shelling of parliament
in Russia backed by the US and all these
you know then millions of of Russians
died from the ne liberal structural
adjustment imposed on them according to
UNICEF and anyway the point is is that
Putin when he came to power he was the
West
man Bush met with Putin and said I
looked into his eyes and I saw his soul
and saw he was a good man and that's
because Russia was trying to integrate
with the West Russia was trying to join
NATO it became part of the G8 and in
2008 despite all of that the US said no
we don't care we're still going to
expand under Russia's borders and
Ukraine is going to join NATO and the US
ambassador to Russia at the time who is
now CIA director William Burns published
a confidential memo which we have thanks
to WikiLeaks whose founder Julian
Assange is going to probably be thrown
in a US prison for the rest of his life
for the so-called crime of doing
journalism well thanks to Assange we
have this document from Wikileaks in
which the US ambassador to Russia
William Burns says that this would be a
red line for Russia and that if Ukraine
joins NATO it will probably set off a
civil war in Ukraine which would force
Russia to decide whether or not to
militarily intervene everything he wrote
about in that memo in 2008 is exactly
what happened it was very easy to
predict at every single level the US has
opposed peace and continues to oppose
peace and continues to send billions and
billions of dollars worth of weapons to
Ukraine and by the way you know people
say they act as though the US is being
benevolent but this is not Aid really
This Is Us companies from the military
industrial complex that are being given
billions and billions of dollarss in
contracts from the US government in
order to send those weapons to Ukraine
so it's also huge huge huge subsidies
for the military industrial complex for
you know the Beltway Bandits who are
making tons of money and then all of
their investors as well so you know this
is part of what's sustaining the US
economy military keynesianism and then
finally at every single stage Russia
wanted peace including as recently as
March 2022 the media has erased all of
this everything that I've just discussed
you will never see this mentioned you
have to dig very carefully and find a
select you know a select few articles
that will mention these facts but
they're all facts and simply that all of
that I mean even regardless of the fact
that they're just regurgitating the
unsubstantiated claims of us and and
Ukrainian Intelligence Officers
constantly even regardless of that they
don't mention any of that history in any
of that context and you cannot
understand this conflict without that hi
my name is aish man I along with jotis
man have started this platform the last
two years we have tried to build content
for the left and Progressive forces we
have interviewed Economist historians
political commentators and activists so
far if you have liked our content so far
and want us to build an archive for the
left I have two requests for you please
do consider donating for the cause link
is in the description below also if
you're are not able to do so don't feel
sad you can always like our videos and
share our videos to your comrades
finally don't forget to hit the
Subscribe button




## Keywords:
