---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8i9BKJR9Nro
---

# Video
Chris Hedges on Cornel West 2024, RFK Jr., Green Party Strategy
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8i9BKJR9Nro)

## Transcript:
Cornell even if he is holding at a
fairly marginal level that's a serious
threat to Joe Biden his commitment to
the working class is real I don't think
any of that's fake but Bernie is the
careerist Cornell has a depth that I is
so far beyond Kennedy I mean these
people are part of the problem AFL-CIO
all these people one of my major
concerns about the People's Party is it
didn't have any not only didn't have any
ballot access it really didn't have any
structure I think this whole gig economy
is just a species of serfdom really and
it's not going to get better my best
educated guess is that yes
he's authentic he does not however have
the long track record of standing with a
marginalized and being an
Anti-Imperialist the way Cornell watch
how they pile on Cornell and they pass
on Cornell because they're fright and
it's our job to make sure not only they
are frightened but they're even more
frightened it's my pleasure to welcome
back to bad faith podcast Chris Hedges
Pulitzer prize-winning journalist author
and one of the truest voices most widely
respected on the left today welcome back
Chris thanks Brianna now you and I made
a little news you made news you were the
journalist you asked the right question
at the right time I've been there don't
don't blame it on me well say I mean I
was I was softly it was softly suggested
to me that I not make the whole uh
worker Strike Back New York launch a
referendum on uh Cornell West having
just thrown his hat into the 2024
presidential race but I could not help
myself at the very end I thought I
exercised great restraint waiting to the
very end of the panel to Simply ask you
uh what you thought of uh the choice of
him announcing as MVP and of course that
night perhaps a little uh naively
thinking that people weren't recording
it and Blasting it to the internet we're
very honest about the fact that you were
arranging a meeting the next morning
between him and the green party and of
course we all know the news now that he
is planning to run
um with the green party in addition to
MPP is that right
uh
uh he's primarily a green candidate
let's put it that way yeah I mean he
there can be other parties that are part
of the Coalition but all of the
organizing and all of the infrastructure
will be green okay so speak to me about
infrastructure you know strategically
what are we looking at in terms of
ballot access where should people be
looking to help to the extent they want
to make sure that they have the the best
chance of being able to vote for Cornell
West in the general election in every
state what's the what's the trajectory
looking like
well it's rough because you know I
worked with Ralph Nader and I didn't do
ballot access for him but I watched at
Ralph him himself of course is a lawyer
brilliant lawyer uh and every state is
different and the hurdles are tremendous
I mean really uh you know almost
insurmountable the greens have about 20
States I think remember we're a year and
a half out so I don't think it's
unrealistic to think that they could get
another 20. uh I think I think when Jill
ran she had 44 States and then there are
states where you can write in as an
independent
um uh but it's really hard and that was
really one of my major concerns about
the People's Party is it didn't have any
it not only didn't have any ballot
access it really didn't have any
structure and and and the Democrats are
going to be they were vicious towards
Ralph uh they they will sue you in court
uh they will uh uh create legal teams to
challenge your ballot access so uh the
legal fees were tremendous I think over
a million dollars uh and and it wasn't
that that anything was wrong with the
petitions uh but the Democrats will just
challenge every name they did that to
Matt ho when he ran for Senate so it's a
it's a tough battle you really need
people who are experienced
in dealing with that uh and that wasn't
going to happen unless he moved to the
green now the green I've had a long
relationship with the greens it's uh can
be pretty dysfunctional as well uh it's
it's got to really open its doors to a
whole new generation
of activists whether they do that or not
I don't know because it's some of these
green parties are just a collection of
like old cranks uh who want to you know
put their name on the ballot to be
Governor or something no I'm not uh you
know I've been there uh and so
candidate what you mean as a candidate
yourself I was a candidate for 24 hours
until our head of RT in a panic called
and said you know under FCC rules we
gotta cancel your show the only reason I
agreed is because normally the greens
run someone in my district they didn't
have anyone so I go I wasn't gonna go
mount a serious campaign
um uh but I wasn't about to sacrifice
unless I was going to mount a serious
campaign it made no sense to sacrifice
my show which on RT had huge reach not
just nationally but internationally yeah
yeah for sure so do you think that this
moment of Cornell West Reading has
agreed finally getting someone who
already has a lot of cultural traction
name recognition all of those kinds of
things
is the moment that some have been
waiting for where the green party has an
opportunity to claim more authenticity
um more legitimacy than it has done in
the past and perhaps reform itself from
something of a
um anachronism a party filled with kind
of for lack of a better
stereotype old old hippies from a
previous generation and to get infused
with some of the younger
Bernie asks whatever you want to call it
more recent revolutionary energy is now
the moment it is the moment whether
they'll do it or not I don't know
because unfortunately I built my career
out of two dying institutions the church
and newspapers and what happens is when
those institutions feel threatened as
they fold in on themselves uh they come
come become completely self-referential
um and I just am not that connected to
the green party infrastructure I've had
tangential I've spoken at the
conventions and stuff
um but I I do think they have to do some
uh serious restructuring and they have
to step aside uh to bring in young
activists former Bernie activists
whatever uh because that's really where
the energy is going to be and it's also
where in terms of the you'll need a lot
of volunteers
what does it mean to step aside I mean
structurally what's going on in the
organization is not the case that
interested parties shouldn't reach out
to their local green party and you know
run for various positions or sign up to
volunteer I mean is it really the case
that there's there are people occupying
space and kind of holding on white
knuckling it they need to be
ousted
yeah I can't answer that because I'm not
really that but that's what I fear
uh and uh
if this is going to be a viable
candidacy it's got to be a big tent it's
got to be inclusive uh it and you know
you can't you can't ask people to come
into an organization and immediately be
subject to a hierarchy there's there's
got to be a kind of
uh
you know collaboration especially if
you're going to bring in young
volunteers so uh and and you know you
were involved in the Bernie campaign so
you know all that but that that is and I
again I'm speaking theoretically so the
green party May turn out to be fine uh
but I I do think it's something we want
to keep an eye on I've heard you've been
asked in an interview if you were going
to be
part of Cornell West's campaign and you
said something on the lines that I'm
trying not to be but you're getting
sucked in with the status of that now
well I mean Cornell is a very close
friend of mine over many many years so
um definitely sucked in I mean uh I mean
especially in terms of like handling
media
not not just handling media perhaps
messaging and stuff like that
um I don't have time to do that full
time
and right now Cornell is just trying to
build an infrastructure which I'm
helping with and Jill Stein is an acting
campaign manager and she of course has
Anna Jammu who's greater Baraka so they
have really the experience that Cornell
needs
um but you know we have to build I mean
I will obviously help Cornell's give him
as much help as he thinks he needs uh
and right now it's you know there is
uh we have to create a campaign and you
have to pull in people who you trust I
mean you know there's no question
I used to tell this to the kids in
zakati I mean you know the the the the
uh the state the the internal organs of
the state have
uh massive resources and they're not
gonna especially allow Cornell even if
he is pulling at a fairly marginal level
that's a serious threat to Joe Biden
because uh of how close though at least
according to polls the race will be
between I assume Trump and Biden I mean
Biden is just a phenomenally weak
candidate and it says a lot about the
Democratic party that's who they're
coughing up like Camilla Harris is you
know absolutely I will say I was
um in a social situation uh with friends
over the weekend who were
um you know much more open to the
Democratic party shall I say that I that
I am people who you know tend toward
being a little more credulous about the
Democratic party's failures and
um Place more blame on Republicans and
obstructionists like mansion and Cinema
then a lot of the left does and even
they were kind of not in a position to
defend Joe Biden the the feeling even
among more mainstream Democrats really
does seem to be what polls have been
telling us for a long time which is the
overwhelming majority of Americans
including majority of Democrats simply
do not want him to run again and are
very concerned about what this race
might look like uh I'm sure you've heard
the news of respect regulation rather
that the Democrats are positioning Gavin
Newsom to kind of take the mantle if
it's the case if it seems to be the case
that Joe Biden really starts to falter
and flail uh I don't know have you
caught any of his recent media
appearances and what do you make of that
strategically well he he he's kind of
checked out I mean we've just had too
many examples of that reading the
prompts on his teleprompter turn right
you know as if you know and of course
the latest God Save the Queen but he's
all right God Save the Queen man
and the fact that they won't allow him
to debate I mean that says a lot it does
so even John fetterman debated you know
weeks after a stroke
so it's not an age issue I think
Bernie's older isn't he older than uh
Biden uh yes he is uh so it's not an age
issue Ralph Nader is 89 I wouldn't want
to debate Ralph uh uh if I was anyone
having to go on stage Ralph would
Slaughter you which is why they've never
debated Ralph
uh so it's not an age issue but he he's
not there I mean he's clearly not there
that doesn't matter Reagan wasn't there
at the end either
uh and they'll just you know the Empire
can be managed as long as they can get
them out there and he looks sentient and
he can manage to walk himself to the
podium and he can still read what they
put in front of him uh but I I don't
think that he's I think a lot of it's on
he's kind of running on autopilot uh so
I mean that's really dangerous because
when Trump if Trump comes back it's
going to be a different Administration
it's going to be one whose primary focus
is Vengeance it's gonna be very ugly
ugly it was ugly before but it's going
to be nothing like it is now Vengeance
on who exactly you think first it'll be
the mainstream organs that Trump felt
correctly went after him so it'll be the
media it'll be the Democratic party
hierarchy they'll be number one on a
list critics like me who are critical of
uh the entire system are are not at the
top of the list but we also don't have
that kind of reap but it will it'll be
against and it'll be dismantling those
mechanisms within uh the government
dismantling those institutions so that
they become personally loyal to Trump uh
and he was starting to do that at the
end of his presidency so I mean we're
entering a very dangerous time which is
why coughing up a figure like Biden is
so uh
foolish and it it reminds me very much
of the end of Weimar where the
aristocrats who are all hated uh uh kept
thinking they could contain uh the
fascists uh and put forth one weak
candidate uh Bruning and all the others
after another I mean remember it's true
that nobody wants them to run but nobody
want him to run in the first place uh he
he couldn't he had no traction in the
primaries and it was only until the
Democratic party hierarchy including
Obama pressured other candidates
to get out
and then of course all the dirty
machinations that They carried out
against Bernie uh
and and they that's of course what
they'll do to Bobby Kennedy Bobby
Kennedy is no Cornell West uh uh and my
suspicion is that Bobby especially with
his long roots in the Democratic party
or his family's roots in the Democratic
party is not going to be a rogue
candidate he's not gonna I'm guessing
he's I mean I asked Dennis kucinich his
campaign manager whether he would honor
the Loyalty of them is probably telling
the Dennis didn't answer
um so
uh so by the Loyalty oath you mean the
oath to say you're going to tell your
supporters to vote for the eventual
Democratic Bernie running around trying
to get people to vote for Clinton yeah I
mean what do you make of Bernie's choice
to endorse Biden so early
well Bernie I I I I I I have mixed
feelings about Bernie I think he's
his commitment to the working class is
real I don't think any of that's fake
um but Bernie is the careerist and he is
uh and that goes all the way back to the
clintons I mean 96 he was campaigning
for Bill Clinton after NAFTA hmm so he
has decided to build this kind of
Faustian relationship with the
Democratic party to protect himself okay
he gets what's the head of the Banking
Committee I guess that's what they gave
him I mean it wouldn't be my dream in
life uh but they if he look I know it's
not even hypothetical because I was with
shama sawant and Bernie
and Bill McKibben and Naomi Klein we
were speaking together all of us the
night before the climate March and
Shaman kept pushing Bernie to run as an
independent and uh and uh
you know Bernie's final
uh answer was I don't want to be Nader I
don't want which was really saying I
don't want them to destroy me I don't
want to become a pride and if he took on
the Democratic party they would so and
he knows that so he I think he has
decided I think he's wrong but I think
he has decided that it's uh better to uh
accommodate himself to the system rather
than not be within the system so just to
put a pin on it given everything that
you've said about the vulnerabilities of
Joe Biden and the kind of media frenzy
the you know obsequious Praise of uh
some of Gavin newsom's recent media
turns I don't think Joe Biden is
mentally physically capable of being the
president of the United States
hang on I suspect if I took your phone
and I took a look at it not that I
believe in privacy I would never do that
um I would bet on a daily basis that
there are people
urging you to run for president and
primary him am I wrong in my assumption
well my phone's been lighting up how
well he did with the UK prime minister
my phone lit up and how he's that's a
nice stock McCarthy on the desk is your
phone light up the phone lights up with
Republican friends saying you know what
despite all of the rhetoric these
bipartisan bills he keeps passing on
infrastructure and the chips and science
act the bipartisan work he did on gun
legislation reform and around the debt
ceiling uh make me feel maybe he's done
a little bit better job than so that
wasn't my question are does your phone
light up with Gavin you need to get in
this primary he's not able to run he's
not up to the job look there's everybody
has their quiet chatter uh and
everybody's out there rooting for
America I'm rooting for our president I
have great confidence in his I don't do
you not think there's any chance the
Democratic party might choose to
substitute out Gavin Newsom or somebody
else for Biden if things start to look
Grim enough I I that's I'd have to guess
you know having been a reporter for a
really long time I hate making those
hypotheticals unless I've talked to
people uh within positions of power who
have the ability to make those kinds of
choices and I have not
but the evidence is the evidence would
be or I guess the question is do you
think that Gavin Newsom who I think
objectively is putting himself out there
in a way that feels distinct and
purposeful and not just like he happens
to have fallen into a new cycle because
there's just news in California or
something like that he's getting these
high profile sit-downs with uh Sean
Hannity he's he's really front and
center in a way that you might expect as
someone who's positioning themselves at
least testing the waters for a
presidential run I mean let me let me
put it to you this way so to get away
from my hypotheticals
do you think that would be a
strategically beneficial Choice from the
perspective of the democratic party and
do you think they would be able to do
that sidestepping the awkwardness of
Kamala Harris being right there as the
VP
I mean in terms of Optics of course it's
better but in terms of substance I.E
those forces that are driving a
disillusioned electric it didn't make
any difference
so go ahead and cut you off yeah so I
mean what is it that I don't see them
being able to pull votes from Trump
the fundamental issues that have pushed
people into the arms of a demagogue
the on the in the part of people who uh
uh are don't like either system so that
combination of
anger rage white sense of dethronement
all of that stuff de-industrialization
so you have a lot of people who are
heavily motivated uh coupled with a
figure like Biden coupled with apathy
coupled with a Democratic party that
sold you out and doesn't address you
isn't this a very dangerous combination
I don't know that Newsome is going to
change that particularly yeah uh but but
uh
uh I mean you are reaching a point where
it's almost anything's better than Biden
right well that brings us to the
question of RFK Jr a jump of Baraka was
on the last episode of bad faith he did
not have a particularly uh sanguine view
of the man or his ability ability to
kind of follow through on some of his uh
anti-war bonafides I I wonder what you
make of RFK Jr the authenticity of his
run and the way that his
a legacy as a Kennedy
affects his politics going forward
so I should preface this by saying that
I'm very good friends with this campaign
manager Dennis kucinich who I like and
have supported for a long time
um I watched his
announcement and it was
built on the superstructure of two lives
one that America is a good people uh
that you know that kind of deification
of our virtue and then the other was the
a deification of the Kennedys that's
another lie wait a minute Chris
Americans I'm not saying Americans are
better than anybody else but America you
know you don't think it's kind of a a
position that most politicians including
Cornell West kind of have to adopt that
Cornell is not going to adopt that
corner we're we're we're good and that
we should rise to the our greatest
potential even if there's a lot and you
can say that but the deification of
American history and the Founding Father
yes which is what he was doing okay okay
Cornell I'm gonna do that yeah yeah I
mean I suppose you want to tell people
they're good having spent 20 years
uh outside the Empire and places like El
Salvador in the Middle East I can tell
you uh there are a lot of Iraqis and
Palestinians and Salvadorans who don't
think we as a country are particularly
good uh given the plethora of crimes
that we have committed against those
friends fan Uncle The Wretched of the
earth uh Empire is a pretty evil entity
um and and of course as James Baldwin
pointed out we uh choose not to look at
Empire and we confuse I'm quoting
Baldwin of course we confuse ignorance
with innocence
and then as Baldwin said that eventually
turns you into a monster so
Cornell has a depth that I
so far beyond Kennedy I also have such a
problem I mean there was one point in
his his uh announcement where Kennedy
talked about his father coming back and
saying that you know the rich people
have the bankers and this about the
workers or something have the Kennedys I
mean coming out of the working class
that was a pretty nausea inducing
comment like we need the we need rich
people like the Kennedys I mean the
Kennedys uh both Bobby and and RFK I
mean they would not have had a chance
but for uh the fact that they came from
a fabulously wealthy family their father
Joe Kennedy who bankroll the campaign so
not only is that how JFK and then all
the dirty relationships with Daley in
Chicago and everything else but people
forget that Bobby didn't run until
Eugene McCarthy the anti-war candidate
got a lot of traction and and Bobby was
spending I don't know it was his family
money a million dollars a day or I can't
remember the figure but he just he
buried McCarthy but it was very
opportunistic he also was the as
attorney general the person who put the
wiretaps on Martin Luther King's Way he
hated King he hated King
and if you read closely that neither of
the Kennedys were particularly
supportive of the Civil Rights Movement
uh not in any real way
and it's so counter-intuitive to the
narrative that we're well of course but
that's how that's how white people do it
without it you know George Washington
Lincoln freed the slaves no Lincoln was
wanted to ship enslaved people off the
madagascars it was Frederick Douglass
who
you know it was the Abolitionist William
Lloyd Garrison you know so we write as
in says we write those we we recreate
the narrative I mean it's like FDR no
FDR did not give us the New Deal it were
workers who were doing radical sit-down
strikes and
and uh uh in the auto plants it was the
old Communist party I mean you know so
there's a uh always uh and that's how
you get 10-year Princeton you know you
write big thick books like some of my
colleagues about Ronald Reagan or
something you know you you uh so uh and
and and Bobby speaks in that language I
mean I have my big problem with him is
over
Palestine I was seven years in the
Middle East I
I just won't support anyone who uh
uh parrots the Israel line I I just
can't I mean even if it's only me I
don't care anything his stuff on his
stuff on Israel is just awful he also
trapped I mean it's personal but Roger
Waters is a friend of mine somebody I
admire very much for his both is
artistic talent but also his Integrity
his courage and he's trashing Roger so
that for those are little maybe that's a
little thing I can go there so what then
do you make of so many people in RFK
Junior himself has kind of framed the
fact of his uncle and father being
killed as an as you know this is how he
puts it as they take this
anti-establishment anti-fbi anti-war in
Vietnam turn and he has linked the
their murders to their substantive
politics but she's describing as
uh anti-establishment and kind of
radical and anti-war and placing himself
as the inheritor of that Legacy in a way
that's given him a lot of credibility
with people who share that sort of
anti-war sentiment and that narrative I
think works for him and so far it says
well yeah sure he's a Kennedy sure that
it's it's Camelot it's American royalty
it's incredibly Elite and prestigious
and insidery and deeply you know capital
D democratic
however because ultimately his own
family members were perhaps targeted and
killed by the FBI the CIA the Deep State
whatever it is then he's someone who can
be trusted I mean what do you do with
that narrative how are you absolutely a
very simplistic and mendacious narrative
Bobby Kennedy's Obsession was the murder
of Castro
they're both JFK and RFK were you know
bought all into the Cold War
anti-communism stuff
uh uh so
I I Evan Thomas I read Evan Thomas's
biography of RFK and he had a kind of
really telling line he said the
difference between Bobby and his
brothers Joe Kennedy who was killed in
World War II he was a pilot was being
groomed and and and you know from day
one their father was orchestrating a
political Dynasty through his money
and so Joe and John and and and Robert
was kind of Forgotten but he had a line
in there that unlike Joe and John Robert
could actually feel that he was in touch
with his emotions so
there is enough kind of circumstantial
evidence to show that
Bobby Kennedy cared about
poor people I mean he would take time to
go into poor urban areas into rural
Appalachia there's a he's touring South
America and he I think it was in Chile
he goes down and sees the conditions I
mean he physically put himself in these
places which is is I think uh
commendable so he goes down into these
mines and sees the conditions of the
workers and he comes out and he says if
I was if if I were them I'd be a
communist too so
but it's always mixed you know so I
don't want to trash I have less time for
the deification of John F Kennedy and
everyone should read Seymour hersh's
book The Dark Side of Camelot
um I I think there's a lot of Mythology
around JFK did the C did the CIA hate
him yes uh that's real and Dulles in
particular who was who was insane and
the fact that he was ahead of the
warring commission and because you know
it was all on Cuba because he wouldn't
allow air cover to protect the Cuban
Exiles who invaded it the Bay of Pigs
which uh deeply angered uh the the Cuban
Exiles and the and the anti-communists
like Dallas who had orchestrated the Bay
of Pigs and then the other was Bobby
Kennedy's a fierce
investigations as attorney generals
against the mafia so they had potent and
lethal enemies and there was a bizarre
connection between the CIA and the mafia
because they hired I mean that before
the Revolution the mob kind of ran
Havana they had all the casinos and
stuff so they had a lot of contacts in
Cuba so the CIA at one point was hiring
Mobsters to take out hits of Castro so
you had the connection between the CIA
and and the mob coupled with the fact
that Bobby as attorney general did Mount
a very
uh concerted campaign to break the back
of of the mafia that is real I mean
Jimmy Hoffa hated Bobby Kennedy
um uh so those forces they're you know
people who I I don't think you can
discount it uh there has always been
this feeling that the fusion of those
forces came together in JFK's
assassination uh we don't know I mean I
read uh how uh David Talbot's book
where the last kind of quarter of it is
on the Kennedy assassination I think
there's a lot of compelling questions I
don't think anyone's ever found a
Smoking Gun I don't think we've ever
proved it but but I but I don't discount
it well RFK Juniors certainly seems to
believe that that that's the case I mean
he speaks at length about it and it does
seem to land him some credibility in
folks's eyes
um when he says he is interested in
defunding the FBI or stripping these uh
intelligence organizations of power
reigning them in ETC and I wonder even
if you don't agree with his
understanding of his family's Legacy or
the historical narrative if you believe
that he's being authentic when he
articulates those as policy goals of his
and if that's a legitimate reason why
people should be excited for his
campaign so the only reason I would say
is authentic is be I don't know I've
never met I've done this I was
interviewed Ryan but I've never I don't
have any spend any time with him
uh I trust Dennis and Dennis believes
he's authentic and Dennis is definitely
authentic so uh my my best educated
guess is that yes
he's authentic he does not however have
the long track record of standing with a
marginalized and being an
Anti-Imperialist the way Cornell does
and that's why and Bernie had that I
mean let's give Bernie that kind of
credit I mean from day one Bernie uh
what was it they were trying to trash
Bernie to the campaign that he hadn't
done civil rights
and then that somebody yeah
arrested somewhere yeah
housing it's like segregated housing
protesting segregated housing I don't
personally agree with Bernie's
compromises but I think Bernie has
Integrity the way Cornell does and that
that goes you know that's decades in the
building the way a figure like Jeremy
corbyn does
that's a concern of mine about Kennedy
that a lot of these seem to be newly I
mean apparently it was a good
environmental rights lawyer uh but a lot
of these issues I don't see that he has
a long track record with and that always
makes me suspect I mean Cornell has not
deviated I I was in Community School
and Cornell who was
you know a few years old it was already
a superstar I mean it was plenty so we
forget you know I mean
so uh any any took a lot of hits I mean
he stood up to Obama yeah the Obama
White House really made life
uncomfortable for him
so
yeah
yeah I mean you know black radio he was
called a race Trader and they managed to
get all his or a lot of his speaking
engagements canceled and so he's been
through it I mean he's been attacked
um when it's ongoing
um ongoing and it's going to get really
bad because
my best guess is that Bobby doesn't run
beyond the primary there's no way the
demo is absolutely impossible for him to
get the nomination
they'll figure it doesn't matter how
much support he has he's not going to
get it
yeah we've been on that Rodeo train
before yeah of course and
and then then because even if Cornell's
polling in the single digits that's a
threat to Biden
so they're going to be they're going to
come down as they've already started to
to say on the mainstream news they've
been circling the wagons I want to play
a clip for you so Cornell West went on
MSNBC and in a different MSNBC segment
they were talking about his interview
let's just play this clip and I want to
get your reaction we have Progressive
Robert um
West who first announced running for
president in the people's party but now
he is switching to the green party uh
he's addressing accusations of
potentially being a spoiler in the
election take a listen
you don't look to the weakest candidates
as a full explanation as to why you lose
sister Hillary Clinton lost because she
was not a good candidate the idea of
putting all the responsibility on the
candidates who get the fewest votes
compared to the other big two is just a
way of rationalizing a two-party system
that has become more and more outdated
and Antiquated do you agree with that I
mean in today's national politics how
big an impact is a third party candidate
have deciphon votes from Democrats and
Republicans and is he going to be on the
ballot in 50 states well you just
touched on it and at least touched on it
the key is ballot access right if the
green party if Cornell West is the
nominee for the green party and the
green party is on the ballot in an
Arizona or Wisconsin or Pennsylvania
then the impact could be significant I
mean I I think what Cornell West is
saying there it doesn't appear to be all
that versed in history right we don't
have to go back far the 2000 election
George Bush has declared the winner of
Florida by 537 votes right and yet 97
000 people voted for Ralph Nader so it's
a concern yeah
so Chris Hedges is Cornell West
insufficiently versed in history
yeah well
(Laughter)
I haven't met anybody better versed in
history than Cornell West
I mean that's that just is spitting back
a lie
because they only counted two counties
even Al Gore says now he won Florida
they stopped counting because they had
an estimated 354
000 if I remember votes that were
invalidated Democratic votes and they
pushed it to the Supreme Court where uh
George Bush was anointed president by
judicial Fiat that's the truth had
nothing to do with Nader in fact if I
remember Ralph saying I think the
libertarian party got even more I mean
this is just part of the demon it's the
Distortion of History the demonize
third-party candidates and after 2000
the Democrats were terrified of Ralph
and they really it was awful what they
did to him and of course they vote
you're right they've already started
with Cornell but having anybody say that
Cornell doesn't understand history is
there's not much that Cornell doesn't
understand I mean having spent hours
being humbled before it's Brilliance
well the other part of that club that
really stood out to me was uh Robert
Gibbs uh former White House Press
Secretary that's the male voice that
listeners can hear uh In that clip
saying well the key is really ballot
access and what I heard when I heard him
saying that it was almost like a bad
signal that you're putting out into the
world saying make sure the green party
doesn't have ballot access like that's
the game plan yeah that well it is the
game plan if you read Teresa Amato's
book Grand Illusion which everyone
should read the myth of voter choice and
a two-party tyranny she was Ralph's
campaign manager and in-house counsel
both in 2000 2004 she wrote a book
specifically about all of the obstacles
and impediments they place to make sure
both both parties
do not third parties cannot get on the
ballot because it goes back to Ross
Perot where I think he got 19 and they
were just any Andy was allowed to be in
the debates and that they they said
that's never happening again uh so yeah
the key is ballot access he's right
about that what he's not telling you is
that the duopoly is gamed and rigged the
system so effectively that it's
extremely difficult for third parties
even to get on the ballot much less run
and the way they do it is it's expensive
to get on the ballot not only do you
have to hire you know serious ballot
access people who are attorneys uh to
make sure your lists are legal and all
that but then that it's expensive
legally because they're always
challenging you in court
so the process is is it mostly a
signature collection and then the court
disputes are over legitimacy of those
signatures or is there some other aspect
to it I don't know you're the lawyer I'm
not an election lawyer unfortunately
uh my understanding is they challenge
the list even if they're legal right it
racks up your legal fees right because
they know you don't you have such
limited money yeah so it kills you the
other part of this that always boggles
in mind and I raise this with uh Dr West
when he was on uh the podcast last week
is that there's an alternate universe
where the Democratic party is just open
and fair LOL where they say well the the
ticket isn't ballot access the issue
isn't ballot access the issue is the
Democratic party if it was genuinely
invested in preventing Donald Trump or
Rhonda Sanders or whomever from being
president as opposed to being genuinely
invested in preserving its own power as
one of two corporate parties then it
would be advocating aggressively for
rain Choice voting or something some
alternative to first pass the post
voting which puts it in this position
but of course if they did that they
would uh give up their ability to
pressure people via vote blue no matter
who into compromising for any number of
frankly compromised candidates like Joe
Biden
well we know exactly the Democratic
would party hierarchy and donor class
preferred Trump to Bernie they were
upfront about it I mean Lloyd blankfein
there's someone who should be in prison
a former had a Goldman Sachs came out
even alone he said if Bernie's the
nominee we're all going to support Trump
we know the the Democratic party even
supports the corporate indentured Biden
and if somehow there's a real Insurgency
and a figure who is not like Bernie
corporate indenture then they'll go with
the Trump they'll go with the Republican
corporate indenture that's that's the
that's the real her Beating Heart of the
democratic party and that's not even
hidden yeah I mean I I want to ask you
since I mean you say here's someone
should be in prison I mean it obviously
jogs my thinking about what's happening
right now with uh the most recent Trump
indictment Daniel Ellsberg of the
Pentagon papers just passed away there's
been a lot of conversation about the
nature of
um confidential documents and the ways
that the Espionage Act has been
historically weaponized against not
leakers but leakers that reveal
information that is inconvenient to the
intelligence industry as a and that is a
very much of public interest as opposed
to the everyday course of leaks that are
fed to mainstream newspapers who often
happily just repeat those uh deep State
talking points if you will and so I
wonder if you've given much thought to
how the left should be thinking about
the use of the Espionage Act to
get Trump to quote uh dershowitz
well the Espionage Act has always been
dirty going all the way back to its
Inception in 1917.
and it was used first against the left
they shut down the masses under the
Espionage Act they threw the Socialist
candidate Eugene V Debs I think he was
actually officially charged under this
Edition Act
they deported Emma Goldman uh you know
so it's it's always
been a weapon that has in the name you
know sort of roughly the equivalent of
the British foreign secret sect it's
always been a weapon that's used to hit
uh critics that the establishment
doesn't like
uh I have my doubts as to how far
they'll get with Trump
um you know we this has just been a
cycle we have gone through since he was
inaugurated they haven't stopped and and
they they uh I mean maybe maybe they
will maybe they'll bring him down this
time I don't know uh but it it it's it's
been a reoccurring theme yeah the
Espionage Act I am as you know I'm a
friends and strong supporter of Julian
Assange who could very well be
extradited this week
um because the last uh appeal his last
his appeal uh he the the judge bariza in
January of 2019 because it was I can't
remember or no it would have been
2022 I think anyway I can't remember the
year but anyway about a year ago uh she
blocked the extradition not because she
didn't find him guilty but because he
was a suicide risk and the inhumane
conditions of the American prison system
the US government issued a diplomatic
note uh that gave all sorts of
guarantees none of which are worth the
paper legally that they're written none
so the green light of the extradition uh
assange's attorney's appealed the appeal
was rejected they have one last kind of
emergency appeal uh and the the reports
are that they will rule this week now if
they reject that appeal it's not
inconceivable that he could be
you know given a sedative put in diapers
hooded and stuffed on one of those CIA
planes and brought back this week and
that's all the Espionage Act again
uh somebody who's not even an American
citizen and who has a news organization
is not even based in the United States
so it the the the the the Espionage Act
has kind of like become Stalin Stalin
had this law 58 that they used at the
height of the purges just to be able to
arrest you for anything that's kind of
what the Espionage Act has become
um are they going to get Trump
you know again having been a reporter
for so long I I it's hypothetical it's a
guess because I don't like making those
guesses unless I've interviewed
uh the people who are engaged and that
and I don't know
um but I have my doubts just because of
the the sheer number of attempts that
there have been so far
yeah and he's lawyered up and he can
drag it out
and uh and if he drags if he drags he
could very well be running
I guess my question is less you know
what you think will come of the
prosecution but how you think the left
should be advocating one way or another
so to your point if it is the case that
Julian Assange could be extradited this
week it puts the left in a very
difficult position
if in the normal course of things we
should be advocating for the repeal of
the Espionage Act but in this particular
political moment do so is even more
likely to get us again accused of being
indifferent to Trump and his crimes
um sympathetic to Trump in some kind of
horseshoe Theory way
um there is this argument that sure the
Espionage Act is bad and has been
historically weaponized against people
who are trying to bring forward stories
of the public interest and shine a light
on
um the horrific actions of the American
government but for once this time it's
going after somebody rich and powerful
and is Justice letting him off the hook
when others have gone down I mean have
you given much thought to from where
from a messaging perspective the love
should be on that yeah I would say
there's one message to the left and that
is that the FBI is not your friend
uh despite the Mueller report and
everything else
uh so of course the Espionage Act should
be repealed it's been used primarily
against the left
primarily and and when we normalize
those kinds of procedures we slit our
own throat because we're the primary
victims you know they may have this case
it's it's all the anti-terrorism laws
the special administrative measures that
were used against uh after 9 11 against
Muslim I'm very involved in it because I
come out of the Middle East and of you
know and Muslims were demonized after 9
11 uh you know they may have been a car
mechanic living in Dearborn Michigan it
didn't matter uh and of course all these
Draconian legal procedures were pushed
through well now they can be used
against
anyone and R being used against animal
rights activists environmental activists
cop City those people are being charged
under these terrorism laws so absolutely
don't want to justify the breakdown of
the rule of law habeas court you don't
want to do that for anyone even Trump
and and and Trump has many ways to
protect himself in ways we don't
so yeah I I I think that is that's
that's how they sell you on this stuff
that's how they sold us the Patriot Act
again clippenstein came on Rising this
morning and talked about his most recent
reporting for The Intercept about how
there has there's been a tenfold
increase in investigations by the FBI
into
uh pro-abortion Advocates activists uh
despite the fact that there's never been
a documented instance of uh anybody
being seriously hurt or killed by a
pro-abortion activist and they're being
you know a couple dozen instances of uh
anti-choice activists successfully
killing
um people who support the right to
choose that there has you know they have
a cover I think because of the now
liberal appetite for expanding uh the
FBI's Powers they're using it to go
after not who I think the Liberals would
hope that they would go after but that's
the nature of these institutions and
institutional creep
um I I want to ask you a little bit
about a conversation that started at
that uh workers Strike Back social
alternative uh event that we were at
last week
um at one point shama sawant was talking
about the benefits of a presidential
campaign outside of these simple
electoral yes or no vote on a ballot
that one will fill out at the end of the
whole thing
um the benefits from an organizing
perspective
the the benefits of helping people to
Rally behind concrete messages and
mature their political identity and I
wondered if you could speak a little bit
more to what you hope to come out of
Cornell West campaign besides obviously
the hope that we all you know would love
to see him win but short of that what
concrete gains do you think we should be
looking to
well there are a couple first of all it
gives expression to
those working men and women who are
attempting to organize and regain power
over their own lives it gives a clear
political expression to that which isn't
small
no no presidential no political
candidacy no political party is going to
be worth anything unless we rebuild
robust unions that uh frequently use the
one weapon they have against the
oligarchy and that's the strike
and uh and so that's one thing that's
important the other thing is that we're
not going to build uh an alternative
political movement in an election cycle
and this was Bernie's grade failing
Bernie raised quite a bit of money
for his political revolution and then at
the end uh herded people back into the
Embrace of
the corporate Democrats so you go back
it took ceresa 10 years to take power in
Greece and their first election I think
they pulled four percent
and we have to think in the long term as
I know Cornell is we're trying to build
a real political movement and that is
going to require people to overcome the
fear and they are going to because they
don't Biden both sides they don't have
anything to offer their constituents
other than fear fear of the other and
it's effective and when and because
you're pounded with it with the media I
mean they've already started but we're
going to have to overcome that fear and
just on the issue of the climate crisis
alone we have no time left
and so we've got to stand up against
these forces and of course it's very
hard at the beginning because they seek
to disempower you by telling you that
it's not only useless but it's
counterproductive
and I think we have to take the long I
mean look at the abolitionists uh on the
eve of the Civil War
everybody wrote them off as dreamers
uh utopians yet by 1865 slavery been
abolished so and we have the you know
the reversal of reconstruction and Jim
and jankra and all that after I'm not I
don't want to say that anything was
great after that but uh but it's always
a lot of Theologian Reinhold neighbor
calls it those possessed of sublime
Madness
in which he says that people possessed
of that Sublime Madness that hold fast
to a moral imperative or a vision in
times of distress are far more effective
than a bankrupt liberalism uh and I
think we're at that moment and I think
that that's a good way to describe
Cornell and what he's doing uh and and I
am a great admirer of Ralph because uh
and and uh because Ralph saw that he
understood that politics is a game of
fear that you you pull as Ralph said he
knew he wasn't going to win 5 10 15
million people into a third party the
Democratic party starts to be afraid uh
and that's the only way it reacts that's
why Ralph says our last liberal
president was Richard Nixon not because
Nixon was a liberal but because he was
we had powerful movements from the 1960s
that frightened him
and and and we have to without those
popular movements
we have no power
and but we at the same time need a
political expression of those movements
and uh while there are many things that
Bobby Kennedy says that I agree with
uh I know Cornell has spent his entire
life
standing for this
and I gotta say it feels so good
honestly
you know I I've been me personally
hinting around the edges of it I
obviously have voted green for the last
two cycles I have
you know I've written an article called
Defensive litmus test that basically
asked the question you know challenging
gnome chomsky's take on this show back
in the fall of 2020 that vote blue no
matter who is just imperative given
Rising fascism Etc that at a certain
point the ratchet effect is only going
in One Direction and at some point you
have to have the moment where you're
willing to to lose you're willing to
make there be a real cost for the
Democratic party because absent that
there's absolutely no leverage there is
absolutely no fear and there's something
that I will say feels so ideologically
consistent and right about supporting
someone in a general election without
having to also do the second guessing of
will they do the dirty break won't they
do a dirty break are they just going to
sheep hurt there's something that feels
powerful without about not having to
hide the extent to which yes you were
willing to cause the Democratic party to
lose because there's a longer game being
played here than just the every
four-year election cycle well watch how
they pile on Cornell and they pay on
Cornell because they're frightened yeah
and they have every reason to be
frightened and it's our job to make sure
not only they are frightened but they're
even more frightened
that's what politics is about
well let me ask you just quickly before
we wrap uh some news the teachers union
and the nurses Union have both come out
now in the last few days and endorsed
Jill Biden Bernie's campaign got an
early boost of legitimacy from getting
endorsements from you know historically
you know left-leaning unions and nurses
Union in the relationship to Medicare
for all was very meaningful the teachers
union has been so radical of late with
the Wildcat strikes of 2018 or so
uh are you concerned about this
development does that feel like evidence
of a retrenchment of some kind
no it's the bankruptcy of mainstream
unions which have become Junior Partners
in the capitalist system and so the
effective strikes so the Old West
Virginia teachers strike for instance
was a wildcat strike that was carried
out by the teachers in defiance of the
Union leadership the union leadership is
largely bankrupt uh I mean Biden Biden
uh just broke the freightwork rail
workers potential to strike and that you
know as a candidate he talked about
strengthening collective bargaining and
then as soon as that strike was
threatened he took away collective
bargaining from one of the very few
entities of workers that possess it I
mean so you got to look at what they do
not what they say I mean he says he's a
pro-union president I mean this is
garbage after NAFTA I mean Biden I have
a lot of anger towards Biden I mean you
know what he you go back and look I mean
the author of The Patriot Act NAFTA he I
teach in a prison as you know half of my
students wouldn't be there but for Biden
and Clinton the amount of suffering and
then he was calling for invasion of Iraq
five years before we invaded you have to
look at the consequences the the
suffering that was visited on hundreds
if not hundreds of thousands millions of
people including in this country and you
you can't walk away from that you have
to be held accountable for that and
these people you know he may be a kind
of you know intellectually limited you
know people say he's a nice guy I don't
know whether he is I don't care the
policies that he has embraced yeah
uh have diminished our democracy uh got
us into all sorts of Foreign Wars that
we should have never been in including
the 20 years in the Middle East
uh I mean in the end both parties are
utterly subservient to the War Industry
that's it
I mean they have all these Cuts they
won't touch this Pentagon budget which
is
10 times with the next it's it's more
than 10 times of the next 10 countries
combined including Russia and China so
yeah I mean you know what you know
they're very good these this public
relations industry is very good at
creating fictional personas that we come
to believe in in the same way that we
believe that Trump was a great
businessman because of The Apprentice uh
but we have to look at what they do and
and uh Biden Biden's policies well
that's why Barack Obama chose him he was
a Democrat who always voted Republican
they used to call him Senator credit
card because he worked for the credit
card senator from Indiana based in
Delaware right and uh and that's why the
Democratic party anointed him because he
was a company guy
I'm coming back to this this point of
the Union leadership I didn't want to
press too hard on this at the worker
Strike Back event I didn't want to be
too negative it is an event that's you
know initiating an effort to do
Grassroots organizing of the type that I
very much think is necessary we had two
representatives of uh unions on the
panel with us someone from The Writer's
Guild uh and someone from a a grad
Student Union
however when we see what's happened with
the teachers union and the nurses Union
and there is this critique of business
Union business unionism and the captured
nature of Union leadership and then
simultaneously there's this discussion
of how the path forward for the left is
through
unions and workers
as opposed to through electoral politics
it can start to feel
quite demoralizing
um when you're basically realizing that
the
group collectively that held the most
promise and existing organization seems
to has been neutered so effectively and
feel so confident in thumbing their nose
at the movements they were recently
aligned with in Bernie Sanders and at
this juncture
when there's only one candidate in the
race in the in the prime and Democratic
primary who's advocating for Medicare
for all and it certainly isn't Joe Biden
it certainly is an RFK Jr that there
isn't just a willingness to sit sit it
out but an an eagerness it feels like to
go ahead and endorse the guy that has
been basically giving you the finger for
years
I mean what do you what do you say to
people who might find that to be a kind
of demoralizing portrait of a password
that is a comment on the bankruptcy of
the leadership not the membership right
because but still leadership is selling
out the membership so how does one
we've got to get rid of the leadership
that's what shama sawan's trying to do
workers strike bad is about re or
building militant Union movements where
the leaders are not allied with the
ruling class that's what her whole
movement is about and she's right
that's what has to be done yeah I mean
these people are part of the problem
AFL-CIO all these people
yeah and and as things get worse and
worse as we
you know create this whole gig economy
is just a species of serfdom really and
it's not going to get better
uh this this leadership and remember the
salaries these people are pulling down
you know quarter of a million dollars or
something uh I forget which Union it was
so they you know they uh they've been
integrated into the oligarchic elite in
essence
and
um and so when we talk about rebuilding
Union strength we're talking about
replacing these traditional unionists
union leaders
yeah who make these decisions such as
the one you just mentioned about
endorsing body well I strongly recommend
people go and listen to the entirety of
that worker Strike Back uh event not
just the parts that salaciously got
clipped for the internet because you
were making big news Chris Hedges thank
you so much for spending the hour with
me once again can you tell the listeners
where they can find you in your work on
the internet yeah
Chris edges.substep.com it all goes out
there all right terrific on the real
news every Friday too so awesome I'm
sure I Echo the sentiments of many
listeners when I say that we're very
glad that you have such a close
relationship with Cornell West and we
just are so thankful for your guidance
I'm sure Dr West is also thankful for
your guidance and your friendship and
it's hard to imagine a better team as we
move forward I admire him tremendously
you know he's the real thing and and you
know his commitment to the marginalized
is I've seen it over and over and over
he came I brought him into the prison
where I teach all the students asked him
to come teach this guy has a schedule
that would kill most Mortals and he came
in and taught a philosophy class there
was no cameras nobody paid him no you
know he's real and that's why I'll you
know I'm so fiercely loyal to him and
and uh and supportive of his candidacy
well thank you for that and thank you to
all of the listeners for tuning in once
again uh if you would like another
episode of bad faith every week you know
you can subscribe at patreon.com
badfaith podcast and get our Monday uh
premium episodes as always take care of
yourselves and keep the faith
hey YouTube thanks for watching just a
reminder that this is a podcast you can
catch an extra premium episode every
Monday for five dollars a month at
patreon.com badfaith podcast that's
patreon.com badface podcast for five
dollars a month an extra episode every
week additionally please do consider
liking this video subscribing to this
channel it helps us out it helps
Independent Media beat the algorithm we
appreciate you and as always

thank you


## Keywords:
