---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-vtaDw7PJmY
---

# Video
Consciousness, Free Will, Space Time and Quantum Mechanics  Penrose, Arkani Hamed, Musk, Peterson
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-vtaDw7PJmY)

## Transcript:
in your view is consciousness something
that's unique to humans or is it
something that permeates all matter
almost like a fundamental force of
physics
I don't think Consciousness permeates
all matter
pan cyclists believe that yeah there's a
philosophical how would you tell
that's true that's a good point I
believe in scientific method blow your
mind or anything but the scientific
method is like if you cannot test the
hypothesis then you cannot reach
meaningful conclusion that it is true
foreign
truth cannot be a system of thought
no
system of thought can give you
knowledge of Truth why because the
system of thought
is
a map
science is a system of thought based on
observation
experimentation
validation peer review also but it has
certain rules it's a system of thought

philosophy is a system of thought
okay epistemology ontology
Etc
religion is a system of art Islam
Christianity Buddhism Etc Hinduism
they're all systems of thoughts that in
other words they are ideologies
therefore they are dogmatic in their
insistence on the validity of their map
which they mistake for the territory
and thirdly
they are always they have some
commonalities but they're always at odds
thank you
the mistakes
within religion
are the rebels
they say no system of thought can give
me the truth because the system of
thought is a map okay so the what's the
common thing between the sufis and the
the Christian Mystics and you know
almost all of them
kind of relegated to the outskirts or
the fringes of their religion because
they're not accept it is they realized
that in order to know fundamental truth
to understand fundamental reality
you cannot depend on perception and you
cannot depend on cognition or a system
of thought or a map you have to actually
transcend to an experience where there
is nothing
scientists would say that I agree with
everything that you've said except you
cannot classify the scientific method as
part of these ideologies because the
scientific method is not a system of
thought as much it's a process to access
truth and it's the only one that you can
be sure of because of the process the
other systems we have no way to validate
them somebody says this somebody says
that a Mystic says this yeah maybe they
feel that but I have no way of
independently confirming it the
scientific method which you articulate
very well is the only way that you can
know that you and I can both know that
truth as opposed to the Mystic who I
believe that you feel that way but I
can't feel it scientific method is the
only way that you and I together can
believe in in an independent reality I
have several problems with that science
is not a method
for doing the truth science is a method
for knowing partial truth if you knew
the truth we wouldn't be making atomic
bombs
and we wouldn't be proliferating
biological weapons of mass destruction
we wouldn't have created mechanized
death we won't have caused climate
change we wouldn't be messing up the
ecosystem with GMO Foods or petroleum
products in what we put inside our body
we call them insecticides they're
supposed to kill insects we share the
same DNA why wouldn't they kill us so
science as we practice it today is a map
for partial truth it looks at the
universe as an activity that is
independent of me but me me The Observer
is also an activity of the universe okay
so when I go inward I am going to an
activity of the universe as much as I go
out to it
there are so many plant behaviors that
are so much more similar than I realized
and I think than most people realize
down to the mechanism so it's it's kind
of like behavior that you would describe
in similar terms to the way we describe
human behavior but they're also
similar genes similar processes of cell
changes resulting in electrical signals
in much the same way that our that our
brains do and of course they're very
different but they're similar enough
that I I use it because we assume plants
are not conscious and so you can kind of
play this trick on yourself by saying
okay if plants do these things that when
humans do them we say that that's
evidence of Consciousness but we assume
plants are not conscious they're doing
all of this without Consciousness why
maybe we don't need Consciousness for
these behaviors in humans and this is
just part of the intuition challenging
that I was doing but yeah so you you
spoke about the the tree Behavior the
Douglas fir and the Birch this is the
work of Susan samard
um I don't know if you've seen her Ted
Talk and it's so worth watching um
she did work in the Canadian national
forest
um
and and I actually think she she grew
some of her own trees and her own like
lab setting to to study the
um Communications that happen
underground in what are called
mycorrhizal networks these are fungal
networks under the ground so there are
root systems but there are also systems
of fungus that help trees communicate to
each other share carbon with each other
they share defense signals there is this
incredibly elaborate system of
communication happening Underground
um some of which and I use this in my
book because it mimics human behavior to
some extent where the trees that have
dropped seedlings she refers to them as
the mother trees are able to
recognize through these networks which
trees that have grown in the forest are
their own kin
and they send them more carbon and they
send them defense signals that they're
not sending to other trees and there's a
sense in which they're protecting they
are literally protecting their kids it's
unbelievable they make more room for
their roots and you can see how this
could all happen without Consciousness
right like it's all trippy but you could
still say okay that's so interesting all
that that happens there's all this
communication and cells talking to each
other and
um and that could all just be happening
in the dark right that could be
happening in the same way that we
imagine our computer
processing systems are happening in the
dark
and if that's true why do we think all
of these things that we're doing require
Consciousness and so I think that's an
interesting starting point but it does
also make
so so trees
um you know they they interact with each
other communicate with each other in
numerous ways they're sophisticated in
how they how they interact not just like
we as human beings are very
sophisticated in how we communicate we
speak we we have science you know we
have body language we have nuances we
can pick up on little small expressions
and and so trees have got multiple ways
of interacting and communicating with
each other as well so they compete but
at the same time they collaborate and I
that's I think the great contribution of
my first PhD work was that I was you
know very much focused on how and and so
was the forest industry on how uh wedi
plants which were considered weedy plus
actually they were early successional
tree species like Aspen and Birch and
Cottonwood were con viewed as weeds
because they would sort of block the
light getting down to the seedlings that
they were trying to grow these conifers
that would provide the next you know
marketable wood product X and and so
they were managing this competition by
getting rid of these these deciduous
trees and and I thought I also saw that
this was actually not helping the trees
as much as they expected they they did
you know sometimes it was helpful to
reduce that light competition but but
other times actually the trees would get
disease and they would weaken and die
and so I started looking at you know
that there are many these other ways
that these trees are actually
interacting that if we just focus on
getting rid of them because they're
competitors that we're actually cutting
off uh their ability to collaborate at
the same time and so what I found was
that as these birch trees for example
shaded Douglas fir they actually sent
more carbon below ground to Douglas for
sort of balancing things out and
enhancing the ability of the whole
Community to survive so the Douglas Firs
could survive in the shade of the of the
paper birch because partly because they
were getting these subsidies from
through the carbon exchange below ground
when I think about that is is
the beautiful symbiosis of these
ecologies right like we're caught up in
our sense of self where we separate
ourselves from others I mean you talk
about Stardust and yeah we can yeah
we're all Stardust but when you really
think about that we don't yeah and when
you think about the limitations of Free
Will and the fact that we're just truly
reacting to our environments and there
is no you know
impermeable barrier between ourselves
and the world and and the Sun and all of
these things that we're reacting
constantly to our environment and that
we are very much in that same place of
responding to our environment and
adapting trees and forests and you know
all of these sorts of things are are
instructive because they show us that
that Integra the integration is so
undeniable when you drill down us you
wouldn't you don't think the plants are
making this decision like okay now now
I'm going to give more carbon to you
over there and
um they are as you said there's this
complex way in which they are connected
and responding and we don't in in plant
Behavior we don't mistake that response
however complex and interesting it is
for free will right and I think you can
you can map that onto human beings as
well that that there's a sense in which
it's all a system from the brain to our
bodies to the air we're breathing to the
sound waves that I'm speaking that are
bouncing off you I mean there there's
this connection that we don't see
um but that is is there not only do we
not see it where our brains are rigged
to convince us that it's separate it's
something very different yeah yeah
some of us believe that there's a lot of
indications and magical properties in uh
in in the results of completely ordinary
particle collisions in regimes that we
in principle think we understood very
well things that are going on right now
in collisions at the Large Hadron
Collider for example that bear in them
Clues to some deeper structure that
might be underlying space-time and
quantum mechanics in any case if there
is some deeper structure that underlies
uh space-time and quantum mechanics it's
clear ahead of time that it has to
involve some new physical ideas and some
new mathematical uh ideas uh as well and
um uh after all if we're going to learn
to talk about physics where these
Notions of space-time and quantum
mechanics don't make an explicit
appearance then our usual way of doing
things certainly makes them make an
appearance and gives us all sorts of
intricate and interesting uh phenomenon
uh um and you know
non-trivial formulas that to make
predictions for for experiments if these
are going to come out of some other way
of doing things clearly we have to have
both new physical ideas and some new
mathematical Machinery that has to that
has to produce the same formulas and
perhaps eventually extensions of them in
a in a different way
you know what happened at the blank uh
scale what happened in Planck time do we
even know there were no constants the
laws of physics break down okay why did
the why did the Big Bang occur when it
occurred and what do we mean by when
where there was no time how can you have
a dateable event in time when time
doesn't exist and yet everybody buys
into the Big Bang Theory okay because if
you're not buying into it if you don't
buy into classic modern new or darwinist
interpretations of evolution if you
don't buy into the Big Bang as explained
currently by science you are subject to
ridicule you are stupid you do not
understand how science Works explain to
me how do you have a dateable event in
time when there was no time tell me the
location of the Big Bang
not only in time but in space because
space didn't exist yeah I asked you know
I asked one of the authors of the double
dog theory of uh of uh the Universe I
said where did the Big Bang occur he
said everywhere I said everywhere oh
omnipresence I said and now we have how
much energy he says one was Limitless I
said oh omnipotence it's and I said
where did it come from he said nothing I
said omniscience you know you guys have
created your own mythology and we buy
into it without even questioning your
mythology we don't understand you know
so you are willing to propose 10 to the
power of 500 universes in you know even
a computer would take eternity to count
them and because you can't actually
explain what's happening and then you
finally ask where does science happen
you know the activity that we call
science where are scientific theories
conceived in Consciousness where are
experiments designed in Consciousness
where are observations made in
Consciousness what is empirical evidence
it's a species-specific mode of
observation it has nothing to do with
fundamental truth you know this is I
have done science in my life and I'm
amazed how we create truth
and then bind to it and call it truth
when it's an ideology you know I I
observe a moving biology the biology is
not a constant it's a moving thing okay
I observe it I freeze it I kill it
I then identify something that I call a
molecule which actually doesn't exist
because it's a movement okay it's a flow
now I call it I give it a name okay
oxytocin
then we all agree now it's reality it
doesn't exist
You Know What You observe
it really doesn't exist the only The
Observer actually is giving it a label
that's all and what is empirical
evidence it's a species specific mode of
observation that we agree on
so let me just give a few examples of
this
um uh many of them are of course
famously associated with Einstein so
Einstein's special theory of relativity
um largely had ancient Origins Einstein
just noticed that there's a notion of
Relativity that Einstein did not event
that goes back to Galileo
um and he just noticed that that notion
of Relativity was incompatible with the
idea that what you do here shouldn't
affect what's uh what's going on there
arbitrarily quickly okay so there's a
notion of locality that what happens
here should not affect what's going on
in Alpha Centauri instantaneously and if
you just take very conservatively the
Galilean picture of Relativity and make
it compatible with this notion of
locality you're led to Einstein's
picture of relativity
all right there's another example that
has uh very much to do with uh with the
quantum mechanics so in the usual
Newtonian picture of the world
um you say that a particle moves around
um governed by his famous Newton's law
that the f equals ma that gives you this
uh this sort of clockwork Universe
picture this deterministic picture that
where the particle goes next is is
totally determined by what's happening
what's happening to it now right so you
say where it is now how quickly it's
moving and the force tells you where the
acceleration is so it tells you where it
goes next and you just keep doing it
over over and over again okay so that's
in that picture determinism is
absolutely hardwired into the structure
of the laws
you can imagine that you're like a clock
running down and that's like a
deterministic model but people aren't
clocks we're dissipative structures a
clock is something that runs downhill
but human beings
you can look up dissipative structure I
think that was an idea that was first
formulated by the physicist Schrodinger
we
we're we're not we're not Clocks by any
stretch of the imagination and we take
energy in and we disperse energy and and
we were anti-entropic in in a temporary
sense so that makes us and and so and
life is as well shorting a wrote about
that in a book called what is life
and
we don't what we seem to do and this is
how it looks to me
we don't contend with the present and
we're not driven by the past instead
what we see in front of us is a
landscape of possibility
and in my Wilder moments I think that's
associated with the physical idea of
multiple universes but that's in my
Wilder moments it's just a speculation
and so what we see in front of us is a
an array of potential universes and
those are the universes that we can
bring about as a consequence of our
actions and it and we make choices to
the right or the left there's a lot of
mythological speculation about that sort
of idea too in an ethical sense because
we decide what sort of reality that we
want to bring into being and so we
encounter potential like God did at the
beginning of time when he made order out
of chaos chaos is this chaotic potential
we confront chaotic potential with our
Consciousness and we cast that into
reality and that now then you think well
is that really the case well
that's hard to say because there are
limits to our knowledge about
Consciousness and about reality but if
you treat yourself like you're a free
moral agent with choice and that you can
determine your the course of your life
then you seem to get along better with
yourself and to be less anxious and to
be more productive and if you treat
other people like that that they're free
agents that are making voluntary choices
about how reality is going to come into
being and you reward them when they do
it properly and you punish them or
otherwise discipline them when they
don't when they do it badly then your
relationships with them seem to work and
then if we
predicate our society on the
presupposition that each individual
human being is capable of doing just
that then we seem to have extremely
functional societies and so and this is
something that Sam Harris has been
taking to task for many times is if you
dispense with the idea of free will
how is it you organize your relationship
to yourself your interactions with your
family and your relationships with the
broader social Community it's a very
complicated issue so I believe
strongly that we have free will that
we're responsible for our choices those
choices are constrained in many many
ways I think there's a gradient of Free
Will from free out into the future to
increasingly constrained as the present
manifests itself to deterministic in the
moment when when in the moment of action
we and we might think that we enter the
realm of deterministic causality at the
moment of action something like that
that's how it looks to me
so free will is an illusion
and even the experience of Free Will is
an illusion like we don't even
experience it
what am I am I good in my summer
yeah this is a
this is a line that's a little hard to
scan for people I I say that it's not
merely that Free Will is an illusion the
illusion of Free Will is an illusion
right like there is no illusion of free
will so there are subject there are kind
of inward correlates to this and I would
say that the um
the sense of self a sense of self and
Free Will are closely related and I
often describe them as as two signs of
the same coin but they're not quite the
same in the their
their spuriousness I mean so so the
sense of self is something that
people I think do experience right it's
not a very clear experience
but it's not I wouldn't call the
illusion of self an illusion but the
illusion of Free Will is an illusion in
that as you pay more attention to your
experience
you begin to see that it's totally
compatible with an absence of free will
you don't I mean they come into back to
the place we started
you don't know what you're going to
think next you don't know what you're
going to intend next you don't know
what's going to just occur to you that
you must do next you don't know you
don't know how much you're going to feel
the behavioral imperative to act on that
thought
if you suddenly feel
oh I don't need to do that that's I can
do that tomorrow you don't know where
that comes from you didn't know that was
going to arise you didn't know that was
going to be compelling all of this is
compatible with some Evil Genius in the
Next Room just typing in code into your
experience just like this okay let's
give him the uh oh my God I just forgot
it was going to be our anniversary in
one week thought right give him the
Cascade of fear uh give them give them
This brilliant idea for the thing he can
buy that's going to take him no time at
all on this this you know overpowering
sense of relief all of our experiences
is compatible with with the the script
already being written right it's and I'm
not saying the script is written I'm not
saying that fatalism is you know is the
right way to look at this but we just
don't have even our most deliberate
voluntary action where we go back and
forth between two options you know
thinking about the reason for a and then
then reconsidering and going to thinking
harder about B and just going eeny meeny
miny mo until the end of the hour
however laborious you can make it there
is a utter mystery at your back
finally promoting the thought or
intention or ration rationale
that is most compelling and therefore
deliberate uh
behaviorally
um
effective yeah but the question is say
that this call what was it the horse of
Consciousness let's call it the uh the
Consciousness generator black box that
we don't understand
and is it possible that the script that
were
walking along that we're playing that's
already written is actually being
written in real time it's almost like
you're driving down a road
and in real time that road is being laid
down yeah and this black box of
Consciousness that we don't understand
is the place where the script is being
generated so it's not it is being
generated it didn't always exist so
there's something we don't understand
that's fundamental about the nature of
reality that generates both
Consciousness let's call it maybe the
self I don't know if you want to
distinguish between those yeah I
definitely would yeah
because there's a bunch of Illusions
we're referring to there's the illusion
of free will there's the illusion of
self and there's the illusion of
Consciousness you're saying I think you
said there's no you're not as willing to
say there's an illusion of Consciousness
I would say it's impossible impossible
you're a little bit more willing to say
that there's an illusion of self and
you're definitely saying there's an
illusion of Free Will yes yes and
phenomenologically it seems clear that
we have free choice and it isn't obvious
to me why we have Consciousness if free
choice isn't real because Consciousness
looks to me like a mechanism that deals
with potential before it's transformed
into actuality let's say and and I think
Consciousness is also the The Faculty so
to speak or a manifestation of the
faculty that enables us to pre-program
deterministic actions so again let's
think about someone playing the piano
they're practicing you know after you
repeat and you repeat your your finger
movements if you're playing the piano
any complex motor skill is like that you
have to repeat it repeat it repeat it
repeat it and you're using Consciousness
to program it to sequence the motor
movements and to pay attention to them
that all seems voluntary and it involves
the activation of a tremendous amount of
your brain because if you're doing
something new a lot of your brain is
activated and then as you practice it
the amount of brain that's activated
decreases it shifts from right to left
and then it shifts from frontal to
posterior and a smaller and smaller area
so what's happening is that
Consciousness is creating little
machines in the back of your head that
do things in an automated manner
if the thermalism isn't really there we
can't imagine the universe is a little
non-deterministic it's like being a
little pregnant it's not possible okay
so it has to be that the only way it
makes sense is uh is if there's a second
way of talking about my physics right
now where there's no determinism
fundamentally and somehow it comes out
it comes out as a consequence of some
other of some other rules and if I find
that way of thinking about things maybe
it'll give a better jumping off point to
the to the next description of the
reality where determinism is just not
there this for some reason happens to us
a number of times in theoretical physics
to me it's the most mysterious feature
of the structure of the laws of nature
that at any given moment in time
um that's exactly the same laws can be
described from psychologically
philosophically totally different points
of view that lead in the end to exactly
the same equations it's totally bizarre
that such a thing is possible but
somehow it's necessary it's the only way
we can make these big leaps
we have to take the laws as we discover
them rotate to some other way of
thinking about them that then makes it
possible to see how they could be the
limits of something that looks radically
different
if I take my arm and I go like this
you see I'll do that again
now you see there's a movement like that
and then my hands stopped just before my
my other hand now
it takes a certain amount of time for
the neural messages to go from my brain
to my arm and back and the time it takes
my hand to go like this and stop is
actually shorter than the time it takes
a message to get to my brain and back so
what that means is that when I
when I plan this movement which is
called a ballistic movement it's called
a ballistic movement because it's like a
bullet once you let it go it's gone
there's no calling it back I've actually
organized the neurological and muscular
sequences that enable that action before
it's implemented I set all that up and
then it's released and the whole thing
Cascades and so
once the action has been released let's
say then I don't really have any free
will because I can't stop it now so so
you think about that it looks like
there's a temporal gradient with regards
to Free Will is that as you look out
into the future meet perhaps the farther
out you look into the future
um the farther down the road let's say
the more free your choices are but the
closer they get to implementation the
more they become deterministic governed
by standard causal processes and there's
some transition point where they change
from being what we would describe as
choice that we haven't got the free
choice yet but at least to choice
there's some transition point between
that and Ballistic movement here's
another way of thinking about it like we
know for example that people who are
expert at playing the piano look ahead
of where they're playing
and and they're doing the same thing
they're watching the notes they're
seeing where they're going but and then
they're disinhibiting the automated
structures that enable them to play what
they've practiced so thoroughly they're
disinhibiting those structures and then
they go automatically and then what
happens if you make a mistake is that
Consciousness notes the error and then
unpacks the motor sequences that have
been practiced and then you repractice
them and sequence them again until they
become automatic and deterministic so
there's choice in that you're reading
ahead but there's no choice in that once
you've read ahead and disinhibited the
actions then they run ballistically and
then you can think about the same thing
that's happening when you're driving in
a car you don't look right in front of
you when you're driving a car because
whatever is right in front of you if
you're going 40 miles an hour or
whatever you've already run over you
look a quarter of a mile down the road
and that gives you the opportunity to
see what's coming and to set up a
sequence of increasingly automated
movements that culminate in whatever it
is that you're doing while you're
driving
and so there's a gradation from choice
to determinism a temporal gradation and
and I I don't often see that addressed
when people talk about free will
now Sam's issue with free will is that
if you get someone to do something like
lift their finger and you and you scan
their brains using a variety of
techniques while they're doing that what
you'll see is that there's an action
potential that Emer and you ask them to
voluntarily move their fingers so
they're doing it let's say by free
choice
there's an action potential that you can
re that you can read off the brain that
occurs before the person either moves
their finger or let's say decides to
move their finger and that occurs quite
a bit before the feeling of volunteerism
or that voluntary act and so that's been
read by Benjamin libbit who did the
experiments
um as indication that even the feeling
of voluntary choice is determined but I
don't think that that's a very useful
way of addressing the issue because
the the issue of when you lift your
finger in up again is it requires
pre-programming to disinhibit like you
know how to do this right you don't have
to learn to do that so you have a little
automated circuit that does this sort of
thing all these finger movements and
everything you can see babies practicing
them and they develop automated
circuitry that tends to be posterior
left hemisphere in order to run those
those automated processes out and what
you're basically doing when you decide
to do something that's a routine that
you've already practiced or or made out
of subroutines that you've already
practiced is disinhibiting them and the
the degree to which you might regard
that as free exactly is unclear as are
the temporal limitations so I don't
think that libits experiments
demonstrate conclusively that there's no
such thing as free will even though
there are action potentials that
indicate that there is brain activity
signaling even the onset of a voluntary
Choice
um uh voluntary Choice early
why is that the case why would it be the
case that the fundamental part of
quantum mechanics in the world that we
are in gives rise to our consciousness
well Robert I think Consciousness is
intrinsic to the universe and it's part
and parcel and in some way is is is
driving the universe perhaps if you look
at it strictly from the standpoint of
evolution
um it could be that Consciousness uh
that that biological systems reached a
level where they could uh more uh more
readily connect to uh platonic
information and Consciousness embedded
in the universe through these objective
reductions and that would give up if an
organism had a had Consciousness versus
an organism that didn't in a
predator-prey relationship the one that
has Consciousness would win and survive
and procreate and go on okay that makes
sense but but you you gave a couple of
uh of uh premises to begin with which
are strongly that uh Consciousness is uh
uh uh um ubiquitous in the universe that
it's it's the purpose to which it's
driving the universe you're throwing
this out at their premises I mean these
are these are very big I mean you can
build whole religions on either one of
those yeah
been accused of that but it's not my
attention it's just I'm just following
my nose and what's logical and and Roger
seems to have Roger Penrose has good
ideas on this
um it's uh remember you have to do
something because to me it's not it's
not uh it's certainly not obvious and uh
uh absurd to think that it's random that
something that is so fundamental to the
quantum physics of of the of the
universe then gives rise to our
confidence if that's the case I mean it
would be absurd to think that that's
just a you know an accident the way
things are
I don't think it's an accident at all I
think Consciousness is intrinsic to the
universe and that uh biology evolved to
uh to connect to it and utilize it
optimally and uh the purpose of
Consciousness is uh to get to the other
side you might say to to get uh to uh
continue to the next Eon and to to
optimize the Consciousness in the
universe and I think uh it's driving the
universe so is that a uh a a conscious
is there a second order of Consciousness
here that there's a Consciousness
driving the consciousness of the
Universe I don't it's not a that's not a
jokey question right that's right this
is where uh I would disagree with Deepak
Chopra for example in his view there is
a universal uh top-down Consciousness uh
god-like and that's directing things
causing collapse of the wave function
guiding our actions this this and that
um I think that it's more of a bottom-up
meets meets top down and that
Consciousness is actually in the the
middle and but but accesses platonic
values that are embedded in the universe
to uh to better uh accelerate and and
move so that's another massive
assumption that there are platonic
values and platonic uh abstract objects
that really exist and that the this
Consciousness is somehow Gathering those
together I mean this is a deep
philosophical uh system that that is
that that is the consequence that
follows from your theory yeah I think
you better be careful with these
theories you know you gotta you got to
know where you're going with these
theories I think we're pretty consistent
actually I may not be expressing it
properly but Roger Penrose came up with
the idea that uh platonic values were
intrinsic to the universe and would
influence choices in these objective
reductions so that and these platonic
values include aesthetic ethical values
as well as qualia uh true mathematical
truth so that if you're Mindful and have
make a conscious decision it's it's
mortgage influenced by these platonic
values you could think of it as that if
you have a gut feeling or an intuition
it's because your your conscious
thoughts are resonating or in tune with
platonic values in the universe you're
resonating with what's it built into the
universe that's sort of a religious uh
spiritual thing uh you know the way of
the Dao that Divine guidance it could be
true
the scheme that needs to modify quantum
mechanics in my view and I think there
are good reasons for this the
modification comes when there is
sufficient Mass displacement so you have
a Schrodinger's cap which is alive and
dead the mass displacement between a
dead cat and a live cat is way way more
than you need so that just a tiny Mass
displacement on classical point of view
but from a Quantum point of view it
would be a big mess displacement that is
where you will begin to see the the new
physics coming in so
um the reasons for this come from
thinking about general relativity and
quantum mechanics and how their
principles and to relate to each other
but there's no good of that now but but
the uh this scale
wouldn't be sufficient for a single
microtubule it would have to be many
microtubules within many neurons acting
in in concert in a certain way and so
the conscious
uh
perception or the conscious willing or
whether it is that comes in at that
level would have to involve many many
neurons but
so what do you need for cartridges how
many of these have to have to be uh
entangled together we used to think for
25 millisecond uh uh Orca War event
Consciousness happening at 40 Hertz for
example for 40 Hertz gamma synchrony you
need 10 to the 10th tubulence which is
about uh twenty thousand to a hundred
thousand neurons however
thank you


## Keywords:
