---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zyNqpk8pVDE
---

# Video
Coronavirus: Rutger Bregman on human nature and Covid-19 - BBC HARDtalk
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zyNqpk8pVDE)

## Transcript:
welcome to hard talk I'm Steven sakip in
times of crisis we learn plenty about
who we really are
so it is that this global coronavirus
pandemic is revealing truths about
humankind how we balance self-protection
against the collective interest for my
guest today is the Dutch writer and
historian Rutger Bregman whose book
humankind a hopeful history is making
waves across the world do we humans
underestimate our capacity for doing
good


rude Bregman in the Netherlands
welcome to hard talk thanks for having
me we are all living in this time of
covert 19 it is a global health
emergency and in times of emergency
perhaps we learn more than usual about
the nature of human beings what do you
think this pandemic right now is showing
us about humanity I think it is showing
us that most people are actually pretty
decent and that especially in the midst
of a crises people most people at least
show their better selves you know and
you see this explosion of cooperation
and altruism I think that's one of the
most important lessons an explosion of
altruism I'm just wondering what you
then made how you process some of the
other scenes we've seen of people at
times literally fighting to get
essential supplies from the shops we've
seen people blaming each other
scapegoating Outsiders for spreading the
virus we've seen lots of very difficult
things - yeah absolutely and I'm not
denying any of that I'm just saying that
you know for every toilet paper hoarder
there are a thousand nurses you know
doing their best to save as many lives
as possible and there are 10,000 people
doing their best to stop this virus from
spreading further I think we really have
to get away from this old idea that
civilization is only a thin veneer and
that as soon as something happens in
earthquake or a disaster or you know a
pandemic that we reveal our true selfish
elf we actually have a lot of evidence
from sociology going back all the way to
the 1960s you know hundreds and hundreds
of case studies that show that
especially during times of crises most
people start to cooperate together
whether they're left-wing or right-wing
rich poor young old that's what we see
and I've just been looking at social
media before coming on air with you and
I've been noticing the incredibly
vitriolic debate there is in the United
States now between those citizens who
want to see society opened up the
economy motoring again and others who
believe that that represents a a
capitalist instinct
put money before people regular citizens
on both sides of the argument are
knocking lumps out of each other and we
see them all the time on social media
well you know Twitter and social media
is not real life I think we have to
remember that human beings have evolved
you know over thousands of years to
communicate with each other on a
face-to-face basis right
we have been designed by evolution
basically to be friendly to each other
so biologists literally talk about this
process of survival of the friendliest
which means that for thousands of years
it was actually the friendliest among us
who had the most kids and still had the
biggest chance of passing on their genes
to the next generation and you can you
can see this in our body still today
so what a very fascinating peculiar fact
about human beings is that we're the
only species in the animal kingdom apart
from some parrots that blush you know we
have this ability to just involuntarily
give away our feelings to someone else
to show that we care about what they
think about us I think that's a very
fascinating thing and it just shows us
that we've been designed by evolution to
cooperate and work together now
obviously if you go on Twitter you know
and see all the vitriol there you may
get a different impression but again
that's not that's not real life this
book of yours which is causing quite a
stir around the world humankind
a hopeful history as it seems to me in
its ambition and its span because it
really nods to all of human history the
the the the evolution of civilization
over millennia what it seems to me to be
doing is really going back to the
age-old philosophical meditation as to
whether human beings are intrinsically
good are sort of born innocent and pure
or whether within them within the very
human nature there is something that
takes us toward sin and bad things is
that the fundamental argument that
you're wrestling with I think so yes you
know there's this very old idea in
Western culture as we talked about that
civilization is only a thin veneer
scientists call it veneer theory right
and it goes all the way back to the
ancient Greeks if you read the Greek
historian to see leaders right he talked
about the plague and
nathan's for example or the civil war
near car serie in his history of the
Peloponnesian War and he had this
observation that you know deep down
people are just selfish in animals and
monsters and indeed if you read the
early Christian church father st.
Augustine same idea you know the idea
that we're born as sinners when you read
the alignment philosophers Thomas Hobbes
David Hume even Adam Smith also often
emphasized that you know in the end
people are selfish or at least that
politically we have to assume that when
we build a society and you know I think
that idea is just wrong it's really
fundamentally wrong in the past couple
of decades we've seen scientists from
very diverse disciplines psychologists
sociologists anthropologists
archaeologists all moving from a quite
cynical view of human nature to a much
more hopeful view of human nature and
what I'm trying to do in this book is
just to to connect the dots and to show
that something bigger is going on there
are you saying far from that that people
are basically selfish and bad are you
saying that fundamentally deep down
people are good I just want to get that
clear
no absolutely not we're not angels we're
not fundamentally good I'm saying that
most people in the end are pretty decent
which i think is a little bit different
and I'm also saying that what you assume
in other people is what you get out of
them so if you assume that most people
are selfish right and that they just
want to get as much of that for
themselves as possible then your design
your society in such a way you'll create
institutions that will bring out the
worst in each and every one of us and I
think we've been doing that for the past
40 years you know we've designed schools
and marketplaces and organizations in
our democracies in a way that has not
brought out the best in us I think we
can turn that around our view of human
nature can be a self-fulfilling prophecy
but we we didn't design everything from
shopping malls to political sort of
governance on a whim we were also
listening to behavioral scientists I'm
thinking of Stanley Milgram and others
operating out of the top universities in
California who set up experiments trying
to figure out whether ordinary people
could be persuaded to do bad things
including
torture of other ordinary citizens and
concluded that actually worryingly yes
they could be persuaded quite easily are
you debunking and dismissing all of that
evidence or many of it you know I used
to believe in all these experiments you
know I've written earlier books that
luckily have not been translated in
English about the Stanford Prison
Experiment for example it's only
recently that I discovered you know
based on the work of an important French
sociologist Ebola dick che that it's
actually a hoax you know we all know
this experiment about 24 students who
you know were selected to participate in
an experiment with them sort of fake
prison 12 were made into guards 12
prisoners and Philip Zimbardo the
researcher sort of said you know I'll
just sit back and just see what happens
and a story that he told later is that
these students on their own started
behaving in a very horrible way and the
message was obviously well there's
there's a monster in each and every one
of us just below the surface there's a
Nazi in each and every one of us it's
only recently that we've learned that
actually Philip Zimbardo specifically
instructed the guards to be a sadistic
as possible that many of those guards
said well that I don't want to do that
you know that's not who I am then he
said look you're you're the 60s hippies
liberals right you want to reform the
prison system in America as well come on
I need these results I need to behave
you to behave in a horrible way then we
can go to the press and say look this is
what prisons do to people and so some of
them went along and this became a huge
story and is still into textbooks of
millions of students Wow
yeah in reality it's pretty much and I
do find that fascinating and you've done
a lot of work to debunk some of those
theories but your big problem it seems
to me is that while you might be able to
debunk the the sixties work which sort
of attempted to say there's a quasi Nazi
mentality within all of us what you
can't debunk because it is just factual
is not sysm genocide and the Holocaust
itself and not even just the German
Holocaust but also the genocides we've
seen in more recent times and for
Rwanda - the ethnic cleansing in the
Balkans and elsewhere these are
realities ordinary people conducted
themselves in the most terrible ways and
I don't see how that fits with your
fundamental worldview well I mean it
would obviously be be who you grip your
bris to sort of pretend - that I can
give a sort of a short explanation you
know for for things that you know we
need libraries full of books to
understand it then maybe then we still
don't understand it but I can say this I
believe there's a connection between our
capacity for friendliness and you know
our our behavior that sometimes can be
so cruel
because so often in history in history
we do the most horrible things in the
name of comradeship and a friendship I
think this is sort of the paradox of my
book and on the one hand I'm arguing
that people have evolved to be friendly
and to work together but then on the
other hand sometimes it's exactly the
problem because friendly behavior can
morph into tribal behavior and group ish
behavior and then people find it hard to
go against the group and against the
status quo and they start doing these
horrible things but are you not I mean
that's just one part of the exception I
mean obviously there are many other
mechanisms at play here but with what
you have just said are you not coming
dangerously close to being an apologist
for the mass ranks of Hitler's armed
forces who committed atrocities and you
might say ah well we have to understand
them because frankly most of them were
simply motivated by comradeship and
wanting to defend their brothers and and
look after themselves that that's not
good enough is it well it's certainly a
danger I think you're right about that I
think we have to be really careful and
make a difference between sort of trying
to understand certain behavior and
condoning it it's the same with the with
the debate about terrorism right I think
we have a genuine responsibility to
understand what drives terrorists you
know what why they blow themselves up
and and here again you have the same
dynamic that often they do it in the
name of comradeship and a friendship and
that you know especially the foot
soldiers are not that ideologically
motivated they may often know very
little actually about the ideology you
know we've had reports from people going
to Syria with books
no in their in their backs with the
titles like the Quran for dummies but
still they do these horrible things
again you know it's it's absolutely not
about condoning but it is about
understanding what's going on there
because that's the only way to to
prevent it I think I want to spend a
little bit of time on the flip side of
your argument not challenging you with
all of the evils that we've seen in
recent human history but actually
getting you to explain why you think one
of your anecdotes in the book humankind
is so very important and that's the the
anecdote about what happened to half a
dozen Tongan teenagers living in a
remote island on the South Pacific when
they decided one night to escape from a
school that they didn't like they
climbed into a boat took off into the
Pacific Ocean found themselves in a
storm shipwrecked and then on a deserted
very tiny island where they proceeded to
live for the next year and more on their
own with no contact with the outside
world and far from any sort of Lord of
the Flies scenario where they ripped
themselves apart you say all the
evidence suggests they lived
cooperatively they cared for each other
and when they were eventually discovered
they were in very good shape it's a
fascinating story but does it really
tell us anything about the human
condition well maybe not I mean it's
obviously not a scientific experiment
and that would be very hard right to her
to drop lots of kids on islands and have
control groups etc and to judge how they
and study how they behave I'm just
saying that if millions of people around
the globe still have to read Lord of the
Flies in school right and they often
become quite pessimistic and cynical
after reading it I mean I remember
reading it when I was 16 and you know I
was depressed for a week afterwards I'm
just saying that let's let's also tell
them about the the one time that we know
of in world history that real kids
shipwrecked on a real Island and you
know it's the most happy story that you
can imagine they live there for 15
months they cooperated really well and
they became the best of friends actually
the captain who rescued them an
Australian captain named Peter Warner is
still soul mates with with one of the
boys who was now 70 years old mono tota
I mean it's
if it would be a movie a Hollywood movie
people would say oh this is so
sentimental you know this is not how
people would really behave this is worse
than in Love Actually but it's it's what
really happened on hard talk we talked
to a lot of sort of public intellectuals
big thinkers with big ideas about the
way we human beings organize our
societies today and I'm thinking of the
recent past where we've interviewed
Yuval Noah Harare and Steven Pinker and
these are thinkers who fundamentally I
think believed in a notion of human
progress Steven Pinker in particular
will make a point of saying you know you
might think things are bad today we
focus on the wars we focus on the bad
stuff but actually human beings are
living in the best of times there is
more security better education more
relief from poverty than there's ever
been in human history before and he
would say that's because we are evolving
better ways of running our societies
your message although you're an optimist
about the human condition seems to be
that we're actually not discovering
better ways to run our societies you
seem to be in some ways anti progress
well I'm absolutely not you know we have
made extraordinary progress in the last
couple of decades moral progress
technological progress if you would
choose any time to live it would be now
what I'm just saying is that we we got
the history of civilization all wrong so
Steven Pinker paints a picture of of our
history in which supposedly everything
was worse right especially when we were
nomadic into gatherers which we were for
95% of our of our history you know we
were waging these tribal wars but sort
of the pessimistic view what I'm trying
to show in the book is that actually
civilization was for most of our history
a big disaster it's it started the age
of warfare of patriarchy of hierarchy of
infection diseases like we're dealing
with right now and that actually the the
lives of nomadic hunter-gatherers were
much healthier and happier and more
relaxed than the lives of the city
dwellers and the farmers who came off to
them
obviously we've made a lot of last
couple of decades posit that the the
cave dwellers and the hunter-gatherers
were happy people living in a state of
sort of pure innocence you have no idea
I mean they haven't left a written
record and just imposing some sort of
quasi religious worldview upon this sort
of age of innocence on you know I'm not
um it's obviously hard to know how our
ancestors lived thirty thousand years
ago but we do have two important sources
so we have what anthropologists have
studied you know tribes who lived in the
19th or the 20th century and who you
know still live there's nomadic into
gatherers and you can look you know if
there are similarities in the way they
live and you'll discover for example
that they have these really egalitarian
societies a relaxed lifestyle you know a
work workweek of around 20 to 30 hours
they're healthier than farmers for as
well for example and you can obviously
also study the archaeological records
now you're absolutely right
nomadic and together has didn't leave
much behind but if there was really some
kind of war of organ against all going
on in our deep past then you would
expect that at some point some artists
in the Stone Age would have said you
know what I'm gonna make a cave baiting
out of that but we haven't found any you
know there's there's nothing like that
we have a lot of cave paintings but not
about war between people then we settle
down we became sedentary around 12,000
years ago we started doing agriculture
and you find a lot of these cave
paintings
that's very suggestive and that there's
also the evidence you have from
excavations you know skeletal remains
you can study that most experts in the
field most archaeologists and
anthropologists believe that war is has
not been with us forever it has really
been an invention it's just that these
people don't get a lot of attention in
the press because they're not they're
not telling us these this dark story is
I think it's often seen as more boring
so they don't get that I'm just now
wondering what all of this means for
Ruger Bergman's analysis of where we are
today you know you paint this picture of
a sort of in Dilek prehistory where
we're hunter-gatherers lived in a more
pure sort of human condition what does
that lead you to conclude about the
state of capitalism for example today
you've written a lot about what you
believe to be the the inadequacy of
capitalist systems that failure to
deliver any sort of equality or justice
ordinary people so what are you
suggesting that we all find our inner
caveman well you know if you look at the
model that we've you know had for the
past 40 years neoliberal capitalism I
think the central dogma has been that
most people are selfish and so we
designed our institutions around that
and I think the results have not been
good you know we've had an epidemic of
loneliness and anxiety and burnouts and
and you know it's it's also not a great
way to deal with the pandemic we're in
right now
so what I hope and I'm not predicting
this it's just what I hope it's but it's
a possibility is that we can now move to
a new age with different values in a
more realistic view of human nature
where we're all real um rely more on our
ability to cooperate and to you know to
have this kind of solidarity that's what
I hope you are a sort of latter-day
Marxist an idealist who know actually it
really the opposite you know Marx was
convinced that history was driven by
material forces right and that ideas
were just well who cares about the ideas
that was just a how do you say the
superstructure right I believe in the
power of ideas I really think that ideas
that you know are often dismisses and
reasonable or unrealistic that will
never happen can over time move from the
margin to the mainstream right and
that's what I think it's been happening
actually since the financial crash of
2008 now we're discussing ideas like
universal basic income higher taxes on
the wealthy a more powerful state that's
really willing to invest in our future I
mean that's moving into the mainstream
if you've seen the the Financial Times
editorial for example the beginning of
April even there you know really
changing their mind right now so I'm not
a Marxist at all I believe in ideas
it just seems there are some internal
contradictions that we're teasing out
even in this con
because a minute ago or a few minutes
ago you said that like Steven Pinker you
think this is the best time ever for
human beings to be alive in so many
different ways and yet you're also
telling me that for the last 40 years
you think human beings and they're sort
of developed capitalist societies have
taken a series of wrong turns can both
be true at the same time yeah I think so
I think I mean historically speaking
this is one of the best times to be
alive but we can do so much better I
don't see any contradiction here and
then obviously they're also the big
question we have with our current model
is is it sustainable right we've got the
massive extinction of species around the
globe we've got global warming yeah I
mean even if we are having a relatively
good time right now that's that's an
important question to ask is it
sustainable yeah and and I'm just
looking at for example the words of Sir
Angus Deaton one of Britain's most
respected economists saying I am still a
great believer in what capitalism is
done not only for the off cited billions
who have been pulled out of poverty as
we've discussed but to all the rest of
us who have also escaped poverty and
decorate bread deprivation over the last
two and a half centuries this is
progressive and it's real yeah is that I
would agree with that as well you know
I'm a little bit bored with all those
old debates from the Cold War in the 80s
about capitalism versus socialism in the
market versus the state right I just
think that capitalism Esmond
underperforming a lot quite a bit in the
last couple of decades and it could do
so much better it's all about saving
capitalism it's about reforming
capitalism if you look at the 50s for
example in the 60s we had much higher
growth much higher rates of innovation
and also much higher taxes on the
wealthy I think that often taxes on the
wealthy for example often let our
societies function better so there can
be more fundamental research in
innovation etc it's a year and a half
pretty much since she went to Davos and
rather famously lectured a whole bunch
of billionaires that the philanthropy
really wasn't the answer to any of the
world's problems it was all about
taxation and the rich paying much more
in terms of tax to genuinely
redistribute wealth in society not much
has really changed since then
perhaps you think that the crisis and
the emergency that surrounds us with
corona virus may be the trigger for some
fundamental change that wasn't on the
cards before is that the way you see
things yes absolutely and I think that
actually quite a bit has changed the
window of political possibility has
really been moving people could say oh
but Corbin lost the elections right and
Sanders lost the elections and yes I
mean that's that's absolutely or the
primary so that's absolutely true and it
would be nice if you know progressives
who sometimes get their act together and
win an election for once I mean that
would be nice but then if you look at
you know the kind of ideas that are that
are increasing in power look at Joe
Biden's tax plan for example it's twice
as radical as Hillary Clinton's tax plan
of 2016 if you look at his climate plan
it is actually more radical than Bernie
Sanders climate plan of 2016 right so
things are really shifting but you you
can only see that if you zoom out a
little bit Rick Bregman we have to end
there we have to zoom out completely but
it has been a pleasure having you on the
hard talk thank you very much indeed
thanks for having me





## Keywords:
