---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cWRWrkG-TDA
---

# Video
Creative Destruction of Institutions
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cWRWrkG-TDA)

## Transcript:
I would like to talk about the creative
destruction of
Institutions and creative destruction is
something that Joseph shumer he's an
economist from say the 1930s and 1940s
um he talked about he came up with this
notion and I'll talk a little bit more
about what it means in a second but
basically it's where the focus and the
energy is not on the thing that's being
destroyed it the focus is on the things
that are getting bigger and expanding
the things that are perhaps determined
to be better within a system that's
where the focus is and as a result of
the expansion of those things something
else is getting destroyed now what do I
mean by institutions here and the the
definition I like to work with is
institutions are rules roles for people
norms and enforcement mechanisms that
make up some system so institutions of
course include things like firms and
corporations they include regulatory
bodies they include academic
institutions journalistic
institutions but they also include
things that are a little bit more uh
broad for example marriage is an
institution slavery was an institution
that definitely needed to be destroyed
uh you have social institutions in terms
of the social norms that determine uh
what things get judged harshly and what
things get uh accolades in society
that's
institutions so it's really Broad and
I'm going to stick with the ones that
are kind of easy to think about and easy
to visualize like firms corporations
regulatory bodies for this video at
least but I do think the same process is
going to hold for other types of
Institutions so how does creative
destruction fit in with the project of
this channel
because of course we live in this moment
that is a potential change point in
history and there are some similarities
with the old Enlightenment in terms of
the need to get out from under the thumb
of existing power
structures and with that in mind this
channel really is about Paradigm shifts
in economics governance and knowledge
systems so which of those three things
does creative destruction fall most
under
and it might be tempting to put it under
the umbrella of economics and that's of
course because he's an economist if you
hear creative destruction being
discussed in Academia it is way more
likely to be in an econ Department than
other
places but in a lot of ways the whole
point I'm making in this video is that
it should not just be economics that
should not be the only realm where this
phenomenon is at play like it should
belong really under all three governance
systems and knowledge systems I think
could benefit from creative destruction
just like economic systems can as well
now in this book when he introduces
creative destruction he's talking about
capitalism socialism and
democracy and ultimately he does not
think capitalism will survive in the
very very long run and uh yet he's also
sort of making a case for capitalism
against
Marxism and there's lots I agree with
lots I don't agree with in the book just
like with any other thinker but what
he's best known for here is the concept
of creative destruction so let me read
you a couple of quotes on that topic the
essential point to grasp is that in
dealing with capitalism we are dealing
with an evolutionary process industrial
mutation if I may use that biological
term that incessantly revolutionizes the
economic structure from within
incessantly destroying the old one
incessantly creating the new one so
creative destruction is embedded inside
this evolutionary process where he's
thinking of firms as having like DNA
that may survive it may serve well
within the system or it may die out now
of course if you're thinking about an
evolutionary system you do have to ask
the question what is the mechanism that
determines whether something grows
whether it shrinks and dies out and that
mechanism is sort of what I'm kind of
focused on in terms of um I I think
there needs to be some changes in in our
system in terms of what determines what
grows and what shrinks and there's going
to be a bunch of options for that I mean
voting with your feet voting with your
dollars voting with your time voting
with your vote voting with your budgeted
votes like there's all kinds of
mechanisms that could be used for that
and I do think the digital environment
is going to make way for more creative
mechanisms for determining that but I
also think it's worthwhile for us to
think about sort of the small business
ecosystem and the way that plays out
when it comes to creative destruction so
let's imagine an ecosystem of small
businesses
and the DNA of those businesses is going
to be the rules within the business the
social relationships and the unspoken
rules between people who are operating
that business the hierarchy or lack of
hierarchy in terms of the way it's
designed by uh the startup owners or the
founders of that business and we're
imagining an ecosystem with lots of
these and we might imagine them all
starting out
as the same size of
business what will determine what grows
and what shrinks and and shrinkage of
course in this context is creative
destruction the rules that determine
that in say a capitalist system are $1
one vote and I think one way people
think about this that I think is
incomplete and poignantly incomplete in
the current situation is that people
will imagine that the $1 one vote gives
rich people a ton of power like a ton of
voting power in terms of which of these
small businesses grows and which shrinks
and that poor people don't have as much
power to to sort of influence what
succeeds in the system and there's a lot
of energy regarding should rich people
have as much power as they do in
determining that or should it be more
equal which that's definitely an
important question
but I think the situation we're in now
is not rich people versus poor
people rather it's going to be
institutions like organizational
institutions versus rich people and one
way of thinking about this is if we
imagine say a onep party country where
you essentially have a dictator at the
top and like a very strong hierarchy
leading up to the central uh group who's
in charge of that one party and if that
one party had what looked a little bit
like a capitalist system except the one
party uh government could come in and
put their thumb on the scale in a way
that majorly determined which
organizations got to grow and which
organizations got to shrink I think that
would be in in many ways against what
many people who are in support of
capitalism would be against
against and if you have say a corporate
ecosystem where the institutions of the
corporate ecos system and the people who
are at the top of whatever that
hierarchy is if they have goals of their
own that is not just looking at the
population and attuning to the needs of
the the rich or attuning to the needs of
the population if they have goals of
their own and can put their thumb on the
scale in terms of which small businesses
grow into huge corporations which shrink
uh what rules they're trying to enforce
on this
ecosystem that would be in many ways not
what I think a lot of capitalists would
want but this video is not about
capitalism and socialism despite the
title of his book this video is about
the question could the same sort of
mechanism where you have an ecosystem
and some set of rules determining what
organization grow and what organizations
shrink and when an organization stops
serving its ideally its social purpose
that that could be displaced by other
institutions growing larger and crowding
it out the question is could that happen
for institutions that are not currently
in that setup like regulatory bodies
that might say get in bed with
industries that they're regulating or
that might do other things could those
regulatory bodies be subject to some
kind of evolutionary system where if
that regulatory body is too cozy with
the industry it's regulating actually
there's other startup regulatory
bodies that are better set up to
actually do the
regulation and I think the answer is yes
I think this is the kind of thinking
we're going to need to revitalize our
system and to build an immune system
into it and so I just think it's a super
useful useful idea especially when
designing systems


## Keywords:
