---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZlmhjBWW5SQ
---

# Video
Critical Inquiry Chapter 3 Intro & Vagueness
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZlmhjBWW5SQ)

## Transcript:
chapter three in this
chapter we'll learn to do various things
first to determine acceptable and
unacceptable degrees of vagueness in
language secondly to understand and
identify types of ambiguity third
identify the problems generality causes
in language fourth to use definitions to
increase precision and Clarity and to
influence
attitudes then we'll look at
understanding the types of definitions
and finally acquire skills for writing
an effective argumentative essay and now
we turn to the actual content of chapter
3 now one of the problems that we face
is a lack of clarity and there are
various example of these for example a
person may something like say something
like this I would generally expect that
today in Washington DC the probability
of changes in the weather is highly
uncertain but we are monitoring the data
in such a manner that will be able to
update people on the changes that are
important or another example you know
when you give a man more money in his
pocket in this case a woman more money
in her pocket to expand a business it
they build new buildings and when
someone builds a new building somebody
has got to come and build the building
and when the building expanded it
prevented additional opportunities for
people to work and of course that's
rather
unclear another
example they say that the money we had
promised proed 3 years ago to be new
money this year is not new money we have
not paid it yet and is old money versus
new money for me new money is new money
if paying in5 or $10 it's the same
money so these are examples of lacks of
clarity now the main causes of confusion
at least from the context that we're
looking at involves the following three
things first excessive vagueness
secondly ambiguity and third terms that
need to be defined we'll be examining
each of these looking at vagueness
ambiguity and then
definitions now one of the focuses of
the chapter is the argumentative essay
and this is obviously enough an essay in
which a person takes a position on an
issue and shockingly enough supports it
with argument so this involves a
statement of the issue a statement of a
person's position on that issue and then
arguments that support that
position now it can also include
objections that are replied to basically
arguing against arguments against your
position and so one effective way to
argue is to show that objections against
your view are
mistaken now as it might be imagined
writing an argument of essay or any
attempt at communication is weakened by
obscurity now the first type of
obscurity we'll look at is
vagueness
now first we'll take a look at vague
statements the definition of a vague
statement is this it's a statement whose
meaning is indistinct imprecise or
otherwise lacks detail to use uh my
favorite crappy analogy
here experiencing a vague statement is
rather like driving in a fog
everything's sort of fuzzy and unclear
and you don't know exactly where you're
going
now getting back to being a little more
specific about vagueness a phrase or a
term is vague if the group of things to
which it applies to has borderline cases
and you know good classic examples
include say being rich it's a fairly
vague term I mean we know what it is to
be like really rich you know like Romney
rich or you know Donald Trump rich or
Bill Gates rich but we also know it's
like to be you know really poor yeah
like Professor poor or unemployed poor
or really really
poor but there are sort of gray areas
for example if a person makes you know
100 billion a year they're clearly Rich
a person makes you know Millions a year
they're clearly Rich what if a person
makes 250,000 are they rich or are they
middle class is it 450,000 and so a term
like rich is vague similarly the classic
example of baldness now obviously
someone who has no hair whatsoever
obviously bald someone who's got lots
and lots of hair obviously not but of
course there's fuzzy areas literally in
between where someone you know doesn't
have all the hair they wants head but
doesn't have you know complete lack of
hair now what are some examples of
vagueness
well suppose you're in a class and all
you're told about the paper is this that
the paper should be on a suitable topic
obviously that's pretty vague you know
what what is a suitable topic I mean we
know it's going to be a topic it's going
to be suitable but we wouldn't know
exactly what to write on another example
suppose you know you hear some advice
about health saying you should get
enough sleep if you want to feel better
now enough is rather vague is that 7
hours 8 hours 12 hours we don't know
it's whatever enough is another example
politicians of course often deal in
vagueness they'll say things like the
tax increase will be fair now exactly
what does fair mean fair to who what do
they mean by that in this
context now vagueness occurs in many
context for example in the case of law
vagueness often occurs and can have
serious consequences for example we take
the term you know the phrase cruel and
unusual
punishment obviously punishment is
supposed to be you know kind of mean
because because it's punishment but what
is exactly meant by being cruel or
unusual or the expression like torture
that's kind of vague you as we saw you
know after 911 there's a use of enhanced
interrogation techniques that some
people are guarded as torture others are
guarded as merely enhanced interrogation
and so the there sort of a fuzzy area
between say we might call like legitim
interrogation and between that and
you know clear torture that's kind of a
fuzzy area so the term torture is kind
of
vague now addition to being problematic
in terms of the law vagueness can also
be fairly annoying for example if you
get like vague directions to something
so if some if you ask like where a place
is and someone says uh head down the
road ways until you hit the first major
intersection take a right when the
street uh Street starts curving a bit to
the left take take a left the house is
like colored and kind of near the turn
now that's full of course of a variety
of vague terms so I mean you might be
able to find your way there but
obviously it's pretty
fuzzy now in addition to people being
vague because of say just not being
careful vagueness can also be used
to essentially avoid being precise when
someone doesn't want to be precise or
cannot be precise vagueness can be a way
to sort of evade answers now of course
in some cases it can make the person
look a little silly for example if
someone asks a political candidate and
you know the question what news sources
do you get your information from and the
candidate answer is any of them that's
vague but obviously doesn't make the
candidate look particularly good or is
another example suppose a politician is
asked how does your health care plan
differ from your opponent and they reply
back back mind does what is right for
the American people in an effective and
meaningful way and of course that's very
vague what does that mean what is it to
be effective what is it be to be
meaningful how much will it cost how
well will it work you can also use
vagueness when you want to sort of avoid
taking a definite stance say in social
situations for
example suppose you have a friend who's
dating someone who
is you know pretty awful and your friend
asked you you you know your friend's
pretty sensitive and they say what do
you think of my new girlfriend and you
one might say and reply she's different
because that's fague it could be
different nice different bad but it's
sort of safer than taking a definite
position now vagueness much like fog
comes in degrees there's more vague less
vague
and basically being more precise means
being less vague being less precise
means means being more vague for example
if I say my taxes are higher than last
year that's more vague or vaguer than
saying my taxes increased by 2%
similarly if someone says the paper is
due near the middle of the semester
that's vager than the claim the paper is
due on Wednesday of week eight of the
semester now vagueness is in many ways
unavoidable but what is to be avoided is
not all vagueness because that would be
perhaps impossible but to avoid an
undesirable amount or degree of
vagueness the mere fact that a claim is
not as precise as it could be doesn't
mean that it's not precise enough so
it's a matter of context and often in a
very practical sense in other words if
you know what the person means and it's
adequate for your purpose then then it's
precise enough if you don't if it's too
fuzzy you don't know what they mean
because it's too fuzzy then it would be
too vague for that
purpose now typically people tend to be
more vague than too precise although of
course people could be too precise you
know go on and on with needless details
but in general you know if you're sort
of trying to decide should I be like a
bit more vague or should I be more
precise in General it's probably better
to air on the side of precision because
if you're more precise then people can
simply you know ignore the extra
information they don't need to use a
crappy
analogy it's kind of like thinking about
how much money you might need when going
to the store it's when you go to buy
something it's better to have more money
than you need than too little the same
with Precision in general it's better to
be a little bit too precise than not
precise enough again because if you're
over L precise you may like bore people
a little bit or give them you know too
much information but they can choose to
sort of ignore that or not use that
whereas if it's too vague they're kind
of at a
loss now as I mentioned before whether a
claim is too vague or not depends on the
context for example suppose somebody
says the computer is
broken now if you're going to say you
know use a computer to print your paper
and you're told you know by the by
someone well the computer you're going
to use is broken that's precise enough
all you need to know is well not going
to be be able to print my paper with
that printer off that computer now
if you're talking to someone you know
who is supposed to be like an IT expert
and you're you know paying them a lot to
fix your computer and all they can say
is you know it's broke you'd expect a
little more than that so what is precise
enough depends on the context to use
another
example if someone says I'm not feeling
well that's precise enough if someone is
telling someone why they're not going to
some sort of an event but if someone is
telling the doctor what's wrong with
them they just say to the doctor well
I'm not feeling well the doctor leads a
little more than that to make a
diagnosis now some
claims interestingly AB boringly enough
are so vague that it can be almost
impossible to determine if they're true
or not because it's not even clear what
they actually mean for example suppose
an advertising blurb says our new
formula gets cloes brighter than Bright
Now I guess it's supposed to be
something positive but it's not clear
what it would be to be brighter than
bright so to recap something is vague
means that it's indistinct imprecise or
lacking in detail and vagueness comes in
degrees and the amount of vagueness that
you can accept depends on your purpose
or context so it might be too vague in
one situation maybe just write in
another so it's kind of like a
Goldilocks porge thing except in this
case what counts is just right depends
on what you're looking
for and
that leads us to the a little bit about
vagueness which is relative Words which
I sort of indicated before for example
terms like Bal and Rich those are
relative terms and by their very nature
in a way they are vague because you
don't know exactly they don't have very
precise meanings but again sometimes you
don't need it to be precise for example
if um you know you're looking for like a
professor and you know there's two
professors talking and and someone you
know you say well which one is you know
Dr Jones and you the person says well
he's the bald one and there's a person
with hair and there's someone with less
hair quite a bit less hair then even
though bald is pretty vague that's PR
precise enough for your purposes that
brings us to the end of vagueness and
we'll pick up next time with ambiguity


## Keywords:
