---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4MceeO4Ulrs
---

# Video
David Harvey Lecture 1: Capital as Value in Motion
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4MceeO4Ulrs)

## Transcript:
my Approach has often been to sort
of have a dialectic if you were if you
like between uh the sort of studies of
urbanization and uneven geographical
development on the one hand and the kind
of understanding of the theory on the
other hand and my tendency is to say if
the theory doesn't help me understand
any of that then maybe that's a piece of
theory that's not really worth it uh on
the other hand I've been remarkably
surprised at how much of marks has been
incredibly useful uh and helpful uh in
arriving uh at the interpretations of
those
phenomena so there been a long journey
only on this was also trying to publish
things that showed that coming from a
Marxist perspective you can have things
to say about uh imperialism or
neoliberalism or and you know what's
going on in cities and
urbanization so that has been uh one one
part of what I what I do and I thought
I'd like to use this opportunity to
share um a few of the insights that uh
I've had um uh over the years years uh
but coupled also with uh something that
I started to do about 18 months ago and
I I think actually I have a hard time
explaining to myself why I did it apart
from the fact that it seemed that since
the whole world had gone insane I might
just as well sort of go off and do my
own little insane project and not you
know because it didn't seem like I could
do anything about some of the insane
things that were going on and are still
going on uh on a day-by-day basis not
only in this country but pretty much
everywhere
um and so I I thought I'd take a good
hard look at Marx's value
Theory uh and this came about a bit by
accident I was at uh Burke Beck
Symposium on critical theory and uh I
was on a panel with X of all people and
I said something about you know I know
maybe his time he looked at uh value
Theory again and he said yes you should
do it why aren't you doing it so the
next
of course of course by now he he would
have written three books about it and
and I was with him again about a couple
of months ago and he says where where
where is the stuff on the value Theory
and I said well you know I mean I don't
ride as fast as you you know I mean so
so um but I got into it and it seemed to
me kind of a very stupid thing to do and
you feel you know the world's collapsing
all around you and there you are
wrestling with some kind of obscure kind
of piece of Marxist thinking and it
seemed to me I was being very very
stupid and I felt quite idiotic with
myself but as often happens in these
things things started to come out of it
and after a bit some new insights came
out of it and and so part of what I'm
I'm doing right now is is is sort of
emerging from that into a more General
uh sense of uh
understanding um and then I I thought uh
I I'd write about the value Theory and
and as often happens in these things it
got longer and longer and
longer and uh I was with my publisher
friend in in Oxford in the summer and he
looked at me and he said you know you
should just write something that's you
know kind of simple about ideas about
it's suround what it is you're you're
doing and and you know how to do that so
why don't you do it so I since then I've
been doing that and what's going on
right now is very much a product of um
uh of doing uh exactly
that um and then all of a sudden uh
weirdly it turns out that September of
2017 is the 150th anniversary of the
publication of volume one of Marx's
capital and suddenly been deluged with
all these invitations we've got to do
something
to to commemorate all of this so I
thought well you know maybe I should get
ahead of the game and start
commemorating it a year
before uh and at least prepare the way
and I hope that next uh uh next
September we can actually uh you know
get together some conversations about uh
uh the significance of uh that
publication um I may of course in in the
process of of these talks uh
preempt uh much of which what I really
want to say
so this uh this uh week I want to look
at the the question of Marx's concept of
uh
capital and the one I favor uh and I
think Mark favors is to Define it as
value in
motion um what this then requires is
that uh I talk a little bit
about um both what we mean by value and
what is the
motion uh Marx
himself uh of course during his critique
of classical political economy hoped to
come up with uh some idea of what the
laws of motion of capital would look
like uh but if you're going talk about
the laws of motion then uh the
definition of capital as being about
motion is I think uh uh a very obvious
connection
so
value uh now value is a a very
complicated idea in marks and therefore
it's not something that I'm going to
actually try to unravel uh at this point
but I do have to start
somewhere uh and the definition I start
with is value for Marks is the social
labor we do for
others as
mediated through commodity production
through price fixing
markets now that's a bit of a mouthful
of a definition but I think it what it
signals is that the exchange that goes
on uh between participants in the market
economy is an exchange based upon the
labor time they have utilized in the
production of whatever commodity that
they are taking to
Market and what Marx does is to say if
you were in a barter
situation uh in effect there would be as
many measures of value as there are
Commodities to exchange that in effect
if you produce shirts and I'm producing
shoes uh I would measure the value of my
shoes in terms of your shirts and you
would do the same thing the other way
around and therefore there would be a
cacophony of
values all over the place uh in in a
barter situation and multiple barters
but then Marx says you know I'm really
interested in how value evolves in a
situation where exchange becomes
normalized as a social
Act and the only way you can set up
Myriad exchanges between all sorts of
different Commodities and millions of
people producing thousands if not
millions of
Commodities uh is to have one commodity
which actually becomes the measure of
value in that commodity is of course the
money
commodity so what Marx does is to
suggest that the rise of the money
commodity
parallels the transformation of all
those multiple values into a single
notion of value so that as commodity
exchange becomes more and more
generalized and and more and more
Universal so a universal notion of value
starts to crystallize out alongside of
it so uh now this relationship between
value and money
is I think a very important one it's a
and it's one that is often
forgotten uh in what
follows because value for Marks is a
social
relation and social relations are
immaterial take something like power I
mean how do you actually find the atoms
or you know molecules of power you can't
do
it uh and nevertheless
you wouldn't say well because you can't
find the molecules of it doesn't exist
you kind of say no this is uh
important uh but it's immaterial and
Marx actually defines value as a social
relation which is immaterial but
objective and the parallel he uses is is
gravity which he says you know you can
dissect a stone as much as you like but
you can't find atoms of gravity in the
stone the stone the stone has a
relationship with other stones and
gravity is that
relation and the same thing
applies uh to Commodities you can't
dissect a commodity and find atoms of
value inside of it you can't break it
open and say ah here they are you can
only find out what the value is through
its relation with other Commodities and
eventually with the money so it's
immaterial but
objective as he calls it the objective
side of it is taken care of by the money
so the money is a very firm material
represent representation of the social
relation and the material representation
of that social relation is something
that is I think again very going to be
very significant throughout Marx's
work uh because the
material what Marx calls money the
material ass he says is not value and
money is is actually an expression or a
representation of
value and that therefore you always have
to bear in mind
that
representations of something like value
are may be accurate in certain
Dimensions but nearly always
misrepresent in
others um I tend to use geographical
examples because I come from a
geographical background it's a bit like
map
projections you know there are all these
different map projections you know you
kind say well actually there's only one
Globe um you
know but the represent representation of
the globe often misleads at the same
time as it
represents and we're going to have that
same problem with money and that's a
crucial issue to discuss
contemporarily because what's happening
to money Visa V value is that they have
got you know it's a
complicated relation between the
represent the thing that's represents
money that represents value and that
which it's supposed to represent and and
therefore money can lie money can
betray uh and and so I think that this
relationship is therefore
foundational uh for Marx and it's very
interesting to me that you know in a lot
of Marx's work people start talking
about values and then suddenly they
start talking about money as if there
there's no there's nothing wrong with
that relationship but in fact there's a
lot that can go wrong in that
relationship uh and they have quite
completely different qualities is and
one of the key
qualities is that you can't appropriate
value because it's IM material you can't
bottle it and keep it in a corner or
stick it under the mattress or something
like that but you can do that with
money so actually what Marx talks about
is the capacity of
money uh to actually
concentrate uh a certain kind of form of
Social Power which is appropriable by
private persons and in fact the whole
kind of notion of class and individual
and all the rest of it rests on the fact
that Social Power could be appropriated
by private
persons and you can't appropriate it
directly you can only appropriate its
representation so when people chasing
money they're chasing the representation
and the question is when they're chasing
the representation what's the
relationship between the representation
and that which is seeking to represent
so this is something that is
foundational uh for for Mar
marks so value then is that social
relation but it's a social relation
that's in motion and what does it mean
to say it's in
motion uh now marks uh actually has I
think a very interesting way of setting
this
up and I want to describe that and I'm
again first however want to use uh one
example of of
this uh which comes from somewhere
completely different that is an analogy
now Marx actually liked to have
analogies he was always using them he
was doing analogies with Darwin and
evolution and uh crystallography and all
the rest of it but the uh the thing that
suddenly struck me was uh why couldn't
we come up with uh as it were a
visualization of what Marx is talking
about when he's talking about the value
in motion
and this I was I did by using this
following analogy all right well uh this
is the hydrological
cycle and the thing I like about the
hydrological cycle is that you know HTO
is moving around it's in the ocean uh it
evaporates it then be takes almost
gaseous form and then it condenses and
it goes through different
Transformations it goes through what
Marx calls metamorphosis as it moves now
has this form it then takes another form
uh and it then moves at different paces
and different ways and the way it
moves uh also leads sometimes for the
water to be stored in various ways in
glaciers and ice caps and it also gets
stored underground in water and you get
these flows and get evaporation going on
so the movement of the
HTO is actually something that is
visually ized in this way of the
hydrological
cycle and there was a great little book
by a geographer which was written about
sort of 18th century thinking which is
called the hydrological cycle and the
wisdom of God which was about the way in
which uh people started to recognize
that uh there was something called the
hydrological cycle that you could
actually represent it uh in this in this
kind of way so this to me then was was
seemed to me a very interesting way
because it is a cycle and it keeps on
going in
perpetuity uh it is a cycle however that
has certain characteristics one is that
the main energy for the cycle comes from
input of energy from the
Sun solar
energy uh that is over time is fairly
constant except that with the depletion
of greenhouse gases more energy is
coming in and therefore the cycle is
beginning to get pushed a bit harder
because there's more energy coming down
on the planet Earth through global
warming and all the rest of it so you're
seeing certain things of that sort
beginning beginning to happen but by and
large it is a
cycle and I'm going to actually make a
big differentiation here between the
cycle the hydrological cycle which is a
useful sort of tool for thinking about
uh how H2O moves around and how Capital
moves
around and the moving M of capital
however uh is different because it's
going going to end up being a spiral
form and there's a big difference
between a circle and a
spiral and in English we have this
expression things spiral out of
control and I think
spiraling always has connected to it
this fear uh that the whole thing is
going to lose control
whereas the cycle goes round and round
and round and you don't lose
control this is what uh Hegel referred
to as the difference
between uh bad
infinity and a uh just uh infinity that
the circle goes round round round the
Spiral goes whoo you
know
so what how do we rep present this uh in
capital uh well I sort of came up with a
map of it and my good friend Miguel has
done a wonderful little diagram of it um
Let me let me just describe it quite
quite quite
simply which is that let's
start the process off with
money and the first thing to remark is
that
that not all money is capital right uh
capital is money used in a certain kind
of way which means that the circulation
of capital can only begin when there's
already money in existence so there has
to be a monetized economy already
existing before Capital can begin and
what happens with capital beginning is
that it takes part of that money and
starts to use it in a very specific way
what is the specific way in which it
used is it it takes the money and it
goes into commodity markets and it buys
Commodities and there are two kinds of
Commodities it buys one is labor power
and the other is means of
production now that also means that
Capital can only work if there is
already a labor market a functioning
labor market and it cannot work unless
there's already a functioning commodity
Market so the capitalist goes and says
all right there's workers out there who
are exchanging their labor from a wage I
can hire them there are Commodities out
there I can buy in terms of you know
energy inputs and cotton or whatever and
I can you know buy all of them I'll take
free Goods if if if I want if they're
there but basically I buy those
Commodities and I I then say all right
with a given technology I can put the
labor together with the means of
production and I can make a new
commodity that new
commodity is
then congealed labor
time that is labor time has been
embodied in that
commodity what Marx call socially
necessary labor time has been embodied
in it that is it's not simply any old
labor time it is that labor time which
is socially necessary
which Marx talks about as being the
average Lab labor time which would be
required to produce commodity of that
kind
so this
commodity is then taken for out into the
marketplace and it is sold for
money now notice what has happened here
you started with
money you bought Commodities you then
went into production you then got
Commodities and you then sold it for
money
okay why would somebody who starts with
a given amount of money end up with the
same amount of money at the end of that
process having gone through all that
aggravation the answer is there's no
incentive or motivation to actually do
that unless you get more
money at the end than you started out
with at the beginning therefore profit
seeking becomes absolutely crucial and
critical for this form of circulation so
that's the first part of the motion but
let's go back into that moment of
production what is being
produced at this moment of
production two things are being produced
one is a material
commodity but the second thing that's
being produced is
value that is that immaterial so there's
a material form which is the commodity
and
immaterial social relation which is
congealed within the commodity
but if you're going to end up with more
at the end of the day than you started
out with you not only got to produce
value you've got to produce Surplus
value that there is there has to be more
value created during the production
process so there's a double process that
goes on a material process of producing
commodity and a social process producing
value and surplus value how do you
produce Surplus
value but Mark says this okay when I
entered when the capitalist entered into
this marketplace where there's wage
laborers the wage
laborers had a value what is the value
of the wage labor the value of the wage
labor says Marx is equivalent to the
value of the Commodities needed to
reproduce the
value of Labor
power so it would be the value of the
bread and the shirts and that which
would be needed to produce reproduce
labor power at a given standard of
living now it's going to vary from one
place to another and over time but we
know roughly what it
is and Marx then kind of
says you contract with the laborer to
work for say 10 hours a day and you then
try to see to it that the laborer
produces the equivalent of their value
power
in 6 hours or
whatever the rest of the hour
are free to produce the Surplus value
for the capitalist so this is the theory
of surplus value so production is not
simply the production of
things it's also the production of
surplus
value okay so that's the first part of
the argument but then you've got to the
point where at a certain point you take
the commodity to
market the value is supposed to be in
motion but all you've got is a bunch of
widgets on the factory floor there's no
motion there and you can't take it out
you just the only thing you can do is to
take your widgets to Market and try and
make sure you can sell it so you sell
it and you hope that you can sell it at
a price where that gives you profit and
which is equivalent to actually
realizing the
Surplus
value
now Marx calls this part of the story
realization of
value and the language he uses about the
production process because it's not
simply about production because
production is always meant in this
double sense material and social he
calls it
valorization that
is the implantation of value
within the
commodity so the first step then is
valorization second step is the
realization of the value in the market
but the realization of the value in the
market
depends upon there being an effective
demand for the commodity the effective
demand has two components one is that
there has to be wants needs and desires
for those Commodities because if nobody
wants needs or desires a particular
commodity nobody's going to buy it it
has no value so Mark says value is
contingent on there being wants needs
and desires for the
commodity value is also con contingent
on not only people have to want's needs
and desires they have to have the money
to pay for
it so it's once's needs and desires
backed by ability to pay which forms the
effective demand so then the question is
where where is that effective demand
coming from and we can't really answer
that at this point because we now need
to take a look at what
happens to all of that money which is
realized as
value well the money that's realized as
value is then distributed and it goes
off into this feere of
distribution and the distribution is
well partly it goes to wages you pay the
workers well the workers then exercise
an effective demand because they come
back in to buy the wage Goods which then
you know reproduce them as
laborers so that's part of it but
then the Surplus value is also received
by a large number divided between a
large number of agents and
institutions taxes for example come into
play
now Marx never actually wrote about
taxes and this is very peculiar because
he should have
done uh except what you understand
something about what Marx did and when
he did it Marx never wrote about things
that he didn't know a tremendous amount
about and we know from the grunder that
he was going to write a book about the
state and civil
society and he never got round to it
anywhere so since the state and Civil
Society are supported by taxes and
tithes and all these kinds of things he
didn't write about it so well I don't
know anything about it so I'm not
writing about it I'm leaving
it till much
later so
that's one way part of the Surplus and
part of the value gets redistributed
amongst them then it gets distributed
amongst various groups of of people
uh the direct producers those who are
producing the Surplus value get some of
it but actually they ended end up
getting what's left over after they've
paid off certain others that is they
have to pay off the landlord pay off
rent they have to pay the merchant so
was profit on Merchant
Capital uh they have to pay the banks
and finance years so there profit
there's interest they need to
pay so they pay so the the value and
surplus value then gets divided up
amongst all of these
factions and then part of that division
dividing up comes back in the form of
effective demand I've already mentioned
you know workers get wages and they come
back as effective demand segments of the
bis Z come back as effective demand bua
and of course the state with its
expenditures comes back with effective
demand so we get a sort of feedback Loop
if you like which is taking the
distributed value and recycling it back
in as effective
demand but at some point or other also
some of that money has to be extracted
again from this great seething pool of
distributed value in money form and
pushed back in to form money capital and
go back into the circulation process so
this is the circulation kind of process
that Marx uh is
describing and it then seems to me that
what we need to do is to look more
closely at what
happens as it you as capital goes
through these different moments of
metamorphosis as it goes through the
process of realization is the point of
realization a point where you could
possibly see crisis forming well
obviously there's not the effective
demand
there and if there's no wants needs and
desires you're going to get a lot of
value which is potentially value created
in production which goes nowhere that is
you throw it away it becomes waste uh
you you know so crisis can form because
this effective demand problem the
distribution moment also has some many
uh forms and can the money get back into
to being valorized again or will it just
churn around amongst distributive agents
in which banks lend to landlords who
then put their money in the banks and
Banks lend to other Banks and you know
is there is there some danger of uh the
value being lost in all that churning
that goes on in the field of
distribution so this is the general
framework that Mark sets
up and in the diagram what I do is to
suggest that there are actually also
some elements from outside I mentioned
the free gifts of
nature that uh if you can extract things
from nature for nothing you will and in
the early stages of capitalism then you
extracted a great deal of free goods
from from from
nature the same is true of human nature
that is the powers and capacities is the
laborer are not actually powers and
capacities uh which are simply trained
as it were by Capital they are there uh
because of cultural configurations and
you know the whole history of human
societies and things like that and so
Capital
actually takes those as free gifts says
I can use the talents and capacities and
powers of the labor for those 10 hours I
have them and and and and a lot of that
is a free gift of of human nature so
there are these free elements within the
system which are I think uh terribly
terribly
important so that is if you like the
whole kind of circulation process as
Mark sets it
up now how does Mark set about analyzing
this and this is I think the interesting
point the thing you have to realize
whenever you're reading
Capital you say what are the three
volumes of capital
doing well actually Marx lays out what
his whole kind of thing is in the
following
uh he says in the first volume of
capital he says this the first condition
of
accumulation is that the capitalist must
have contrived to sell the Commodities
and to reconvert into Capital the
greater part of the money received from
their
sale in the following pages that is of
volume one of capital we shall assume
that Capital passes through its process
of circulation in the normal
way the detailed analysis of this
process will be found in volume two not
in volume
one the capitalist who produces Surplus
value is by no means its ultimate
proprietor he has to share it afterwards
with with capital who fulfill other
functions in Social reproduction taken
as a whole with the owner of land and
with yet other people Surplus value is
therefore split up into various parts
its fragments fall to various categories
of person and take on various mutually
independent forms such as profit
interest gains made through trade ground
rent
Etc we shall be able to deal with these
modified forms of surplus value only in
volume
three on the one hand then we assume
here that is in volume one that the
capitalist sells the Commodities he has
produced at their
value I.E there's no problem at all of
the
realization of of the of the of the
value on the other hand we treat the
capist producer as the owner of the
entire Surplus value or perhaps better
as a representative of all those who
will share the booty with
him what this means is that volume one
confines its attention to that passage
from money up until the point of
realization on this diagram it's the
left hand side of the diagram it just
confines itself to that and then says
there's no problem about
realization distribution doesn't concern
me it is of no interest to
me and we just assume all everything
else that goes on everywhere else goes
on in quote a normal way that is a way
which is completely untroubled by any
difficulties
whatsoever so volume one is solely
concerned with the passage from money up
until the realization and it is assumed
that the
realization occurs because everything is
going to be sold at its
value now what Marx is doing here is
abstracting from the the total
circulation process of capital and
putting it under the
microscope in volume
one and what does he
see what he sees
is that valoriz the moment of
valorization occurring in the labor
process is the moment of congealing
value and surplus value in the
commodity that all of this is occurring
under the assumption of a perfectly
competitive economic
system now here too we have to ask some
questions about
assumptions Marx actually
assumes a perfectly competitive
capitalist system that is he assumes
Adam Smith was
right to formulate his understanding the
economy in the way way he
did now this is very strange because you
think well you know you really wanted to
see Marx kind of departing from Adam
Smith not saying I
accept The Hidden Hand of the market
that's what he does in chapter two of
volume one I accept The Hidden Hand of
the
market of course what he's going to do
is to say The Hidden
Hand is the hand of the
laborer that's what he does further down
the line now the interesting thing about
this is that when whenever you ask any
kind of conventional
Economist what do they think of Marx's
labor theory of value they say well it's
just a mystical kind of thing you know
it just happens uh you know nobody can
take that seriously and then you say to
them well what about The Hidden
Hand isn't that mystical thing and they
go well no that's the Mark I mean no
that's the market you know yeah it's the
way the market is and you say I don't
see a why should I take a market as
being a hidden hand and you have a
little argument of that kind and it
actually turns out of course The Hidden
Hand is just as mystical as Marx's
theory of value in fact if not more so
because you know Adam Smith does not say
whose Hidden Hand it
is whereas Marx is definitely in there
saying it's a Hidden Hand of Labor that
you've got to be looking at
here and the fact that Adam Smith
ignored what what's happening to
laborers for the most part is part of
the critique that he will offer but Marx
is still accepting the notion of
perfectly functioning
markets he doesn't say why but my own
view is simply this that what Marx was
actually out to do in volume one of
capital in particular was to
deconstruct the utopian vision of free
market capital ISM that the classical
political economists were trying to to
promote in other words he's saying all
right let's assume you have you're
granted all of your
assumptions of a perfectly functioning
market then what is actually going to
happen and of course what happens is
that you degrade nature and you get
greater and greater levels of
inequality so marks in volume one of
capital sets out to show why capital is
technologically Dynamic why in a
competitive Society Technologies are
perpetually changing and why there's
this tremendous Dynamic why absolute
Surplus value that is extending the
length of the working day beyond that
needed to reproduce the value of the
labor power is then supplemented by
reducing the value of Labor Power by
technological innovations that make wage
Goods cheaper and cheaper and
cheaper and here too you get an
accounting which goes on in the value
schema of things which is different from
what may happen
materially for
example when technological innovation
comes in then the value of the items
being produced individual items
diminishes and as items become cheaper
and cheaper and cheaper if those items
are important in determining the value
of Labor power then you can reduce the
value of Labor power even though people
are getting the same number of
items in other words the material
standard of living of Labor can remain
constant while the actual share of value
is going down and down and down and down
through technological innovation and
this is one of the reasons technological
innovation is so
favored in fact you can even get a
situation where the the material
standard of living of of the laborer can
increase at the same time as their share
in value production is going
down and that of course is what a
Walmart economy is about and that's
what's been going on for the last 30 40
years the share of Labor in total output
has gone down and down and down but the
material basis of daily life has
actually improved so everybody has cell
phones now
which they didn't have you know 30 years
ago so these again whether you're making
the accounting in value terms or
material terms keep that always in
mind because when somebody comes along
and says oh well what Mark predicts is
kind of the laborers going to be worse
off and look they've got cell phones and
they got all these kinds of things you
say no Marx wasn't saying they would be
materially worse off they might
be but they could in fact be materially
better off but they share of the value
is going down and down and
down so what Marx does then is to set up
a model if you like of what happens in
that valorization
process and the model comes to a certain
conclusion as to what the consequences
would be if the assumptions of that
model are model are
correct those are some and those are all
and then what will happen is the rich
will get richer and the poor will get
poorer nature will get degraded she has
that wonderful kind of Passage I can
read you a bit of it in here when he
talks about uh uh he talks about within
the capitalist system all methods for
raising the social productivity of Labor
are put into effect at the cost of the
individual worker all means of the
development of production undergo a
dialectical inversion so that they
become means of domination and
exploitation of The Producers they
distort the worker into a fragment of
man they degrade him to the level of an
appendage of a machine they destroy the
actual content of his labor by turning
it into torment they alienate from him
the intellectual potentialities of the
labor process in that same proportion as
science is Incorporated in it as an
independent power they deform the
conditions under which he works subject
him during the labor process to a
despotism more hateful for its meanness
they transform his lifetime into working
time and drag his wife and child beneath
the wheels of the Juggernaut of capital
but all methods for the production of
surplus value are at the same time
methods of accumulation and every
extension of accumulation becomes
conversely a means for the development
of these methods it follows therefore
that in proportion as capital
accumulates the situation of the worker
be his payment high or low must grow
worse finally the law which always holds
the relative Surplus population or
industrial Reserve Army in equilibrium
with the extent and energy of
accumulation rivets the worker to
Capital more firmly than the wedges of
hesus held Prometheus to the rock it
makes the accumulation of misery a
necessary condition corresponding to the
accumulation of wealth accumulation of
wealth at one pole is therefore at the
same time accumulation of Misery the
torment of Labor slavery ignorance
brutalization and moral degradation at
the opposite pole I.E on the side of the
class that produces its own product as
capital that's the conclusion volume one
now my point about this is two points I
would make about it
first there's no question
whatsoever that this process that Marx
is talking about here is something which
recurs again and again within the
history of
capitalism you can see it of course in
the early 19th century factories of
Manchester you'll see it right now in
shenzen you'll see it in B you know
Bangladesh you you'll see it
everywhere so it's obviously the case
that there's a certain truth to what
Marx is talking about but at the same
time there's a lot of evidence that this
is not the whole
story and people are quite correct when
they say well it's not all doom and
gloom for for for the workers actually
if you look at something like life
expectancy many parts of the world life
expectancy is far far higher now than of
course it was in the 19th century and
that applies the working class as well
even though are have a far lower life
expectancy than you know we academics
and Priests and judges and people like
that
so so something else is going
on and there something else that's going
on comes from the fact that if you drop
Marx's assumptions that everything's
okay with
realization if you drop the assumptions
that nothing matters in the distribution
then maybe you would construct a
different
story so volume one of capital then just
works on that part of the story and it
works on it as if there is no problem
elsewhere volume two of capital works as
he says he's going to do works on
realization actually was a lot in volume
two which is about effective
demand and what happens with effective
demand
and and of course one of the
difficulties of talking about this from
Marxist circles as soon as you say that
people start to say to you oh you're
you're
Keynesian you're not Marxist I said no
no actually you know Marx came up with
this before canes and if anything kanes
was a little bit of a Marxist in that he
followed volume two uh and was
influenced secretly by volume two of
capital he and he was actually he never
read him himself but he had a he had
other people you know like you it's like
when you get graduate students to read
all the nasty stuff you don't want to
read and then and they tell you what so
kan's had people like that around and
told him what was in volume two and oh
yeah okay so this is
a
so so the question of realization then
becomes absolutely absolutely
critical and volume two does a number of
things one is Mark starts to talk in
volume two about the whole circulation
process and says well let's look at this
whole circulation process from the
standpoint
of what happens at the money Point what
happens at the commodity Point what
happens at the production point in other
words Mark say let's disaggregate this
whole circulation process and look at it
from the standpoint of money commodity
and
production and what do we see we see
actually that there are different things
which may be going on depending upon
where you start if you simply hold money
and you're only interested in increasing
your
money then you wouldn't necessarily be
want to be bothered yourself with
production you'd lend it to somebody
else let them do the production and they
can pay me Interest or something like
that as long as I get my Surplus at the
end of the day my distributive share
I'll I'll do that so the so the
standpoint of money the whole kind of
what you have to go through in
production is an inconvenience it's an
inconvenience between money and money
plus
profit and it's a nuisance and let
somebody else deal with
that the direct producer on the other
hand says realization is a problem and
also getting the money back is a
problem and and of course the merchant
capitalist as it were who holds the
commodity says everything is a problem
around apart from my bit you know and I
just want the producer to give me the
stuff so I can sell it and and and and
and all the rest of it
so there three different perspectives
but what you then that Mark says well
you know in in a in a a real situation a
proper capitalist entrepreneur would
actually be combining those three
different
roles and marks always talks about roles
rather than persons and he said the
capitalist industrial course
unfortunately uses the word industrial
but the capitalist producer really has
to be a good money manager a good
producer and a good good
Merchant and we all have known of
examples where people are brilliant as
producers but they don't they can't
figure out the money side of things and
they go bankrupt or they can't figure
out the merchant side of things and go
bankrupt now this of course is going to
be the foundation for for explaining why
it is that Capital breaks up into
factions like okay there's a producer
who just passes on to the merchant and
let them take care of the merchanting
and somebody else like you know the
banks and so on assemble all the money
and give you the money and so they're
the ones who who do the money money side
of things but also it turns out of
course that that that
value in those different states has
different uh material
possibilities the one I always want to
look at and it's very important is
geographical
Mobility the most mile form of capital
is of course
money it's what I call the butterfly
form of capital it can fit around and
land anywhere and fit off
again
commodity is less mobile than money but
still depending upon the nature of the
commodity is variably mobile production
is the least
mobile so if we're going to talk about
globalization which form of capital
would you want to
put at the top of the pile well
obviously money Finance okay who
liberated Finance
capital and what did it do in the
1970s and why did Finance Capital become
hegemonic you know I mean in other words
there's a whole set of questions there
that you can immediately approach
actually just by sort of looking at
thinking about those three different
roles and the capacities and powers and
possibilities that exist three different
roles so
Marx looks at that but then he kind of
says well actually I've got to start
looking at the effective demand where is
it coming from how does how does Capital
circulate and volume two is very much
concerned with something else which is
how
fast you go around the circulation
process it's a really great analysis to
speed
up why is the capitalist so interested
in speed
up because you know if you go around
this process and it takes you three
years to get around it you get one bout
of profit coming out of it you can get
round it in 3
minutes you know obviously the faster
you move the more you can get and if I'm
in competition with you I I go faster
than you I you know so speed up has been
an absolute crucial
element in what is going on in the
history of
capitalism and actually if you start to
look at technological innovation and ask
how many technological innovations are
about speed
up and what are the consequences of
speed up well Marx doesn't actually
think these through too well for example
one of the consequences of speed
up in production is just got to be speed
up
in
consumption that is you've got to start
manipulating once's needs and desires
and this is where the Mad Men of
advertising come in and all that sort of
stuff and fashion comes in and all these
sorts of things and planned obsolescence
comes
in uh and capital starts to make things
that fall apart after 3 years or become
out obsolescent after two years so the
whole thing shifts towards a kind of a
consumer World which is actually
speeding up as well in other words the
phenomena of speed up in our society
again in in in my lifetime has been
absolutely incredible I mean
you I came from an academic culture
where if you produce two books in a
lifetime you were considered a bit you
know too
ambitious now of course if you if you
haven't produced a book every two years
people think he died so you kind of you
know so anyway the turnover time of
everything okay just just just crazy and
it's part of the insanity of the world
right now I mean it's got to a point of
acceleration and of course what you're
seeing in through all of these kinds of
artificial intelligence and all these
things and what's going on in stock
markets and nanc and microsc trading and
all the sort of thing is is is is kind
of speed up speed up speed up speed up
well that the logic of that is all
actually sort of set out in volume two
of capital I mean Marx obviously
wasn't going to predict all of these
sorts of things but it's pretty clear
that the question of speed up is and
turnover time is crucial and it's not
only the turnover a time uh of be how
long it's in the market but the
production time how long does it take
you to produce
something uh you start to interfere in
all sorts of things so that uh uh Hogs
that used to have litters once a year
now have them three times a year uh
they've even managed to engineer
lobsters so they get bigger faster than
you know I mean every everything's about
and you know and all that salmon you
think it's organic it's actually sort of
speeded up you know so so so so there's
a there's there's a whole world going on
here that Marx is is getting with and
kind of saying well that also is is
putting certain pressures on effective
demand and how effective demand is
expressed and the money has to flow
faster as well and how do how do you
then get Technologies of money so we get
that that that have very low transaction
costs which which move very fast and so
you get electronic monies suddenly and
then the question arises like I started
out by saying what's the relationship
between these new forms of electronic
monies that are occurring all over the
place and value right isn't it possible
that they're so out of you know control
as it were in relationship to Value
production that they're going off in
this direction and then nobody knows
what it's all about because we've
abandoned the material form of
representation which is gold and silver
we've AB abandoned the a metallic base
and now we're adding just zeros to the
money supply as the Federal Reserve sort
of does quantitative easing or something
of that kind so these sorts of issues
are are very much set up in volume
volume two of
capital but then there's something weird
about volume two of capital Marx in
order to study this process of
realization assumes there is no
technological
change the whole of volume two rules out
any discussion of technological change
well technological change is the
foundation of volume one you say well
how Okay so he says now I I I assume
that's all there's no techn zero
technological
change and I also assume something else
in the same way in volume one he assumed
that everything exchanges it its value
in volume two he also says I assume
everything exchanges at its value but
that assumption has a different purpose
in volume two he in effect says I assume
that demand Dem and Supply are in
equilibrium I assume that the value
produced is equivalent to the effective
demand I make that assumption that is I
make the assumption that everything is
in
equilibrium I then ask what are the
conditions under which such an
equilibrium could be established and
other words you work backwards from the
equilibrium to say what is it that could
possibly give
you that
equilibrium and he finds actually a
macroeconomic situation in which things
have to be calibrated very very finely
such that those things could be in
equilibrium and in fact the only point
at which technological change really
comes into volume two is that he finds
the only way can the equilibrium can be
established is by a
particular twist and technological mix
now what this says you know
macroeconomic terms is that there can be
a
macroeconomic growth path which is
stable and trouble free provided that
there is a pattern of technological
change of a very very particular
sort now Marx doesn't make the argument
but it's obvious to
me that when you look at the
technological change that would be
required to keep everything in
equilibrium and you look at the crazy
forces of technological change which are
let loose in volume one of capital which
I described in The Communist Manifesto
and all the rest of it there's
absolutely no way in hell you can ever
be in
equilibrium you never can get to that
equilibrium
path so there are inevitably what we now
call crises of
disproportionality that is the the whole
thing is going to get very much out of
equilibrium the only way to bring it
back into equilibrium is to have a
crisis and so Mark starts to say okay
the role of Crisis is because you've got
outside of equilibrium and it
reestablishes equilibrium by doing what
destroying Capital you have to destroy
Bunches of capital Here There and
Everywhere in order to get yourself back
so crisis of
devaluation part of the answer which
comes out of volume two
the other thing is that he could only
get to th that understanding in a
situation where there was no
technological change because if you
introduce technological change into it
it be like for the reasons i' I've
already suggested the whole thing goes
hey why the whole thing but nevertheless
you can read volume two and say all
right well this is telling me something
it's telling me stuff about speed up
it's telling me stuff about turnover
time it's telling me all of these kinds
of things about you
know but it's not the whole story
anymore than volume one was the whole
story it's a different story the analogy
often used about this is to say well you
know let's suppose we're we're looking
in on a square and you're over there and
I'm over here and I describe what I see
very objectively and you describe what
you see very objectively we have two
completely different descriptions both
of them are
true but they're from different
standpoints what Marx does in volume one
is have a standpoint tell you what he
sees he has a standpoint from volume two
he also tells you what he sees the
trouble is that volume two was never
completed so there's a lot of things
there are all sorts of you know hanging
out you're not quite sure what to make
of them and it becomes difficult but the
standpoint is very clear and he says
that is going to be his standpoint in
this kind of commentary in in volume uh
in volume one that in volume two I'm
going to deal with that problem and and
to some degree he does deal with that
problem in volume
two now in volume three he assumes no
problem at all about what's going on in
volume one no problem at all about
what's going on in volume two and starts
to isolate and look at you know what's
going on in volume
three that is let's look at
distribution but again he looks at
distribution in a very peculiar way
instead of kind of saying well okay uh
you know all these distributions he he
asks just one very simple Elementary
question we know that before Capital
started to circulate as industrial
capital in the way that I'm describing
here
before that happened there
were landowners and landlords and there
was a form of landed property which is
claiming a lot of whatever Surplus was
being
produced we also know that there were
bankers and financiers and we also know
there were Merchant capitalists who were
raging around the world and buying cheap
and selling
deer so those are what he calls the
anti- diluvian forms of capital that
existed before industrial Capital became
significant now what Marx does not want
to do is to say you
know to the degree that in this Advanced
capitalist Society
rent
interest profit on Merchants Capital are
still
important to the degree that's
true we have to show why industrial
capitalists who are making the value and
the Surplus value
tolerate such
factions we have to therefore explain
what the logic is of
having financiers and
bankers landlords and Merchant
capitalists taking a part of the value
and the Surplus value and what part
should they
take so that's the question he seeks to
answer
ask now this actually is a very
interesting exercise it's a theoretical
exercise and again it comes back that he
wants to ask the question what does a
per perfectly functioning capitalist
Society look like in a perfectly
functioning Capital
Society landlords would only take that
part in rent which is really due to what
their function is Merchant capitalists
would only take
that part of Bo which deals with their
function and bankers
likewise so that's his that's his
argument and that's his his thrust now
this is very different of course from
what a real life capitalist society
would look
like that is Marx does not consider what
would
happen if the financial system became so
big that you had all these institutions
which are essentially
oligopolistic and which are too big to
fail and all the rest of it and that
therefore can wield
power over everything that's going on
around them he doesn't consider
that what he does is something much more
modest and I think it's a worthwhile
exercise to go through because because
you get away from a tendency which
exists on the left which is to regard
all of those other factions as
parasites totally useless parasites Mark
says no no there's a reason why land
rent of a certain sort is
important there's a reason why the role
of the banker is significant and
important and as a reason why Merchant
capitalists are important just to take
the merchant capitalists Mark's argument
about them
was you know individual capitalists have
difficulty marketing their particular
product you
know wouldn't it be better if a range of
different products were all put together
in one place and you had a kind of a
market you know in the merchant
capitalist and you had a a department
store or Supermarket or something of
that kind so that everybody who's
shopping can go and just go and they can
get all of the different things there
instead of going to the supplier here
supplier there supplier elsewhere in a
complicated
Society you
need the merchant capitalist to come in
so Mark says and the merchant capitalist
also shortens the turnover time for the
industrial capitalist because the
industrial capitalist instead of waiting
there till they've sold their product
can pass it onto the merchant capitalist
and says well okay give me my give me
money but they pass it on at a
discounted
rate that is the total value of the
product is only realized by the merchant
but the merchant first pays
off the the
producer a
proportion uh of the value so they split
the two and you know like I said you
know there are people who know very good
at making things but are not very good
at the marketing stuff well you got
specialist Market people out there now
who are specialize in selling stuff and
getting it to move faster and through by
influencing taste and fashion and those
kinds of things specialize in
manipulating the market in all kinds of
ways so the role of the merchant
capitalist is is absolutely critical for
the proper functioning of an advanced
capitalist society and I think that's
again I think a significant finding of
marxy point he does the same thing with
landlords and he does the same thing uh
with uh bankers and
financiers so this is a I think a
reasonable kind of
exercise but again what I would want to
to say to you is this that when you're
reading Capital you always have to be
careful to know which volume you're in
and what is being assumed and what is
not because otherwise somebody will read
you what I read to you and then say
that's the truth that marks Pro is it
you know we stand or fall by whether
this is the case well here is what he
said in volume
two which doesn't have a clear
conclusion as volume one has but there
are elements of it and one of the
elements is this and you'll see it how
different it is from what I read to you
just now about volume one contradiction
in the capitalist mode of production the
workers are important for the market as
buyers of
Commodities but as sellers of their
commodity labor power capitalist Society
has the tendency to restrict them to
their minimum
price further contradiction the periods
in which capitalist production exerts
all its forces regularly show themselves
to be periods of overproduction
because the limit to the application of
the productive Powers is not simply the
production of value but also its
realization however the sale of
Commodities the realization of commodity
capital and thus of surplus value as
well is restricted not by the consumer
needs of society in general but by the
consumer needs of society in which the
great majority are always poor and must
always remain
poor that is if you follow the volume
one prescription and that's the way
Capital worked you would end up with a
very very weak effective
demand and capitalists would have a lot
of difficulty selling their
product so there's going to be pressures
to try to raise wage
rates to try to increase them this is
what Henry Ford did when he said okay we
need to actually you have a working
class that has enough money to buy the
products that we make
so we go for a $58 hour a
day and you know and that of course is
part of the logic of why canes would
kind of say well one of the ways in
which you start to
actually do things is to is to play
around uh with the effective
demand now this then leads to maybe two
or three very important
features the first point is this that
Mark often talked about his desire to
create a model of capitalist
society which was modeling it as quote a
totality what that would require would
of course be putting all of these three
volumes of capital
together volumes one 2 and three even in
their incomplete forms Marx never tried
to do that
he never got to the point where he felt
he understood the stuff in volume two
well enough or the stuff in volume three
well
enough to be able to kind of say all
right now let's look at the
totality but I want to argue to you that
in Reading Marx is capital you've always
got to have this idea of the totality in
mind and ask yourself the question what
is it that you're reading in volume 3
where does it lie in relationship to
this totality that is having the
visualization of what the totality of
the circulation process is about is
extremely
helpful to helping you read and
understand what it is you're reading and
what it is you're not reading and why
you should not draw certain inferences
from what you're
reading on the basis of you know its
positionality in in the in the in the
totality so having some idea of the
totality and that's what I'm trying to
do with this is to create a version of
the totality of the circulation process
the second point is to ask where's the
driving force in this in the
hydrological cycle the driving force is
the input of energy from the Sun what's
well we've seen one of the driving
forces one of the driving forces is the
fact as we mentioned that nobody in
their right mind starting off with a
certain amount of money would end up
going through all this business just to
end up with the same amount of money
therefore profit seeking is a terribly
important driving
force but does that mean that effective
demand is not a driving force once needs
and desires are not a driving force now
you can either say once needs and
desires are Simply Creations of
capital which to large degree they are
or you can kind of say once needs and
Desires in society have a very complex
history and they actually put their own
pressures on what it is that shall be a
an acceptable commodity and why is it
that we take certain Commodities and say
we don't want this to be even in the
value theory in the value system at all
why would we take a something like
education and say take it
out don't have it as part of the
value that is do something you know
provide it free
good why don't we do that you know so
why so so there's a lot of consumer
Choice involved here and the moment of
realization is an intense moment of
political activism which parallels the
activism that goes on in the
valorization process now marxists are
very fond of talking about the activism
that attaches to the valorization
process class struggle in the workplace
this kind of thing they're not so happy
talking
about action political action around the
question of
realization when in fact the question of
realization is very very important
because a lot of values is actually
extracted at the point
of of
realization give you an example you know
you've all heard about hedge funds take
over a pharmaceutical company raise the
price of the drug from $15 a pill to
$750 a
pill I mean this is something that's
happening at the moment of
realization and it's ex and it's not as
if you know there been any big changes
in the production system or anything
like that this is simply a gimmick
that's used look what's happened in
housing all the hedge funds go up go in
and buy up foreclosed housing and start
to S of you know then sort of rented out
you
know and actually the politics that goes
on at point of realization is a very
critical politics and a lot of it of
course concur concerns daily life in the
city which is one of the reasons why I'm
always talking about the politics of
realization as being foundational for
looking at the nature of social
struggles going on in cities
struggles over housing Health Care you
know against price gouging against the
telephone companies you know I mean
everything you know well this is all the
politics of realization the reason
marxists don't like it is because at the
point of realization the worker no
longer is a worker at the point of
realization Marx is very clear the
worker is simply a
buyer and at the point of realization
it's a relations between buyers and
sellers
and since it's not about class and
capitalist class and working class Marx
is say no no no it's not not that's not
where the real action is but of course
if you take the totality and this is the
point about it if you take the
totality then that is
indeed one of the points where there is
a huge amount of social struggle going
on and that huge amount of social
struggle is very much about the
embeddedness of what is happening at
that point in this total circulation
process and that therefore an anti
capitalist struggle has to locate its
struggles not only at the point of
production and the point of valorization
it has to locate also at the point of
realization and recognize
that the SEC the third point I would
make is
this that with respect to
distribution I said you know Marx
actually worked things out saying what's
the logic of having these people around
in a society dominated by industrial
capitalists and he came up with very
good
answers but on that basis we also have
to recognize that
those groups form power
blocks which actually exercise immense
power and in fact the situation arises
where the merchant capitalists that Marx
assumed only took the discounted value
of the Surplus value the merchant
capitalists are actually realizing much
more of the Surplus value now than the
direct
producers
Walmart doesn't produce much value it
markets it but it takes an enormous
amount of value and the value is
produced in workshops in China and all
that kind of thing so it's produced
elsewhere and it's realized somewhere
else Apple these computers made in
Shenzhen and Shenzhen has about a 3%
rate of profit apple has a 28% rate of
profit that is the merchant capitalists
are taking a lot and then you look at
the finance capitalist and then you look
at the roners and all this kind of stuff
and you kind of say my God they're
taking the whole gamn lot and in fact
the direct producers are not doing much
not getting much at
all so we've got to be prepared not to
sort of sit there with Marx's definition
I think it was a useful exercise to
explain why these people are there why
you can't get rid of them
why you can't nationalize them out of
existence or something like that but
it's very difficult to then sort of
assume that they're just going to sit
there and take what they're supposed to
take in a perfectly functioning economy
but you can see
immediately that an economy can get
extremely lopsided in the realm of
distribution that actually Bankers look
and say well okay we have money where
are we going to invest it we going to
invest it in production or are we going
to invested in those people over there
who are uh engaging in land
speculation oh the rate of return on
land speculation is much higher than it
is in production let's put it in land
speculation in other words there's a lot
of
unproductive investment going on and so
again there are all these sorts of
issues which I think are
significant and finally I'd like to make
this point about it you you can ask me
what is
the what is what's what's the value of
of having something like this what's the
political value of
it well it just helps you locate a
little
bit some ideas and proposals that are
around you for
example Bernie Sanders's
campaign uh argued for
$15 uh minimum
wage uh more recently black lives matter
has argued for basic uh
income uh initially uh oriented to Black
communities but it be very hard to
imagine
it without it becoming actually
Universal what does this do put it in
this map say where does this
sit this is like increasing the
effective
demand and the theory of it is if people
have more money because of higher WI
wage if people have more money because
they got a basic income then they
can improve their conditions of
reproduction of Labor power that is you
can get it round the back down to this
corner of reproduction of Labor power
they can improve their
lives substantially because they will
have that extra effective
demand now that assumes that nobody's
going to rip them off at the point of
realization
okay who else is in favor of a basic
income Silicon
Valley Silicon Valley knows that its
Innovations are going to put everybody
out of
work they also know if everybody's out
of work they're not going to have any
money and they're not going to buy what
they what they're selling so Silicon
Valley is also very interested in a
basic income now that doesn't mean I'm
against basic income I'm kind of mildly
in favor but my point is this that
actually unless you get hold of the
politics of
realization the basic income raising the
minimum wage and all this kind of stuff
is not going to give get you anywhere in
terms of actually getting down
to improving the conditions of the
reproduction of the
population it's not going to get there
because you're going to be ripped off on
root and you might ask politically is it
better to actually sort of say all right
we want to we want to have legislation
which strictly forbids any hedge fund
from doing anything and taking over any
pharmaceutical company and this kind of
stuff you're going to do something like
that take all of that out take you know
are we going to do the same about you
know foreclosed housing being bought up
by you know you
know are there are there things we can
do somewhere else and other but my my
point here is that having a map of this
kind and then thinking about how you
insert you know what to do Here There
and Everywhere and it you kind of say
all right well there are things that
could be said here
important things that can be
said so I think this is uh politically
useful again not in the sense that
somehow or other you plug it in and you
get out of answers but helps you to sort
of think through what is going on in
terms of the circulation of capital in
general and it's very important that we
resurrect the notion of the
totality and understand and that's why I
want to stick with this it's the it's a
total framework of this culation which
is important now you can start to add
things
in in terms of the drivers I said okay
effective demand can be a driver another
big driver is actually the fact that
Banks end up with a lot of
money and they actually create money so
when you go to the distribution thing
there is another
driver and Marx actually when he gets to
the banks start saying they're the ones
who are really pushing
accumulation they've got money and they
want to make more money and therefore
they go charging down this kind of thing
of reinvestment trying to push as much
as they can and the banks in pushing as
much as they can to
valorization suddenly realize they've
got a
fund
realization so you can put a link
through here which connects you know the
banks and the financiers and interest to
both valorization and
realization because that's what goes on
in housing
markets Finance years they finance the
developer to build housing and the same
Finance years sometimes buy Finance
consumers to buy that
housing I mean this is a perfect
circle which is of course a perfect
situation for
asset you know
Bubbles and and and the like so so
there's a driver there but where is it
driving everything
too and and and what about so you by
thinking through this and sort of just
looking at it and kind of playing around
and adding things to it and taking
things away and all the rest of it and
is you can start to actually
imagine thinking through a whole set of
of very interesting
relationships but it's in the context of
the totality and I think that's the
point I'm trying to to make that Marx
when he's talking about the totality he
is's talking about something very
powerful and very significant he never
unfortunately went along to try to
demonstrate what it looked like what I'm
trying to do is distill out of you know
my reading of three volumes of capital
and theories of surplus value and all
the rest of it and grund so some kind of
General framework that is I think
consistent with what he was talking
about then use it to try to explain what
he was talking about where why volume
one is only dealing with this and volume
two with that and why they're so you
know contradictory to to each other in
terms of the sorts of conclusions
they're posturing so this is if you like
the way I would want to see us approach
the
text and text of Marx's capital
that having the broad
sense having an intuition if you like of
what of what this is all about and what
Marx was trying to do I just think it's
profoundly
helpful because with Marx there's always
a Woods for the trees kind of
problem but by having something like
this clearly in mind I think it's just
helpful to to to push it to the level
where you can understand not only things
going on around around us but also you
know what the intellectual history is of
these
kinds of formulations that marks set out
and one of the things that can be done I
think is to raise the question how well
have marxists actually
represented much of this
totality there is a tendency within
Marxism and within those who articulate
Marxism to favor volume one
CU it's a beautiful
book but the totality is something else
there's a tendency to think that
distribution is just distribution that's
the end of the story actually it's not
it's the end of the story but it's also
the beginning of another
story and by actually seeing what
happens and this is what I want to talk
about in future lectures because there
are many other aspects of this which I'm
you haven't got to yet but which are
really I think important important uh
for trying to understand not only marks
but understand the nature of what
capital is about both the concept and
the book so let me leave it there thank
you very


much


## Keywords:
