---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5rlIslPyF30
---

# Video
Democracy and Technology
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5rlIslPyF30)

## Transcript:
wonderful well I think we'll get started
um welcome everyone to the birkham clein
center and our Institute for reting
social media um my name is Tony Gardner
and I direct operations for our
institutes and I have the pleasure of
welcoming you all and also introducing
our moderator for today's event Manan
rubel um Manan is an employee fellow at
The Institute for rebooting social media
having graduated from MIT in 2023 with a
PhD
in Social and Engineering Systems and
statistics her research focuses on
Reviving Democratic governance online
and offline and understanding
information disorders leveraging
mathematical models statistical tools
and political philosophy theories she
investigates new ways to organize
collectively and share information in
order to update how we think and do
democracy over to you man thank you very
much Tony
and and please give Applause for our
wonderful panelists that I will start by
introducing so we have the pleasure to
be in the company of Claudia schw who's
the CEO and founder of democracy next
democracy next is um an international
nonprofit that has been building muscles
and spreading practices of doing better
Liberation and better democracy around
the world before this you were at the O
where you also had to work on
deliberation and surveying the practices
of Citizen assembles around the world I
think you uh you build this Del ation uh
tool box when you were at the OC um and
you an author of of uh books uh such as
the pop signal uh why politics and
democracy need to change and the
people's verdict adding in from citizen
voices to public decision making welcome
cludia

and and our co-panelist is Lawrence leig
who um is learn for many achievements I
was reminded today that one of maybe the
most noted achievement is that you were
the first Berman
professor at Harvard before becoming the
RO firman professor of GL leadership you
also frequented Chicago um University of
Chicago and Stanford um your work at the
intersection of L and Technology had
impacts in U Realms such as intellectual
property and antitrust um on the
Democratic realm some of your impact has
involved clerking for um justices
Richard Posner and anony Scalia um
you've also um drafted help draft the
1995 constitution of Georgia if I'm not
mistaken uh you also a secret
sorry um and frame our accounts of uh
thinking of Judges as translators of
static texts into current context um and
I guess I could go on with
more achievements that I might add to
here welcome Larry as well thank
you and so I want to uh open the floor
thinking about the future of democracy
which is really the topic of today
thinking about democracy and technology
and uh some of the work that both have
been leading in a different contexts
have been thinking about Democratic
Innovations and it seems that when we
think about democracy maybe not in this
space but we've been thinking about it
as a static institution that were built
centuries ago um and we don't really
think about democracy as a as a field of
innovation and a field where things are
actually moving evolving at the same
time as Society is evolving um and um
one of the democ invation that was
envisioned in 1955 by azimov is one you
might not enjoy but I would like to
remind you
of which is um if any of you know the
book franchise by azimov it's a this
Visionary idea that that azimov had for
democracy where you had a machine uh the
multi that was created based on
everything that was ever created and
written by Humanity into a single
machine that was capable of talking to
the humans this is 1955 as a reaction of
uh polling becoming a new tool for
statistical modeling in in politics um
and as IM story went as followed there
was this this machine that had invested
anything everything that was created by
humanity and at every election it would
talk for three hours with a randomly uh
sorry not randomly with with a a citizen
of that the machine would choose and
update its understanding of society to
choose the next candidate to the next
election um so I don't know if this is
the direction of the marke of
Innovations in which we want to go that
was the one lay down by azimov in
1955 um so I'd love to to hear your
thoughts on what do you think are the
core problems of democracy that we are
facing right now and why the different
approaches that you taking in your uh
are up taking and fighting these
challenges that you've
observed kick off um yeah I mean I I
only learned about that story yesterday
actually so I need to add that to my to
my reading list uh I guess the way that
I've been approaching kind of what is
what are the problems that we're trying
to address in democracy uh started off
with actually Explorations that I was
doing around populism a long time ago so
back in 2010 I was doing research around
um to what extent is is people
disillusion meant by politics and the
system and feelings of lack of voice and
agency driving uh part of the populist
trends that that we see
and at the time there was a lot of focus
on the economic and the cultural drivers
and those are there it's a complex
phenomenon but from that research I
became really convinced that this is one
part of the really deep drivers of a lot
of the problems that we're facing today
so many people feeling a lack of agency
to really influence the decisions that
are affecting them and their families
and what can we be doing about this I
think that a lot of the problems that we
talk about today tend to focus on a lot
of the symptoms of the problems with
democracies so we zoom in on things
around disinformation and
polarization um campaign finance and so
on these are these are symptoms of
problem are actually much deeper um when
we look into a whole bunch of different
statistics um around uh people's sense
of uh feeling like they matter having
real connections with other people and
uh a sense of being influence things
those have gone down over time um and I
think that they're deeply linked to a
lot of the problems that we have today
which are showing up in all sorts of
ways and if we don't kind of go back to
those deep roots of the problem of how
can we give more people a real sense of
agency and dignity we're not going to
address the problems of of
democracy so I I certainly agree with
that and I feel like I'm a student of um
Claudio's work because I think it's
incredibly important to begin to build
these practices
of
deliberation but I think it's important
to recognize um how uh these practices
uh are challenged with the current um
environment and what in the current
environment challenges them and I think
it's hard for us to recognize just how
dramatically
different the media ecos system is
relative to what it was when these old
people like like me um settled on our
view of what the nature of democracy
would be you we we've passed from an era
of what um Marcus prior calls broadcast
democracy where we're all watching the
same show and of course we react
differently because some of us are
conservatives and some are liberal but
we're reacting to the same set of
facts uh now I don't mean to say that
they were complete facts or unbiased
facts or it was a golden age of anything
that's not the claim just the claim is
just simply that living in a world where
we're all reacting to the same set of
facts and that the business model of
media
then was simply to tell us a story kind
of a Walter kronite life story um um and
that was extremely um productive in
helping Society move through really
difficult problems um civil rights in
the 1960s Vietnam in the 1960s Nixon in
the 60s and 70s
um the environmental uh movement all of
these uh uh really extraordinary
accomplishments were made possible by in
some sense us all being part of the same
conversation now what's changed is not
just that technology enables us to tune
into different
conversations it's that the business
model of Technology profits from us
tuning into radically different
conversations and it just so happens too
bad for us that the best way for the
business model of Engagement to work is
to trigger us with the most extreme and
hate-filled and uh ignorant type of
content um so you know we're suffering
the byproduct of a business model
crafted to drive advertising Revenue now
you know at some stage I hope history
will look back and say wow you destroyed
democracy because you were trying to
maximize advertising Revenue but that's
kind of the way I think about it like
we've built a model for maximizing the
revenue for
advertisers and the byproduct of that is
destruction to democratic practices just
like you know oil companies had a
business model for producing oil and for
many years they hadn't a clue and then
they did have a clue and they lied about
it but they didn't have a clue that was
going to destroy the environment but
then all of a sudden ch's going to
destroy the environment you know it's
just too bad for the environment this is
the way we make money um and that's
what's going on in social media and so
the question is what could we do about
it well I would say let's ban
advertising okay but that's not going to
happen um what we need to do is to begin
to build human resilience against this
reality and I think that's about moving
Democratic
politics into a protected sphere into a
place where it's not vulnerable to that
same kind of manipulation and I think
the magic that democracy next is
demonstrated um the Magic in people
sitting down and talking to each other
about hard issues when they you know not
people who agree with each other about
heart issues people talking about heart
issues demonstrates there's a certain
thing that we humans can do when we do
politics at that scale and I think an
essential part of what we need to do is
to revive a sense that we're entitled to
democracy most scary statistic in this
field for me is Pew in
1998 started asking do you have asking
Americans do you have confidence in
America's political judgment and in 1998
two-thirds of Americans said yes we have
confidence in America's political
judgment now two3 say no we don't have
confidence in America
political and in part that's because we
just see crazies all over the place and
you're like wow these are our citizens
these people vote I mean who would have
confidence in a system driven by these
crazies now of course these crazies are
not
representative they're just the crazies
that get us going and get the focus and
constant attention to the screen so it's
not it's not that we in fact are crazy
but to the extent we continue to believe
that we are filled with people who don't
understand anything
it weakens a commitment to democracy so
we've got to
compensate we've got to exercise the
muscle that recommits us to the idea
that there's a dignity in um uh human
practice of democracy and that dignity
comes not through flashy ads or digital
Connection in some way it really is just
humans learning how to work out problems
together um and I think that's the
practice we have to revive so azimoff
was brilliant writer but it's nightmare
because that has nothing to do with the
practice of democracy like figuring out
the answer is not it I don't care what
the answer is I care that people are
working out an answer together and they
have that experience and they can walk
away thinking okay that guy's a
Conservative Republican but he's not in
reptile me he's like a normal person who
has a kids and just wants to his kids to
do well and that's the interaction that
we have to facilitate through these and
I you know i' I've become convinced that
the that the work that um that you're
doing that Deb's doing the work that is
being done in the field of of pushing
deliberation and the work that um it's
wonderful to see Sam Shan who's um now
joined us to do the deliberations
project here at the asml um uh uh these
are all efforts to like build that
practice into our life again I don't
know not enough of a historian to say
whether it's again but it's certainly
what we
absolutely something you have to give
aim off in this novel is that his
solution scales very well you don't need
to have that's
right he solved the problem of scale how
do you how do you solve the problem of
scale with the Liberation how do you
have um an impact that is actually
impacting an entire citizenry that
especially at times where we they are
deemed extremely divided how do you
scale this process and how do you
recreate the eltion practices sometimes
in absence of f CRS
yeah I mean I think well maybe just to
take a tiny step back a little bit too
because we've mentioned deliberation and
citizens assemblies but I think maybe
just for the sake of everyone being on
the same page what are we talking about
um by this and then how do we scale
those ideas um so to me I mean citizens
assemblies actually revive a very very
ancient practice that we've lost uh we
kind of forget that in the um you know
in the American Constitution French
Constitution and otherwise the word
democracy doesn't mean appear anywhere
uh and that was intentional at the time
but actually when we go back to some of
the historical roots of of democracy in
AG in Greece uh the institutions that
were considered democratic were the ones
where on the one hand there was mass
participation but the other ones were
where there was this practice called
sortition meaning randomly selecting
decision makers and then rotating the
randomness um and we've had a Revival of
this practice contemporarily in citizens
assemblies that have now been to off for
the past 40 50 years or so where um you
know perhaps to Define it through
through through an example so where I
live in France uh there was very
recently the French citizens assembly on
end of life uh so the French government
convened uh an assembly where there were
185 people that were selected by
sortition to be broadly representative
of the diversity of friend society and
they were tasked with coming up with
propositions to the question of should
France change its existing legislation
on end of life issues and if so how uh
so to be able to answer this they met
for 27 days of deliberation over the
course of four months they heard from
over 60 experts and experts in a very
very large sense of the term they heard
from uh Faith group leaders and
philosophers and people with lifelong
illnesses and then they did the hard
work of listening to each other taking
in what they did I mean deliberation
means collectively weighing evidence but
also coming to a shared ision off the
back of it so they came up with 67
concrete recommendations for how the
legislation should change uh and just to
give a sense of the depth that's in a
176 page report that these people wrote
in their own words um so a real a real
kind of weighty deliberative process uh
and those recommendations were were
passed on to president mol met with them
that they were passed on then to the
parliament uh to be worked in the
Parliamentary committee and that has now
been put in the form of a draft Bill and
uh and president M met with the assembly
members again just last week uh to to
have another exchange actually about
well this is what has made it in the
legislation and also ask and having a
conversation about kind of the next
steps and other things that that are
going on so this is just one example out
of out of hundreds that have taken place
um so the work that you reference that I
did at the OCD previously um was a
really big study looking at at the time
around 300 examples of these assemblies
but now there's over 700 examples in the
oecd database of of citizens assemblies
that have taken place all over the world
on all sorts of of different issues at
different levels of government as well I
gave an example from from the national
level but there's also been a ton that
has happened in cities around planning
issues big infrastructure projects um
you know examples from Ireland have come
up around um like Ireland has had four
constitutional referendums leading to
constitutional Chang around abortion
same-sex marriage divorce and blasphemy
off the back of these assemblies so
there's just been such a wide range of
of examples but to now connect it to
your question of scale so sorry for the
slightly long intro but I think that
context matters is that I mean in one
way we've seen a lot of these examples
over the course of of the past decades
on the other hand 700 or so examples
over four decades is not a lot either
and so there's been a bit of a limit to
doing things things in a very oneoff ad
hoc way that really depends on political
will in a moment in time but what we're
seeing more recently is an approach to
trying to institutionalize to actually
build new institutions that have a legal
basis that are connected in to our
parliaments to public administration
have a relationship with civil society
and other stakeholders as well and play
a really ongoing role kind of expanding
our Democratic architecture and the way
that I Envision scale is actually
building new institutions
in every city in every country at all
these levels of government so that we
have no shortage of policy issues on
which we can be convening these citizens
assemblies in an ongoing way so the City
of Paris since 2021 has now had a
permanent citizens assembly that has a
legal basis people are selected 100
people for a one-year mandate and then a
year later there's 100 new people
selected again and they're dealing with
other policy issues and to me that's a
vision of getting to another kind of
democracy making this a normal practice
um and just maybe the last thing I'll
say
is I think because we've had this notion
for so long that democracy equals
elections and voting there a very
limiting notion actually of what is
democracy and for me part of the mission
is expanding in a wider set of people
that actually deliberation and having
practices of sortition and rotation of
that responsibility and privilege of
being in a decision-making position and
also of representing others in a way is
also something that we can be infusing
into all sorts of other organizations in
our daily lives like for universities
and schools and workplaces and museums
so um I think that's the other way that
scale of another kind of bureaucracy
comes into being when that becomes more
normal too yeah I think that the point
about elections is was for me a a
kickoff point for thinking about this
there's a wonderful book by David Von R
Brook called against elections and he
begins by saying we have about 3,000
years of history with democracy and only
about 250 years of history with
elections and when elections were
born um the greatest philosophers monu
back to
Aristotle remarked that systems that
Embrace elections tend toward
aristocracy and systems that Embrace
sortition or decision by
lot spoke about it tend towards
democracy um now the French and the
Americans who launched the great
Democratic experiments um quickly
covered all that stuff up um and part of
you know the the V RoR makes this into a
kind of almost conspiratorial story but
it's I think it's much more practical if
you think if you're launching the United
States in
1789 it takes four months to get
information from one side of the nation
to the other uh how do you run a
democracy um with those technical
constraints uh and so and so the idea of
um running the nation through something
other than the hope that they would have
Enlighten leaders kind of aristocracy of
ability um seemed kind of hard for them
and so they embraced the idea of an
aristocracy of leaders through elections
and within 5 years they realized it was
a terrible mistake it was a totally
disastrous idea the House of
Representatives was not filled with
Madison or Hamiltons or people like that
quickly became you know a Cess pool in
many ways um and you know that's that is
even better than the clown show that it
is right now so so I think that the
what's motivating about that story I
think is to realize there's a lot of
space for Innovation there's a lot of U
ways that we can begin to think of
remaking democracy because this
particular version is so recent and so
narrow um and the part that I think is
has potential in the United States
that's really
under recognized is that indeed the
United States Constitution itself embeds
a sortition structure into our
government um you know there's all this
talk about sovereign immunity in the
United States I don't mean presidential
immunity I mean sovereign immunity so
the the federal government has sovereign
immunity which means you can't sue the
federal government unless the federal
government says you can sue me and
states have sovereign immunity which
means you can't sue the states for money
damages unless the states say yes you
can sue
me neither of those immunities are in
the Constitution explicitly they've all
been interpreted as implicit in the
structure of federal government the
immunity that is explicitly in the
constitution is for We the People the
con tion effectively says we the people
cannot be arrested and prosecuted unless
we the people say it's okay that's
called a grand jury and it says you
can't be
convicted unless we the people give you
up and say you're going to be convicted
that's a ped jury so the jury is
constitutionally embedded and the jury
is a random rotation system for making
really important governmental decisions
now it's a terrible citizen assembly
because it's too small not there's no
guarantee of representativeness and blah
blah blah but the point is the tradition
of rotation and Randomness is part of
our tradition we just have to revive and
recognize it and I'm still tracking this
Source down because I when I read it it
wasn't important to me but now it's
really important to me the beginning of
the 19th century in
Philadelphia the class of people who
could be jurors mainly people like me
like white male Property Owners the CL
that class on average served on three
juries a year
oh so you kind of think of a world where
three times a year you are given
government power and you're asked to
make a really significant decision that
would radically change your conception
of your role to the government and and I
think this is this is at the center of
what this movement is trying to revive
the notion that we are all part of the
Govern government we are all part of
governing ourselves it's not just
politicians who we elect and then
complain about it's all of us and we
need to have a regular way to enable
that to happen um and we're going to
have to experiment with lots of
strategies and Technologies and
approaches um to make it happen because
the the biggest challenge we face right
now in the reality of the way government
is funded is cost um even though it's
not so here's a particular example I
went to um I went to Cuba something I've
always wanted to do
and what's bizarre about Cuba is uh you
know C we've had an embargo against Cuba
for 65 years it's the longest blockade
of a country in the history of humanity
no country has block another country for
this length of time and you're like why
why are we doing it and of course you
know 78% of Americans would have no clue
that we're even doing it um and most
would be like what what would the reason
be I don't see why we're doing it and
and of course Obama tried to relax it
and then Obama then Trump as a gift to
Marco Rubio revived it and then Joe
Biden didn't reverse it because the
Florida Democrats said please we're
trying to get one more seat in Florida
and we think we can persuade the Cubans
to support us um Joe Biden's
Administration blocked the import of
equipment necessary to fix a oxygen
plant in the middle of Co
so we literally suffocated people in the
name of this embargo okay so I kept on
digging like what makes why is this true
why is this still here it turns out the
United States government sends $50
million a
year giving money to Cubans in
Florida for the purpose of spreading
propaganda against the Cuban government
in Cuba $50 million a year to run
campaign against the quote Communists in
Cuba and of course the Florida Cubans
are extremely important to the balance
of power in Florida so you're like we
are subsidizing the Florida Cubans
remaining
anti-ban normalization so that they can
continue to get this you know pot pot of
money every year this gold every year to
to continue to run whatever they're
doing their websites or their Twitter
feeds or whatever they're doing like
this so okay so that's the problem you
say what if we had a citizen assembly to
address the question should we normalize
relations with Cuba so I'm completely
convinced that that citizen assembly
would determine overwhelmingly yes
obviously there's no reason to continue
to to force this suffering on the Cuban
people that would cost to do it in the
best possible gym Fishin like way
million dollars you know that's a high
number so for a million dollars we would
end $50 million of subsidies to uh
propagandists in Cuba so it seems to me
that pays but the standard way in which
people confront this is they see my gosh
you're going to have a deliberative poll
it's going to cost $300,000 or a citizen
assembly it's going to cost 7 that just
seems like too much money um I don't
think it is but I do think we need to
start thinking about are there other
techniques that could lower the
institutionalized cost like do we know
what juries cost no we don't because
they've been embedded they've been baked
into the institutions of the courts
they're just part of the system of the
courts um and I think that if we could
bacon it into the institution we could
make this Costo normal we could
experiment with other techniques so um
you know MIT is experimenting with for a
project which is an extremely important
effort to try to um make this more
accessible and uh make a deliberation
like process more accessible we've again
second um advertisement for Sam back
here but we've just recruited Sam to
come stand up a deliberation project on
a platform that we've just acquired that
we're going to open source to enable
lots of this deliberation um uh to
develop um but I think it's just a
moment of experimenting to revive
tradition that is part of our history
yeah and can I just pick up on the cost
point because I hear this so much in the
field that at a local level a Citizens
assembly will often cost somewhere
between 150 to$
250,000 dollar or Euros you know but
people are coming together again for a
lengthy period of time to Grapple with
the real complexity of an issue this is
nothing like a focus group or the kind
of traditional town hall meeting or
surveys or things that are that are done
the the French assembly was around I
think 5 million actually the last one
but again 27 days of deliberation with
185 people and and this was all in
person and so but at the same time when
you think about I don't remember what
the figure was something like
16 billion going around the the
investment into I don't think we should
even use the word investment but how
much is being spent on all the election
campaigns in this moment in time it's
just crazy like let's think about how
many citizens assembly could be
addressing using to address and and I
don't think I mean I'm kind of um wary
about trying to lower as much as
possible the cost of assemblies and of
deliberation because it's more expensive
than a focus group group I think
actually we should be investing in the
infrastructure we need to support this
part of what's expensive is we're doing
it all over again each time when it's a
oneoff so the more we're actually also
investing in that Democratic Civic
infrastructure that supports this so
that within the administration you
actually have a team who knows how to
run sortition that there's a team that
knows how to design and run these
assemblies that's at arms length it's
what we've seen actually happening in
Ireland so far now it's been over a
decade that they've been doing
assemblies at the national level where
it's become more normalized and so
there's a whole team in the
administration there's a Secretariat
that's independent and separate they
built the kind of capacity also within
the administration and nobody is now
questioning the value or or the the
attribution of this after after a decade
you have ministers fighting with each
other for their issue to be the next one
for the next assembly there's an
election coming up and um the question
isn't about is there going to be another
assembly it's what will it be about
because depending on who wins each party
has different priorities for the fres
topic so that to me is like how we how
do we get to that being normal actually
um and that there Merit investment
what's hopeful about that is
um I think the first time the French
Parliament this idea was suggested to
Parliament a dozen years ago I something
and when it was suggested every party
signed a a resolution that said that
this would be a complete violation of
the idea of Representative they're all
totally against it and now in France too
you have candidates running saying that
if we win this is the citizens that so
decade or 12 years is a short period of
time and there's a lot of progress
possible yeah I want to play the div
advocate for a second um the I'm sure
that when the founding fethers in this
country or founders of different
democracies around the world were
designing institutions and constitutions
and elections they didn't have in mind
how elections get and how elections get
to become oxidized uh based on how we
actually behave in the context of
Elections and sometimes I'm afraid that
when we think about Democratic
Innovations we tend to compare a
normative ideal of how a system would
would play out with the reality of a
system that to some extent has failed
and was brought to fail because of the
way in which we've interacted with the
institutions and I think similar points
could be made with technology um if we
have time to talk about how technology
can enhance his processes we also know
how we can get to use the techn in a way
that uh is counterproductive so so what
are the failure modes of Citizen
assemblies and deliberations what are
the things that could happen that are
not dissimilar to what has happened with
the nections and how do we know that
we're not comparing apples and oranges
when we're looking at what's happening
now and how a system evolved over 200
years versus a new idea that has been
experimented in places where decisions
are not binding and so don't suffer from
the same pressure from the outside um
and if you have thoughts on again
failure modes how to avoid them and why
do you think in the pres of any this
would seem be a better
equ yeah um I think it's a fair question
and it's something that we should think
about and especially in a context where
I mean I also personally think that we
need to be moving to a next phase of
experimentation where there's actual
decision-making Authority that sits with
citizens assemblies when they're
convened as well and exploring what does
that mean for legitimacy for
accountability for that just wider
relationship with the other uh
institutions of of government as well
these are not unanswerable questions but
we haven't as a academic Community or
practitioner Community really been
thinking about them seriously um I think
we're starting to see in the countries
where uh there has been at least a wider
prominence in the sense of of media
coverage wider citizen awareness like in
the French example that I mentioned what
was interesting to see was that um the
deliberations were all taking place at
the at the building of the French um uh
it's called the social and Economic
Council it's kind of like a third
chamber of Civil Society in the in the
prince system and so that's right beside
uh a metro stop where most of like all
the assembly members were arriving there
and uh various organizations started
taking out advertising in that Metro
station on issues related to you know
why there should be more investment in P
of care and other things like this so
it's it's a sign actually that there's
starting to have more influence and
power but that when that's the case
there's always going to be people people
who will try to be gaming the system in
some way so I'm not naive about that
either I think there's more
um say like
um like kind of protections built in
around corruption and uh protecting
fairness into a system where you know if
you're selected into an assembly by
sortition you can't be reelected you
have no incentive to be reelected you
have no incentive related to your
political party and allegiance to it to
clim com up within it um you know and
and because also the other thing I
didn't say uh earlier too is there's
usually a super high threshold of
consensus required in these assemblies
for a recommendation to become a
recommendation of the group so it's
often somewhere between 70 to 80% uh in
the French assembly it was actually 92%
in the end of life one um that people
voted for the recommendations so again
if you're needing such a high level of
threshold of percentage you're not
looking for that 51% and just the one or
two extra people you might need to try
to win over if you're a lobbyist um and
we saw with the previous friend citizens
assembly on climate change there were a
few lobbyists that tried to outside of
the kind of formal process approach some
of the assembly members to try and
convince them of various things but
those assembly members called them out
to the organizers and to the media so I
think there's a different set of
incentives that also gets ignited in a
so as Citizens when we're conven for
something that's really about the public
good uh and we don't actually have very
many occasions when that's the case and
I don't know maybe this is like my very
positive side but I believe in the
humanity of people and the goodness of
people overall and we need to try and
create and think about that the design
conditions that help bring out that
constructive side in all of us as much
as as possible while thinking and trying
to mitigate for what will inevitably be
some attempts to nonetheless gain gain
the system which I have no doubts there
would be people that would try that as
well I do think that there's more
robustness built into inter system
though I guess what I'm worried about is
um people
believing that it's all just a sham or a
show like it's just greenwashing and
like this has been a complaint in some
context where the government has stood
up these processes but the govern
themselves craft and then government's
not really Bound by what it does and so
that's one part of the problem and the
other part of the problem is though I
believe in America this has a very
strong roots people will approach it and
feel very weird about it they won't you
say this random collection of 400 people
is going to decide whether X is law or
not people would be whoa whoa whoa like
who are these people um and and so I
think that in America the strategy that
I would recommend is first um we go
slowly second we find Salient issues
that capture people's
imagination but third we're very careful
that those issues don't trigger
organized opposition so for example um
if you look at the Irish abortion
citizen assembly it's really extraordin
it's it's really rich and the final
report is not black or white it's not
pro-abortion or anti-abortion it's a
very subtle um perspective on like when
the end of life decision when um uh
termination decisions are appropriate BL
um and so I was working with a woman in
Texas who said we ought to do one of
these in
Texas because she said and I think she's
right the result in Texas would look
very much like the result in Ireland uh
and it would be much more sensible and
balance than the Texas legislature so
I'm absolutely convinced that's true and
uh I would love that to be part of the
debate about um um uh the right to
choose uh for women in America that you
know I obviously come to this with a
strong presumption in favor of that
right but I would be terrified about
that being a delber uh citizen assembly
for the citizen assembly movement
because if that were a citizen assembly
and that did come out with a liberal
view on abortion then the pro-life
movement would identify citizen
assemblies as the enemy and so you would
trigger an organized interest group to
start taking on the Enterprise of
Citizen assembly so I I have come it's
kind of like John Marshall chief justice
Marshall the beginning of the Supreme
Court like we tell this story to our
students and then fail them if they
don't repeat it back to us that um that
Marshall was a very careful architect of
the jurist Prudence of the court in part
to build the institution of the court
and he was very careful to make sure he
didn't make decisions that would
undermine the capacity of the court or
undermine confidence that the court was
in fact an independent institution
that's I think kind of intuition we need
to deploy here that we pick issues and
deploy issues that capture people's
imagination but don't trigger a kind of
tsunami response from people who are who
lose because of a particular outcome can
I just Pro you on on that a second
though because I mean I'm I'm curious
why you think that because in a way in
Ireland as well it was a hot Buton issue
that the MPS did not want to touch for
decades um and there is a strong
pro-life movement there as well and yet
having a process that lasted for 5
months where there were also certain
rules in place like if you um were
already a member of an organization
campaigning on either side of the issue
you couldn't be an assembly member but
what you could do was you could present
your evidence and they received like I
think 13,000 sufficient evidence from
all sorts of people and had a process
around how people can engage with that
there were 100,000 people that watched
the live streams from that assembly
so it also kind of Beyond it filtering
out into a wider public because those
assembly members also brought that to
the to the dinner table with them there
were also lots of other people that were
kind of it enabled them to have
conversations around an issue that
otherwise it was just hard to even talk
about with people and I mean I am aware
that I feel like in the US things are
kind of maybe Ultra polarized or divided
it's more fundamental point I but I'm
curious like why you think it would be
so
different here yeah so so fundamental
point is we couldn't have a National
citizen assembly that would have any
binding legal Authority and you couldn't
have a national referendum that followed
from a National citizen assembly that
would have any binding legal Authority
because of our constitution so so you
can only be doing it on the state level
and I'd be completely convinced that you
would do it in Texas it would be very
much like it was in irand you know let's
say it took the same amount of time same
number of Texans watching it same number
of but the point is that it would only
be for
Texas even if they like made it law
which of course would be a big
assumption but even if they committed to
making a love it would only be for Texas
and it would be just the first shot in a
national fight that we see breaking out
right now about you know local laws
being passed one way or the other so I'm
just I'm just reporting a fe a feature a
bug in the current political reality
around this issue in America
um not because I think we would be less
capable of engaging in exactly the way
the Irish did it's just that in the
politics of it it would it would just be
one shot do you see any potential at the
national level something well I I
think you're not going to get without
constitutional reform an ability to have
um a national decision that's ratified
through a referendum at the national
level you could imagine Congress like
you know
writing books this is part of like the
recommendation so imagine Congress
created a citizen assembly
process and um you know it said the
president can bring two citizen
assemblies during his or her term and
Congress can recommend the citizen
assembly every two years um uh and maybe
there's a citizen initiative process or
citizens who create a citizen assembly
and Congress could commit that any
proposal coming out out of the assembly
would have FastTrack status in Congress
in the sense that it would be introduced
and passed through the Congressional
process in a fast-tracked way meaning it
has a clear path to make sure that it
gets a vote in both houses um but it
would still require Congress to commit
to it now there could be this transition
stage so in America we didn't have
election of senators um uh until the
17th Amendment um and before the 17th
Amendment you had many states who
effectively created the popular election
of senators by saying the state
legislature would commit that it will do
whatever is the result of a popular
election in the state so they would run
a popular election and joeo would win
and then the legislature would select
joeo to be the senator so that was an
indirect way to create um effective
popular control you could imagine a
similar thing to this you know if you
said will respect the results of a
citizen assembly and then if Congress
some Congress person votes against it
you're like you know don't you support
people but you know the scale of the
United States it's hard to see the same
kind of political
pressure there ready for questions on
the floor I will ask one last to the
panelist but uh we are ready to get them
just after this one um I just want to
touch Bas on one uh term in the title of
this conversation that we didn't really
talk about which was this ation was
about democracy and technology and it
seems that we've talked a lot about how
we take democracy back into offline
spaces a lot and how we get people to
talk again with one another though I
know that for both of you this idea of
bringing technology within this process
is something that is quite important to
you so we already said that the ASM of
multivac ID is out this is not how we
use technology and
democracy is it for you something that
can actually enhance the systems we know
that also technology ends up in the
current forms of the Technologies we've
been using this our social Technologies
and be co-evolve with them and so how is
this taken into account into the visions
that you have for the future of
democracy well first of all I'm just
really glad about the order of this
conversation because I think it's nice
that we started with well what problem
are we actually solving when do we think
about democracy and then where does
technology actually come in to enhance
those Democratic innovations that we
believe in which I have to say is not
always the logic of these conversations
when you're talking about democracy and
Technology as well um and so you know I
I I have been working on citizens
assembly deliberation and human in in
person uh uh aspect of this for a long
time and I still believe that that is
the starting point and the Heart of all
of it but um the the technology aspect
be coming in so uh at democracy next we
are collaborating with the MIT Center
for constructive communication and
devitra here and having just wider
conversations also with others in in the
field about these these questions too
like like um lar and yourself and others
but uh but with MIT we're working on
trying to bring in um technology that
will help enhance the in-person process
so for me the goal is not to be trying
to actually get rid of that or to speed
it up or to make it more efficient you
know if we go back to the problems we're
solving those are not the problems the
problem is we're not actually meeting
each other enough in person taking
enough time to have conversations to
listen to one another so people actually
are heard and have a voice and that
we're dealing with the real complexity
of the issues that we face so I don't
think we need to kind of touch any of
those aspects but we have been doing
this work in a very analog way in the
field for a long time and I think we can
be thinking about technology in terms of
kind of the both before during and after
so before how could we be leveraging
something like the for platform to be
used and the whole process that sits
around that provide our community
listening
and bringing in the voices of a much
wider set of the community as part of an
Evidence base to the assembly so it's
not just the experts uh and the
stakeholders but actually Community
Voices are also a core part of that we
can also be using uh recordings during
an assembly process to help with the
sense making so one of the kind of key
dynamics that takes place is you know
you have 185 people but you're going
back and forth all the time between
small group conversations and large
group conversations again so there's
also something sometimes a little bit
lost in the richness of what happens in
all those small groups that having
technology help with the recording with
the summaries with the sense making that
happens that we could also be be
leveraging and then I think for me
another part of it and well I should say
for us because we've been talking about
this collaboratively is also about how
do we have a better public Archive of
what has happened so we do have public
archives of what happens in our in
Congress and in our parliaments around
the world but a lot of what happens in
these assemblies is a little bit of a
black box still in some ways so the
penies are being recorded more and more
so like I said in Ireland it was live
streamed and that's more common practice
um but we get little Snippets of it and
all we really get from as The Wider
public is the PDF report at the end of
this so how do we actually have a public
archive that's much better grounded in
the voice of people um and I think maybe
just the the other thing I really want
emphasize is that because there is a
wider uh debate going on in in the field
and I'm curious also what you think
about this the too but I I feel like
there's kind of two philosophies and
it's linked to the question around
scaling as well about well you know
technology could enable us to have
deliberations with a million people at
once um and some of the arguments around
that kind of come from certain aspects
which link up to the cost conversation
we had well facilitators are expensive
but we could be testing things like AI
facilitat so you know colleagues at
Stanford and Fishin and others are doing
things like this um but again to me that
kind of if we go back to well what
problems are we trying to to solve and
we want more people to have agency and
we want more people to be strengthening
their civic muscles and actually to me
the role of a facilitator is crucial and
more people I think need to have those
kinds of facilitation skills so actually
how could we be training more people to
have those facilitation skills rather
than thinking about well we could be
using AI to facilitate maybe possible
but my my question is like is that
desirable and is that going back to the
problem that we're interested in in
solving um and so I really believe that
for me there's a sense of Technology
enhancing and assisting various things
in person um but I'm pretty firmly on
the side of believing that there's lots
of questions we should be posing about
like if it's possible do we want to do
that um around around certain things I
think so it's kind of where I I fit in
on those questions so I feel like I have
a distinctive a distinct view from that
um I don't feel like it's either or I
think it's both and so I want the world
to build exactly what you're describing
in a much more robust way everywhere I
think it should be a part of governance
should be a part of the ordinary
rotation of citizenship absolutely to
the extent technology can help make that
in-person experience better I'm all for
it but I think I think there's also in
addition to that activity the
possibility that um technology can
enable deliberation in other contexts um
that could have not the same consequence
not the same experience but something
very similar to it um and if we could
radically increase the number of
contexts where people are engaging in
something that feels like real
deliberation that would be a good thing
if only to train them to make them more
comfortable with that activity when they
are finally summoned into the kind of
real space type of deliberation that
you're describing so I think
deliberation needs to be a part of every
single educational every single high
school needs to be a part of how how how
businesses like work out problems on you
know with with each other and um and so
I think you know part of our effort or
experiment here is if we can drive down
the barriers to enabling healthy
deliberation like that in a virtual way
um it wouldn't be because that's where
we should be doing citizen assemblies no
I think we should be doing citizen
assemblies in real space with real
people talking um to each other but you
know can we can we discover where we
actually have disagreements in Virtual
space and then begin to map the places
of disagreement for governance into
citizen assemblies um could we to use
tools like polus or for the whole Suite
of AI Technologies to begin to um map
the kind of implicit Mind of a community
like to figure out where we actually
agree where we disagree um as a way to
facilitate better places for
deliberation I think all of these
experiments are great um as long as
nobody kind of takes a dominating view
that says this is the only kind of
deliberation or um only kind of um
assembly that we should be
I I agree with a lot of those aspects
too and it's not an either or on all of
it like we're also exploring that we
integrate po or something similar like
the work that Ariel Pacha has been doing
on generative social Choice could that
be connected or other things so you know
there is a wider exploration and and we
actually had a pretty natural experiment
during Co in some ways a lot of some
place on zoom and so on but we also
learned from that that it was neither
cheaper nor easier uh and and posed a
whole other set of problems that don't
happen in the
want too and and sometimes I find and
and you're not saying this but I have
found in other conversations that
there's this assumption that well making
things uh virtual will make it more
efficient and cheaper and easier and I
think we need to be realistic that
actually if we're still really committed
to a lot of the democratic principles um
then it's none of those things but
that's fine because it does enable other
um possibilities like at a global level
and and other things like that too so I
don't think think we actually disagree
too much on on that maybe my main
question though sorry I'm kind of taking
over it sometimes but just to Probe on
what you think on the AI facilitation
question I think it's it's an open
question I mean I think we should try it
and we should see what what's good about
it what's bad about it um and uh and so
I I love what Jim's doing in in Stanford
and I would love to see if we could
begin to evaluate Rob
open for a question yes my understanding
and you should please correct me where
if I got the facts wrong is that in
Ireland over the last year there was a
Citizens assembly they recommended some
constitutional changes all the major
parties supported the changes they went
to referendum people voted no uh that
suggest that maybe something didn't
quite go as smoothly as it should have
can you say more about that yes so this
is um it's a fair question it's a more
complex situation to explain is why I
didn't go into that example so that was
the uh fifth and sixth constitutional
referendums that have taken place in
Ireland since I think the first time
that kind of that happened but still the
first four passed and all result in in
constitutional change but this was also
the only time where uh there were a few
different factors one was there was a
really big time gap between when the
assembly made its recommendations and
when the referendum took place uh the
other difference was that this was the
only time where the government didn't
take up the actual um specific
recommendations for the wording of the
referendum question and they changed it
and they both kind of watered it down
and made it more ambiguous and a lot of
the debate the public debate and what
was written in the media around it
showed that actually those were the main
reasons why people voted against it that
they actually would have preferred for
the citizens assembly more um that's the
word I'm looking for you know that the
the citizens assembly's recommendations
that went a little bit further than what
the government did so there's a certain
complexity in in all of this as well and
actually the Prime Minister resigned
after after that referendum took place
so um so yeah there's a few different
lessons we could be learning from that
whole
experience um we're fast approaching
time so we might uh lump a couple
questions together one from our online
audience is uh what strategic shift in
philanthropy's approach to pro-democracy
funding do you believe is most needed to
facilitate progress for this work and
then I think there's another question in
the room we can add on
Prof Professor R suggested when the US
Constitution was drafted it talks uh a
humans to gather people's opinion Across
the Nation so it may be a reason of
introduction represent democracy to the
US Constitution so you know represent
democracy it takes time and the cost
however uh taking the time in representa
democracy have
made delation
possible however today on the internet
especially on social media everything
changes so rapidly people's sentiment
and
opinion moves so fast under such
circumstance deliberation would be very
difficult so Asia
suggest developing citizens assembly is
good idea for promotion of deoration but
today many people are so busy in their
business and private life so my question
is how can you ensure enough time for
deliberation in a time of Rapid
development of digital technology and
businesses let let me take the first one
here because I want to start in
answering the question of philanthropy
so one great idea would be to give
democracy tons of money to help not ask
him to say but but I think both of us
agree that a critical stage of of
resource support would be to build
institutions that could radically lower
the cost of running new citizen
assemblies across especially the United
States if there were kind of an
Administration I mean the government
would be ideal that it's not going to
happen but an Administration that had
expertise um maybe had democracy fellows
that could go help you know a citizen
run a a city run a citizen assembly
could do the like take Ariel asha's um a
formula for figuring out how do you
create the right representative sample
all of that institutional work um needs
money and we don't have that money but
um as to your U really important
question I think that um one thing it's
hard for us today to like under to
accept but would have been OB is to them
240 years ago to accept is that we don't
we shouldn't expect that all of us at
any time should have something to say
about every issue that there is right um
there's kind of a presumption of modern
democracy that like we're supposed to
know everything like we're supposed to
know what policies you know we vote for
a candidate for president because that
candidate agrees with our po our views
on trade and on minimum wage and on
climate change
and that's kind of presuming we actually
have a view about trade and climate
change and and the reality is as you say
we have lives most of us you know spend
most of our time dealing with our lives
and our kids and and uh we have very
little time for thinking about these
other types of things and and I think
like 240 years ago it would have been
more obvious that that never you
wouldn't expect us to all be ready to
give an answer to everything at any time
and the idea of rotation is not that we
are experts on everything at any
particular time is that we're called to
be experts about one thing at one time
and I think if we could get to a world
where three times a year we were called
into some decision and we made it and it
had a consequence we could see in the
world what the consequence was that
would be magic that's the elixir of
democracy like if we really felt and not
just white male Property Owners right
all of us felt we were part of
government decisions and those we don't
have to agree with them it's just that
we're part of them and we have a chance
to understand them and make a decision
on the basis of it that that's the
practice that I think we need
to other question in the
room thank you so so I feel it's very
interesting that you talk about the
revive the tradition who revive people
sense of they're entitled um je
democracy so I wonder like there are lot
of countries in the world and in some
country maybe people think they do not
have this tradition so do you think that
people have to be trended to be ready
for democracy and in that sense when you
talk about the idea of um citizens
assembly and picking topic for Citizens
assembly I feel do you think that's a
sort of training and like in my country
I I feel that every topic you choose
like in China could trigger trigger the
government's um sentiment or something
so in that sense um do you have an idea
that how to how to try to Trend people
to be ready in under those circumstances
thank
you yeah I um I think yeah it's a really
interesting question to think about
because well I think in in a few ways
like one is that it's actually been kind
of interesting to be able to have more
open conversations about ideas like
these uh with people in China because
you're not talking about elections and
and actually the idea of ition and
deliberation feels somehow a bit less um
I don't
know it's just possible to have another
conversation around this and I think
this idea of people needing to be
trained to be ready I feel like actually
we kind of need to awaken these skills
and capacities and abilities in people
in kind of everywhere like I think even
in this country and in the country where
I live and in many other places most
people have just never had these kinds
of experiences as well and so how can we
be expanding that opportunity and that's
where that idea of also in schools and
universities and workplaces and these
ideas being infused all over the place
not just you know waiting for that one
National citizens assembly in government
is what is also really really a big part
of of the vision here and what we need
to be doing too in China not so much
recently but um but before the real
dominance of she um there was a lot of
experiment in with CI with deliberative
polling Jim Fishin was doing a lot of
deliberative polling in China and it was
precisely because it was local
governments realizing this is a way they
could figure out what the people wanted
without there being an election so there
was no political threat um and now you
know westerners are always cynical about
whether the government actually does
what the people wants I I don't have any
way of evaluating that but I do think
the practice Taps into something very
natural I think actually humans the the
process of growing up well before this
generation that grows up on screens but
the process of growing up without
screens and like learning to work with
people and play with each other is all
you need to be able to engage in these
processes it's just about learning to
talk and listen and negotiate with each
other and small groups that citiz
assemblies require and that's what
humans have done for the whole of the
history of humanity
um another question from our audience
online but also want to remind folks we
have some food and refreshments outside
so we can continue these conversations
uh after the formal close of the event
um but a couple about uh citizen
citizens assemblies uh in the local
context specifically asking about the US
um the best mechanisms to uh
institutionalize and integrate these
loader processes at the local level and
City governments just that question very
broadly yeah I mean well the um in a way
the local level cities have been leading
the way in this movement so 65% of the
examples of the 733 assemblies that have
taken place so far have been at a local
level around the world which makes sense
there's way more cities than there are
countries so I think we'll always have
that kind of proportion and so on um and
what's been interesting in the
conversations that I've been having in
the US and I'm curious also what what
you're thinking about this too is I
think there's a lot of interest and and
openness I think that many people
haven't heard as much about some of
these stories that I think just kind of
more Naturally by proximity have been
spreading and inspiring others in Europe
um over the past few decades so I really
believe there's actually a hunger and an
interest um especially in a climate
where people feel like there's Division
and polarization and that these are also
ways of trying to bring people together
by doing work together around issues
that matter to them um as well so I mean
we're we're going to be working with a
couple of cities here in the US over the
next um next year or so um and and and I
feel like where there's also some
opportunity is taking some of the
learnings from these four Decades of
work that have taken place and kind of
being able to go a little bit more
immediately to this place of talking
about building new institutions I think
there's something that makes a lot of
sense about how doing this once with one
group of 50 people yes it'll be amazing
for those 50 people and you it'll be
great for that that policy decision but
if you're also thinking about the bigger
picture of democracy and how do we
innovate it how do we address these
deeper roots of giving more people more
agency than the the idea of building an
institution where you're creating an
opportunity for the rotation of members
to bring in people over time I find has
also been really resonating and that's
really exciting to me too that there's a
a willingness to think about it in that
longer term way and think about the
investment that that requires and some
of the supporting Civic infrastructure
that sits around it as well so yeah I I
think I I was involved in one
conversation with one unnamed city um
and what I was worried about at the end
of the conversation is that they they
were picking boring questions for the
citizens the kind of question they don't
even want to have to deal with it's just
too boring and Technical like um and I
think that would be a disaster I think
again this is about issue selection is
critical they need to select issues that
make the citizens feel like they are the
important people in the room you know so
questions about um you know how do you
finance local campaigns that's an
important question um and if the
citizens felt like they were helping
them make that decision that would lend
um gravitas to their processes but if
they're trying to figure out what the
permanent process should be for local
restaurants having evening you know
dinner dinner on the on the sidewalk
it's like don't we hire you for that
isn't that the sort of thing the
government should be doing um isn't that
a bureaucratic decision so I think part
of this has got to be pushing people
into something more than just citizen
assemblies as cheap
bureaucracies and instead citizen
assemblies as uh um having their own
dignity in the Democratic process that
reflects what's special about the way
they're
constituted and the work and there's no
shortage of like real issues at the city
level like the housing crisis everywhere
and actually what's interesting in the
US compared to other countries is that
there's usually a fair amount of real
power that sits at the city level too so
that makes it even more interesting to
be experimenting there first I I really
feel like that's the biggest potential
in the US as a as a starting point for
this movement well I just want to thank
our online audience for the the Lively
chat contributions and questions we'll
be sure to pass these onto our panelists
but I want to throw it back to Manan for
any sort of closing remarks I know we're
a little bit past time thank you so much
for the questions and for your time and
thoughts on these issues I just uh I
wish we can I hope we can continue this
conversation over great food just at the
other side on the other side of this
room thank you very much thank you



## Keywords:
