---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wmg8-EnS-MI
---

# Video
Designing Freedom: The Disregarded Tools of Modern Man | Stafford Beer
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wmg8-EnS-MI)

## Transcript:
designing freedom

the 1973 Massey Lectures by Stafford
beer professor of cybernetics
international consultant of the sciences
of management and effective organization
prolific author in these fields and poet

in his first talk Stafford beer pointed
to the incipient failure of our social
institutions and gave us the scientific
frames of reference for understanding
this breakdown tonight he looks at the
technologies especially computer and
telecommunications which have been
abused and wasted by our institutions
thereby becoming sources of alienation
instead of aids to an enlightened system
of organization the title of Professor
beers talk this evening is the
disregarded tools of modern man Stanford
beer
if you were sitting under an apple tree
and suddenly an apple fell on your head
- what force would you ascribe the event
is there an apple throwing monkey in the
tree
certainly not the force involved is
called gravity because we understand
this force to be quite general on the
planet we don't propose to experiment
when asked what would happen if we drop
the glass of water we are holding or
what would happen to an aircraft whose
engines suddenly stopped we reckon we
know what would happen and yet the
concept of a force which affects
everything on the planet regardless of
what that thing is and affects it to the
same extent so that a pound of feathers
behaves just like a pound of lead four
equal air resistance there's a very
difficult concept indeed how can there
be a force which effects everything that
you cannot directly experience that
finds expression only in mathematical
terms and that counter to all intuition
treats feathers and led the same kumkum
you will say this is to talk like an
ignorant Savage even a child can answer
those questions and besides you can
experience the force of gravity directly
because it is this force that your body
measures when it senses weight to this I
reply do you think you would have
answered thus if you had lived around
the corner from Isaac Newton in the year
1687 our culture has had nearly 300
years to understand the problems of
Newtonian physics it had more than half
a century to get its grip on relativity
theory and the second law of
thermodynamics knowing that it is at
least possible to make general
statements about the physics of the
universe not all of us I daresay would
care to answer basic questions about
these two although one might have
suppose that the culture would have
imbibed them by now the observed fact is
that our culture takes a long long time
to learn the observed fact also is that
individuals are highly resistant to
changing the picture of the world that
their culture projects to them
I'm trying to display the problem that
we face in thinking about institutions
the culture doesn't accept that it is
possible to make general scientific
statements about them therefore it's
extremely difficult for individuals
however well-intentioned to admit that
there are laws let's call them the
govern institutional behavior regardless
of the institution people know that
there's a science of physics you won't
be burnt at the stake for saying that
the earth moves around the Sun or even
be disbarred by physicists for proposing
a theory in which it's mathematically
convenient to display the earth as the
center of the universe after all that's
because people in general and physicists
in particular can handle such
propositions with ease but people do not
know that there is a science of
effective organization and you are
likely to be disbarred by those who run
institutions for proposing any theory at
all for what these people say is that
their own institution is unique and that
therefore an apple growing company bears
no resemblance to a company
manufacturing water glasses or to an
airline flying airplanes the
consequences of bizarre our institutions
are failing because they are disobeying
laws of effective organization which
their administrators don't know about to
which indeed their cultural mind is
closed because they contend that there
exists and can exist no science
competent to discover those laws
therefore they remain satisfied with a
bunch of organizational precepts which
are equivalent to the precept in physics
their base metal can be transmuted into
gold by incantation and with much the
same effect therefore they also look at
the tools which might well be used to
make the institutions work properly in a
completely wrong light the main tools I
have in mind are the electronic computer
telecommunications and the techniques of
cybernetics
now if we seriously want to think about
the transmutation of elements in physics
we will recognize that we have atom
crackers that they will be required and
that there must be mobilized we shan't
use the action crackers to crack walnuts
and go on with the incantations
but in running institutions we disregard
our tools because we don't recognize
what they really are so we use computers
to process data as if data had a right
to be processed and as if processed data
were necessarily digestible and
nutritious to the institution and carry
on with the incantations like so many
latter-day alchemists the invitation to
face up to these realities is a
necessary one if there is to be any real
chance of perceiving the proper role of
currently available tools for it isn't
something scintillating ly clever that
I'm proposing not a complicated new
extension of mind-blowing techniques
that are already beyond most people's
understanding not a Big Brother that
will a lien 8us still further from the
monstrous electronic machinery that by
now seems to govern our lives I am
proposing simply that society should use
its tools to redesign its institutions
and to operate those institutions quite
differently you can imagine all the
problems but the first and gravest
problem is in the mind screwed down by
all those cultural constraints you will
not need a lot of learning to understand
what I'm saying what you will need is
intellectual freedom it's a free gift
for all who have the courage to accept
it
remember our culture teaches us not
intellectual courage but intellectual
conformity let's get down to work and
recall where we were the social
institution isn't an entity but a
dynamic system the measure we need to
discuss it is the measure of variety
variety is the number of possible states
of the system and their number grows
daily for every institution because
whenever increase
range of possibilities afforded by
education by technology by
communications by possibility and by the
way these possibilities interact to
generate yet more variety in order to
regulate a system we have to absorb its
variety if we fail in this the system
becomes unstable then at the best we
can't control it as happened with the
bobbing ball on our elaborated tennis
trainer at the worst there is a
catastrophic collapse as happened with
the wave so next to something new what
is it that controls variety
the answer is dead cymbal variety
variety absorbs variety and nothing else
can examine first of all the truth of
that statement consider for example all
the customers who are inside a
department store from the stores point
of view this represents an awful lot of
variety that has to be controlled you
will notice how I use the word control
it isn't that these ladies and gentlemen
have to be told what to do and made to
do it it is that when one of them wants
to buy something the variety of the
customer stall system goes up a possible
state has been made actual the lady has
chosen a pair of shoes but she might
have chosen a fruit cake the store has
to absorb this variety there had better
be someone on hand rather quickly to
take the money and wrap up the shoes
moreover there will also need to be
someone on hand to do the same for the
fruit cake but not nothing is that store
called departmental there's a shoe
salesman and a cake salesman
that is what organizational structure is
for to carve up the total system variety
into subsystems of more reasonably sized
variety the customer who is not clear
what commodity if any will meet her need
represents variety that cannot be
trapped by this departmental arrangement
her variety will be left over not
absorbed if the store isn't careful and
we can see how this means the situation
is out of control
but if the store is careful it will have
an information Bureau which exists
precisely to absorb this excess variety
let's return to the shoe purchaser we
observed that she's becoming angry this
is because she can't get any attention
the shoe salesman is dealing with
someone else and four more people are
waiting the other shoe salesman is
similarly occupied temporally at any
rate the situation is out of control
because at this moment the store has
miscalculated the number of shoe
salesman needed to absorb the variety
generated by the customer well maybe you
remember the concept we need to describe
this affair and its name the name is
relaxation time variety is cropping up
faster in this system then the system
can absorb it and this is bad from the
customer's point of view if it happens
all the time it will be bad from the
stores point of view as well the
customer will desert the store looking
for somewhere with a shorter relaxation
time so the temporary instability of
service in the store will become
permanent and at the very moment
incipient ly catastrophic the trouble
with our society institutions of course
is that the citizen has no alternative
but to use them only variety can absorb
variety it sounds ridiculous
but the perfect undefeatable way to run
this store is to attach a Salesman to
each customer on arrival then we could
forget about those departments where the
shoe salesman I run off their feet while
the girls in lingerie are manicuring
their fingernails and absorb the
customer's variety as we go along
for you see not only do we need variety
to solve that variety but we need
exactly the same amount of variety to do
it we were speaking just now of the law
of gravity in physics it's perhaps the
dominant law of the physical universe
what we have arrived at in the
departmental store is the dominant law
of society systems the law of requisite
variety named ashbey's law after its
Discoverer the example is ridiculous
because we can't afford to supply
requisite variety by this obvious
expedient
we can't give every departmental store
customer or salesman because we can't
afford it
but you may already have noticed that in
very superior and therefore very
expensive special-purpose stores such as
those selling automobiles or handmade
suits this is exactly what happens in
fact you can't shake the feather off nor
would you be able to shake off your
personal policemen if half the
population were enrolled as detectives
to spy on the other half it's just
because this is impractical that we have
crime we can't meet the demands of HP's
law but we must come somewhere near in
somehow or we are in for catastrophic
collapse how is this done when varieties
are dispensed as they usually are we
structure our organizations to cope
fundamentally there are two ways and
only two ways of doing this
remember you can't repeal the laws of
nature then ashbey's law will exert
itself we met the first way in the last
lecture it is to reduce the variety
generated by the system so that it
matches the available supply of
regulatory variety you may recall the
men we had sitting on the tool poles
this was their job and I made a crack at
the financial institutions for doing the
same thing I said they shot the cat that
was generating variety by swinging the
tennis ball in other words there's no
way in which an insurance company can
provide requisite variety for you the
unique human being your variety must be
attenuated cut down so that your case
fits a more general case in theory you
can get the entirely personal quotation
that corresponds to having your personal
Salesman
or your personal policeman just right I
have and see what the insurance is going
to cost
now that's perfectly reasonable because
they claim to be able to handle every
citizen's variety is as ridiculous as I
admit in my example to be when trouble
with our institutions is that they don't
admit that the only full solution would
be ridiculous and they're therefore it
isn't done they should acknowledge at
least themselves that they are
satisfying ashbey's law by variety
attenuation and the reason they don't
admit is that it sounds bad in the ear
of our culture our culture insists on
the uniqueness of the individual that
our society can't live up to that this
is no criticism it's a scientific fact
our culture also insists on the absolute
freedom of the individual but our
society can't live up to that either
that too is a scientific fact then look
at the mess we get into by our pretenses
instead of understanding the situation
and using science to do the best
possible job of variety and attenuation
under the guidance of the consumer and
of the electorate we spend vast sums of
the nation's wealth our wealth on phony
claims on the consumer side we put on
the advertising pressure to pretend that
full account is taken of the customers
variety which is impossible on the
electoral side we lose the freedoms we
have when our varieties attenuated
because we are not asked how the
attenuation should be done no politician
would dare to ask the electorate that
question because he is too busy standing
for the inalienable rights which it is
perfectly obvious we haven't in a in
case got no can we have them let's look
the facts in the face
the second method of satisfying ashbey's
laws the one used by the department
store it would be madness to attenuate
the customers variety by stocking only
one kind and one size of shoe for
example or by locking her in until she
was served the alternative is to amplify
in the variety
the regulatory part of the total system
you don't appoint a single salesman but
many can you do this by departments in
each of them you try to calculate the
statistical relationship between
salesman and customers so that the
relaxation time is held steady there are
scientific ways of doing this but they
aren't often used the amplification of
regulatory variety comes in where one
salesman handles many customers
effectively in society systems this is
the preferable way to proceed because it
helps to preserve individual freedom we
don't do it for several reasons but only
one is real the others observes early on
to this think of the outstandingly
spurious reason first this is the most
obvious reason the cost and there are
two things I want to say about that
first the cost of a society system is
taken as its primary measure in our
society whereas the valid measure to use
is variety the cost is not what he
claims to be namely the money that must
necessarily be spent to achieve certain
aims in fact the cost is whatever is
provided in the way of funds then this
total available sum operates to
constrain what we shall do within the
framework we already have if this
framework is merely a joke played on us
by history so that its structure is
outmoded and it's relaxation time is too
long then the system won't work period
the thing is unstable we pour in money
to head off catastrophic collapse but
that's a silly thing to do because the
money will naturally enough be spent in
buttressing the framework feeding an
expensive variety to stop the relaxation
time growing longer still and making the
instability actually worse think of all
those polls on the tennis trainer
second the constraint of caste is
entirely relative to the aims of society
the aims of society are of course a set
of variety attenuators we come to
everything we can see was socially
desirable and our aims our programs cut
down the proliferating variety of
society a choice in so doing the
attenuator allocates the revenue that
the taxpayer will bear once again our
culture prefers us not to look on the
matter this way around there is a total
plausible revenue
come then attenuate variety choose
between developing a vertical-takeoff
aircraft fighting a small economic war
with the United States for the ownership
of Canadian industry and doubling the
price paid for bureaucracy by having
everything done in two languages in the
deathly silence I seem to hear following
that solecism I also seem to hear a
faint voice it must be a madwoman crying
I would sooner have a 24-hour childcare
service hmm that that would cost money
and there is none remaining
don't be ridiculous madam it's my
prerogative the point is that our
variety attenuators have built into the
system freedom of choice has gone down
this particular drain so what about the
antithetical variety amplifiers at the
spurious reason for not using a miss
cost the real reason is that it would
mean redesigning everything so as to get
rid of the built-in attenuators and
install instead the amplifiers that
could really work to achieve
requisite variety viable relaxation
times and hence some sort of social
stability I already suggested a list of
three basic tools that are available for
a variety amplification the computer
tele processing and the techniques of
the science of effective organization
which is what I call cybernetics now I'm
saying that we don't really use them
where as everyone can assuredly say oh
yes we do the
trouble is that we are using them on the
wrong side of the variety equation we
use them without regard to the
proliferation of variety within the
system thereby effectively increasing it
and not as they should be used to
amplify regulative variety as a result
we don't even like the wretched things
if one of those unworkable institutions
we were discussing by as a computer what
happens it uses the thing please know
that enormous cost to do more
elaborately exactly what was done before
the hunters we know that didn't work one
famous computer manufacturer ran an
entire sales campaign for its new series
of machines on the slogan that you
needed simply to transfer the existing
system whatever it was lock stock and
barrel to the new miracle machine well
that sounded good to the financial
director who had learned the hard way
that he minced costs are involved yes
those same costs again in implementing
new hardware in software terms but had
not learned that the machine to do
miracles is not yet invented the effect
on the institution was inevitable to
make the existing instability more
unstable it's obvious really
once the concept of variety and the law
of requisite variety are clear the
computer can generate untold variety and
all of this is pumped into a system
originally designed to handle the output
of a hundred cruel pens the
institution's processes overfill just as
the crest of the wave overfill then
there is a catastrophic collapse so what
do we here on no account do we here
sorry we didn't really understand the
role of the computer so we have spent a
terrible lot of money - 10 Meir
instability in - catastrophe what we do
here is sorry it's not our fault
the computer made a mistake forgive my
audacity please but how I've been in
computers right from the start
I can tell you flatly that they do not
make mistakes
people make mistakes people who program
computers make mistakes systems analysts
who organize the programming making
mistakes but these men and women are
professionals and they soon clear up
their mistakes we need to look for the
people hiding behind all this mess the
people who are responsible for the
system itself being the way it is the
people who don't understand what the
computer is really for and the people
who turn computers into one of the
biggest businesses of our age regardless
of the society consequences these are
the people who make the mistakes and
they don't even know it as to the
ordinary citizen he's in a fix
and this is why I work so furious it's
bad enough that folks should be misled
into blaming their undoubted troubles
onto machines that cannot answer back
while the real culprits go scot-free
where the wickedness lies and weakness
isn't too strong a word is that ordinary
folk are led to think that the computer
is an expensive and dangerous failure a
threat to their freedom and their
individuality whereas it is really their
only hope there's no time left in this
lecture to analyze the false roles of
the other two variety amplifiers I
mentioned but we should get to them
later in the series for the moment you
may find it tough enough to hear that
just as the computer is used on the
wrong side of the variety equation to
make instability more unstable and
possibly catastrophic so our
telecommunications used to raise
expectations but not to satisfy them and
so are the techniques of cybernetics
used to make lousy plans more
efficiently lousy but enough is enough
I expect you would be more interested to
hear what can be done about all this
then to hear more dreadful news then may
I tell you that the next three lectures
will consider constructive policies for
handling variety we shall start with the
state itself this is rather bold but you
will understand by now that I believe we
are all captives of gigantic systems
beyond our individual control then we
need to understand them because as long
as we have any semblance of democracy
they are not beyond
collective control next we shall turn to
the only thing that matters the
individual he and she not to mention
their son and their daughter are
enmeshed in all this machinery and they
have to get out his science cannot join
with politics and management to do that
I might as well be giving the messy
lectures in that ominous year of 1984
instead of in the year of 1973 on that
reckoning we have 11 years and frankly
that's about the limit the third of
these three next sessions will return to
the central topic of the institution and
so before I come to my last point I will
ask you if you do me the courtesy of
staying with these talks to think over a
crucial question before we meet again it
is the central importance of the law of
requisite variety please think it
through think of any complex dynamic
system how is it regulated it will
certainly be proliferating variety isn't
it true that only variety can absorb
variety how is it done do you not indeed
find that in successful systems systemic
variety is attenuated while regulative
variety is amplified it's usually a
mixture of the two I promised you that
this stuff is easy once you break with
the expositions and explanations dished
out by the culture the thinking I ask of
you doesn't have to be done on some
remote level of abstraction or at the
highest level of state affairs
cybernetic laws are Universal for
instance you might think over how these
concepts of variety relaxation time
stability and potential catastrophe work
for and against you on the journey to
work you can do exactly the same
exercise in the course of putting those
high variety and children to bed then
think through how these concepts work in
the big institutions of society that
govern our lives ask yourselves how
telecommunications the telephone
television effect those problems
contemplate what you surely know about
the role that computers play and see if
they are working on the right side of
the variety equation finally if it's
also easy talk over the problem as to
how we managed to get it all so wrong
then maybe you will see why I contend
that there have to be some big changes
and that they have to come fast before
it's too late
then I come to the last point which I
hope will help in these deliberations if
the law of requisite variety is to be
handled intelligently and not just by
leaving nature to find the variety
balance which of course can be nasty for
us humans then it follows that the
regulative forces must not only dispose
requisite variety which is a number of
possible States
they must also know the pattern by which
variety in the system is deployed on the
journey to work we need to have enough
options open we also need to know the
pattern of the highways where they run
what the control points are like what
other drivers habitually do in the
process of putting the children to bed
we need seven variety amplifiers at our
command but we also need to know as we
do but let's make it explicit the likely
behavior pattern of the children without
these known patterns proliferating
variety looks even more threatening than
it really is
which is bad enough what I have been
calling a pattern is what a scientist
calls a model the model is not a load of
mathematics as some people think
nor is it some manner and realisable
ideal as others believe it is simply an
account expressed as you will of the
actual organization or a real system
without a model of the system to be
regulated you cannot have a regulator
that's the point and you can test that
to
the disregarded tools of modern man ii
of the 1973 Massey Lectures
by Professor Stafford beer Stafford
beard is the author of five books
cybernetics and management decision and
control management science brain of the
firm and platform for change
you


## Keywords:
