---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vjWJBy_9DO0
---

# Video
Designing with Forces How to Apply Christopher Alexander in Everyday Work
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vjWJBy_9DO0)

## Transcript:
so thanks Liz thanks for having me here
it's a pretty cool environment I'm
really happy to be here and to be
talking to a small really concentrated
group like this and also I think this is
gonna be a fun topic to talk about so
basically what I'm gonna be getting at
is this book that I came across in maybe
2004 and it's by Christopher Alexander
it's called notes on the synthesis of
form which is a little bit of an
imposing title it sounds kind of
complicated and it's one of these things
that we see listed a lot there's a new
book that just came out by what is the
guy the guy who wrote the mythical
man-month
it called design the design of design
and he's saying that this is one of the
books that really influenced him and
over and over again we see this book
mentioned but so few people are talking
about it and talking about how it
actually applies to their work so that's
what I want to do tonight and
Christopher Alexander is actually quite
well known mostly if you hear his name
you think of this book called pattern
language can I get a hand or anybody who
recognizes that book or has heard about
this
okay quite a few yeah so the work that
Christopher Alexander did in this first
book is like the foundation of pattern
language in order to actually understand
what a pattern is and and the core ideas
of that book we actually start here and
then we'll talk about also is how these
ideas can become a sort of basis for two
other books that I would recommend of
his the first two books of his nature of
order series the phenomenon of life and
process of creating life there book 1
and 2 and those both have some really
interesting stuff in them but today the
focus is on this notes on the synthesis
of form and basically the key idea in
this book is well it's taken it's taken
some time for me to decide like how can
I like what can i summarize in this
thing because there's Alexander is
amazing how he can pack so many ideas
and he has this very kind of precise way
of writing and he's he's he's he's got a
brain like this so but if I had to
summarize it the key idea
is that he's showing us a different way
of approaching a design problem and the
reason that this is so interesting to me
is because when I've looked out in the
world that other designers and designers
that I admire there's definitely a
difference between some people are
consistently producing really good
designs consistently producing really
thoughtful good solutions and others are
not and then it's like well what is the
difference between the two camps right
like what are the people who
consistently do good work doing that
makes them different and I think some of
the ideas in here point to that and
basically if we're looking into any kind
of theory about design or any kind of
guide that's going to help us do design
there's two things that we would really
like to get out of that one thing we
would like to know is how do we even
start designing because well because we
can make anything and how do we make
something good it's just this is the
simplest idea right how do we actually
start from not having anything and then
actually bring these together into some
kind of design that really makes sense
and then the other thing that we want to
do is not only design from scratch but
have some kind of way of looking at the
designs that we already have and
critiquing them and seeing what's right
and what's wrong about them that isn't
just based on what's popular or you know
does this fit the current fad or is this
fit the current trend but is this
actually a really good design that's
working for that's working for the
people who are using it and then the
other thing that's really important for
me that I think we should get out of any
design theory is that it should help us
whenever we as designers are creating or
creating user interface we're creating a
piece of software we're creating
something we need to be able to sit
point to any element in our design and
say why is that there why does it work
what were the different pressures that
led us to that and why is it continuing
instead of saying well it kind of looked
good or I started with a box and it's
what I could fit in the side or I mean
as you guys all know this situation
right we start designing something and
we kind of don't know what we're doing
we just keep putting stuff in until it
sort of feels right and then we say okay
well it seems I managed it it's over
let's do something else but instead we
want to be able to look at each element
in our design and say why is it working
so Alexander has kind of these two
keye these are the only real like
definitions that we bring into the game
here is he likes to say that when we go
into working on a design we're dividing
the world into a form in a context and
this is a really simple idea so if we're
going to design a kettle for boiling
water then we kind of draw this
imaginary line around the kettle and say
this is out of everything in the world
this is the part of the world that I'm
putting my attention on right now this
is the thing that I'm going to control
and then everything outside of that is
some kind of context is putting some
kind of pressure or it's putting some
kind of constraints on this thing so
it's a simple example of how if we're
designing a kettle then the form is the
kettle and the context is the life
situation around the kettle the fact
that the kettle goes on top of a stove
and the heat comes up in the form of a
flame underneath and the fact that a
human being wants this kettle because
they want to boil water and then they
want to be able to pick it up and and
tilt it right and in order to pick it up
it can't be the contents of the kettle
need to be hot but the handle can't be
too hot because then you'll burn your
hand so there are these different kind
of forces in the context that motivate
the whole reason for the kettle being
there and those are all outside of it if
we look at doing software design like
what we do at 37signals then the form
that we're talking about is actually the
user interface so here's the contents of
a web browser and then the context is
all of the life situation outside of
that the fact that somebody is using it
on a computer that is fast enough to run
it or not or not to slow the fact that
somebody is using it because they want
to accomplish something with the
software what kind of what kind of
internet connection do they have what
kind of habits does that person have
what kind of expectations do they have
there are all these different things
that are outside of the actual interface
that are influencing it and then also we
can draw this line of between form and
context inside of an existing interface
so we can decide that for some reason
this on this interface that there's this
form section here for creating a note
and we want to make some changes to this
this is this is some part where we have
some ideas about how to improve
so this is the forum and then all the
rest of the screen that we don't want to
manipulate this is like a context then
this is some kind of giving us
constraints some kind of outside thing
that we're going to leave a loan that's
going to influence the form that we're
making now the interesting thing that
alexander does is because it's so far
it's like okay so what right there's
something you're designing and stuff
around it whatever but Alexander points
out that part of when we first attack a
design problem we're actually making it
this decision about where this form
context boundaries should be and we can
move that around so if our definition
coming in of our problem is that oh I
want to make it Ketel I want to be able
to boil water then clearly this is what
we're going to do we're gonna make a
kettle but it's also possible for us to
change the definition and to say well I
don't actually want to make a kettle I
want to have hot water in the kitchen
and if the problem then is that I just
want to have boiling hot water there
might be a whole different solution so
for example we could go over to the
faucet and at the edge of the faucet we
could have some kind of attachment that
pressurizes the water and boils it as
the water passes through you know like
what we see in these like instant
espresso pod machines so instead of
having a kettle than the form that we
would be working on is actually some
kind of attachment at the end of a
faucet and we'd be getting the same kind
of result but with the totally different
design problem with different
constraints and we've seen something
similar happen recently at 37signals we
were working on well we redesigned the
signup screen and the signup screen this
is for high-rise there are a few
different plans here and each plan has
these like different different
possibilities you know you can have a
certain number of users you can have a
certain number of storage you can have
some number of deals contacts things
like that and in the past high-rise had
this feature well it has it has a
feature called cases and in high-rise
you can you can have notes about all
kinds of different people and cases is a
feature that allows you to say all of
these notes about these five different
people have to do with the same topic
they all have to do with this lawsuit or
this
that we're trying to make the sales
leave that we have and it's a kind of a
way for you to collect notes together
and we have this limitation and
high-rise that certain plans can only
have five cases or they can only have
ten cases and it was always the case
before we did this redesign that it
would say up to six users five gigs of
storage ten deals and five cases then we
redesigned the screen and I don't know
if we forgot to include cases again or
if I don't know what happened but cases
didn't make it onto the chart but the
limit was still inside of the software
so what would happen is people would
sign up they would discover the cases
feature I think all this is great start
making cases start creating all kinds of
putting all kinds of information into
their account and then when they try to
create the sixth case high-rise says to
them you know sorry you've used your
limit that you didn't know you had and
then people would write support and say
you guys suck why did you put this limit
and not tell me about it and so we had a
design problem which is oh we forgot to
show the cases limit on their signup
form and now people are angry so if we
just kind of roll with that without
pausing to think about it then we could
go in here and say okay well we have to
add another line but when we came back
to this screen we didn't want to add
another line because it's like we're at
the border of having too much
information here already like if you
glanced at this this is kind of a lot of
information to look at and if we add one
more line we felt like it was going to
put us over the edge of like too much
stuff making the decision too
complicated so we don't want to actually
change this form what we decided is that
well instead of changing the sign up
screen we could just change the limit so
what we did is we actually killed the
case limit and now we don't have to
change our signup form and the customers
who were hitting this wall they don't
hit that wall anymore because that limit
doesn't exist so the customers are happy
and the forum is happy but what this is
illustrating is how what we did is we
instead of saying that the forum that
we're going to design
is the sign of screen and the context is
all the things that the sign of screen
is trying to do we rethought the problem
and said on the form that we're going to
change is the pricing model for the
application and then all the different
influencing factors on the pricing model
or like all these different business
decisions those are the context and in
this case it made sense
so that's form in context in the
boundary between the two now Alexander
has a really interesting way of defining
context it's not just some fuzzy notion
of some kind of environment or something
that's around the form or some kind of
influencing factor but what Alexander
says is that when we are looking at at
the when we're looking at designing a
form we want to know what are the actual
facts in the world that have to do with
this form what are the actual factors in
real life that are outside that are
happening already that are influencing
the thing that we're going to design and
he calls these things forces and
Alexander can be pretty poetic and one
of the ways that he kind of illustrates
this idea is that if we look at these
kind of beautiful sand dunes where you
have the these regular alternating
ripples of sand that this is actually a
form and this is rippling sand dunes are
a form that's produced by the force of
wind and it's the interaction of the
force of wind and the piles of sand that
produce this kind of rippling pattern
and this is an example for Alexander of
how when a form and a context are like
perfectly fitting right that you get you
get it kind of you get a kind of form
that perfectly shows both and then he
also uses the example of the water like
the the milk drop how the fact that we
actually have this form is that is this
form is showing all of the different
forces that are around it it's showing
the fact that there's gravity that's
pushing the the liquid down and that
there's different kinds of densities
between the liquid and the air right so
that the liquid stays together and the
air stays together and the drop comes in
and then there's surface tension and
there
different kinds of electric charge
between the particles and all these
things are influencing the shape of the
splash and the splashes it comes from
actually Alexander was inspired by this
guy Darth
I think Darcy Wentworth you wrote a book
called on growth and form in the early
1900s and he's talking about how forms
are actually showing us they're like a
perfect picture of all of the forces
that are outside of them and this is
this is kind of Alexander's ideal mental
image of what we're doing when we design
so when we design a piece of software if
we design if we design an industrial
object what we're trying to do is make
something that is such a perfect
response to all of the different life
situations and forces outside of it that
it's the only thing that could happen
you know it just fits perfectly with
those forces so with this sort of like
vision in mind about what Alexander is
going for we can look a little bit more
practically at the process that he
outlines and what he talks about is
first the thing that we do is we decide
where it is that we're going to to set
the problem right so in the case of the
kettle is it we're boiling water with a
kettle or are we going to boil water
with the kind of faucet attachment or in
the case of high-rise are we going to
change the signup form or are we going
to just change the pricing model right
so first we decide this is the place
where the world is going to change and
then this is the place all around where
the world is going to stay the same then
after that having identified that
boundary then we can look at all the
different forces that impinge on that
place that we're going to change and
we're gonna see exactly how we do that
then having identified those what we do
is we create a kind of sketch or a kind
of diagram which is showing a way that
all of these different forces coming
together can be resolved can be balanced
can work together so that there's no
friction and there's no conflict so this
is the this is the design process that
Alexander talks about so in order to see
this in a way that's not abstract we're
going to look at it let's look at an
example so the examples going to come
from high-rise maybe you guys don't know
what high-rise is high-rises a product
of 37signals and it's a web-based
software app and basically the way that
the reason that we've made it is we
found ourselves in the situation
where we had a lot of relationships with
people you know with business contacts
with professional contacts and
networking and things like that
and all of these people you we have you
know somebody calls on the phone and you
can't quite remember when it was that
you talked to them the last time you
can't remember what exactly it was you
talked about you know you have an
ongoing issue with the lawyer and or
with the the landlord and you're trying
to work something out and every time you
talk to him you can't quite remember
what it is that he promised the last
week right or you're you know you're
with the you're trying to get a contract
settled and you wish that you had a
clear record of all the interactions you
had with a person but instead you have a
little note scrabbled here and you have
an email over there and and then what
you know your memory of a phone call
that happened with somebody else and the
other thing that we noticed in addition
to having all these relationships and
not being able to remember like what was
happening with them was that we can
never remember to follow up with anybody
you know you meet somebody and then you
think all great and then you want to
give them a call a week later or you
hear about something and you want to
send an email to check up on it but we
had no system to keep track of all these
different things in all these
relationships so it just kind of didn't
happen so what we did is we built a tool
that would allow us to kind of
centralize the people that were working
with kind of centralize the context that
we have and then keep track of histories
notes of interactions with everybody and
also set tasks so that we give a
reminded you know get a little SMS on
our phone don't forget that you have to
call so-and-so back about this thing
that you talked about last week so that
was kind of the where that came from and
if we look at this in terms of
Alexander's model then starting from the
beginning the form that we want to
design is this piece of this piece of
software called high rise and in
particular the way that we work at
37signals the thing we wanted to design
is the user interface because if we have
the user interface then the you know the
the actual software implementation kind
of falls out of that it's really the
user interface that we're starting with
and then the context is like this life
situation that we're in that I just
described how we have all of these
people in our lives and we can't quite
keep track of them and
on top of all the relationships and be
as prepared as we would like to be in
dealing with all those people so here's
that definition right that we want to
create a a UI for this app called high
rise and the context in general is this
sort of fuzzy life situation so now what
Alexander says is instead of taking this
fuzzy life situation and then just
starting to design instead we want to
look closer at that life situation
usually when we start a design project
we have this idea of of like
requirements right you guys know what
I'm talking about how you you start a
project you're like okay what does it
have to have and you kind of make this
list but when we make a list of
requirements we're actually just
designing without even doing any thought
before we're designing because we're
saying this is what it's going to be and
Alexander is saying something completely
different he says instead of making
requirements about the form that you're
designing instead we should be defining
the requirements in the world so that we
should be looking at what's actually
what are the real facts on the ground
that influence what we're trying to do
instead of just making up a list of
things to check off for ourselves and
this is how we do that is we take this
context that used to be one fuzzy idea
and we break it apart into all kind of
individual facts on about the world that
bear on the thing that we're trying to
make and so in the case of high-rise
some of the things that I mentioned
before that it's too hard to remember to
follow up with people I meet so I don't
do it enough or I can't remember how
long it's been since I checked in with a
certain person or you know I wish I
could remember exactly what what I
talked about with my clients but these
things that we want to do aren't the
only facts on the ground that bear on
this project there's also the fact that
I want to keep track of all this stuff
but I hate doing data entry like this is
this is a major factor the fact that
installing software sucks like I don't
want to install software I don't want to
have to do that so there are all kinds
of different factors here and this is an
exact picture not only of what Alexander
is talking about in the book but this is
the thing that really drew me to the
book because I found that when I was
doing design prod
this is exactly what was happening in my
head that I was thinking okay what are
all the different factors you know what
are all the things that are happening
that this design has to accommodate and
they're all facts not about they're not
requirements they're facts about the
world that bear on the thing that we're
making so we start with this big
collection of require of like of facts
right of he and Alexander calls them
forces because he thinks of them just
like that wind that's creating the form
of the sand dunes or the the
environmental physical factors that are
creating the milk drum it's we don't
just have this big collection but
actually some of these things naturally
clump together they have to do with each
other and they clump together into
groups so we have some of these are
related and some of them are related
over here and some of them are
disconnected from each other and just by
looking at that we can start to see some
patterns so we can pull a few of these
out so for example the fact that I worry
about forgetting details from a
conversation I wish I could remember
exactly what we talked about with
clients I hate doing data entry so even
though I want to remember those things I
don't want to put it anywhere and I
can't remember how long it's been since
I've checked in with a certain person
these different concerns kind of have to
do with each other so then if we sit on
that we can design something that fixes
this that takes these different factors
into account and the way we start is
with a simple paper sketch really really
simple so not a wireframe not even an
HTML prototype or anything like that but
just a simple sketch that balances these
forces out so here's an example of a
sketch to handle the situation you know
we care about when things happen and we
want a history of things that happen so
a pretty natural form for that is a kind
of chronology and then we can have a
note for each interaction that happened
with a person you know here they called
to ask about how the project was going
here I sent them an update and told my
teammate that the client is wanting you
know some more changes and then here we
delivered some changes having time
stamps for each things so that I can see
when is the last time that we talked
should I be following up again and then
in order to make the
entry really painless instead of some
kind of separate place to go like create
note you know and you click create note
and you have like what's the title of
the note what's the description of the
know what color pants are you're wearing
when you wrote the note you know like
all these different attributes that we
usually see instead we say oh but I hate
data entry and this is a factor here so
we have a single text area on the top
and if I go into this text area and I
just type something hit enter then boom
we get a new note on top this would be a
good way to handle these different
factors and we can see how this design
actually maps to these different factors
right the fact that we care about time
the fact that we want it to go quickly
the fact that we want to remember all
these details so having this kind of
basic concept in mind we can flush it
out a bit more and here's what it looks
like when we actually flush it out so
we're looking at we call these things
streams we're looking at a stream for a
certain person from Janis Brown these
are all about her and here's the place
where we add the note and you know a
little detail we needed a button
probably and and sketching this we see
okay yeah this is clear this is a good
concept and we take the next step it's
actually building it this is what it
looks like built out in high-rise and
the thing that I want you to notice when
you look at this screen is the fact that
even though there are like a lot of
different elements here you know here's
here's the header that says the fact
that we're on Janice Browns page it's
not so different from that right and you
can see also how the hierarchies playing
out around there right like this is the
key factor and we have some other stuff
kind of attached to it but it's
definitely not competing for for the
like the hierarchical prominence of that
of that name there and we see here's
that here's that text area that we
looked at and here's the stream now the
exact form of the stream changed a
little bit we ended up doing time stamps
on the top of each entry we ended up
wanting some other details like the note
who wrote this note and then it was we
look further into they up there can be
cases where we have some other metadata
there we have some different kind of
filters but despite all these different
details when we look at this screen now
we can see that there's a certain is a
very specific motivation
behind the bones of the thing right and
that the specific motivation behind his
bones came from these insights about the
problem about what's going on in the
world and how this needs to be designed
in order to really be useful so we got
one little thing designed and actually
that is the first thing that we designed
in high-rise that was pretty much the
most obvious parts of the problem but
then we can go back and we can look at
all the things that we're trying to do
again and we also had some other
observations that you know not only is
it that I want to remember things
remember conversations and details but
there was also this thing coming up
about wanting to somehow follow up with
people or wanting to be reminded I
wanted to remember to do that and we
have a few we have a few forces that we
identified the fact that it's hard to
keep track of who should follow up on a
lead or that I don't want two people
from our team to follow up on the same
lead the one we mentioned earlier that
it's hard to remember to follow up with
people if I do have something that I
need to do if I do have a follow up in
mind it doesn't really matter that I do
it at Thursday at 3:15 p.m. it's more
like you know I want to remember that
tomorrow I should call this person or
next week I should follow up on that
document that I'm expecting to get right
so this is a factor to that I don't
really I'm thinking about I'm coming at
this from my life situation not from a
requirement standpoint wishing that
there was some way I could just remember
that next week I have to do this or
tomorrow I have to do this so we can see
that these things naturally group
together and then looking at this group
we can start to get some ideas for a
form that balances these factors here's
a simple sketch that shows that so what
we're looking at here is a simple form
where we have some kind of way to enter
in a value for the body of the task or
what the task is and we have a pull down
here this is a pull down menu just trust
me this is a pull down menu for the
thing that we had in mind was
we could have these kind of time buckets
like today or tomorrow or Thursday
instead of you know to pull downs for
hour and minute and then you know having
a calendar appear and everything when
you usually don't need that and then we
also talked about keeping track of who
it is that's responsible for doing this
follow-up so we have a pull down here
for selecting the user the highrise user
that is responsible for this and then a
submit button and a way to cancel and
then if we look at this again we can see
that this is reflecting the different
forces that we had the fact that we hate
doing data entry is still bearing on
this so this is a really important
factor in our design that there are very
very very few fields as few as necessary
and then again we don't have a title and
a description and a vist and of that and
all this different kind of metadata we
don't know tags on tasks all this stuff
we just have one little box where you
can type in call her back right and then
when and then who should do it and then
here we can see what it looks like if we
really think about it and start to flesh
it out a little bit yeah and then built
out this is what we have on production
right now you can see how again some
other things started to creep in a
category kind of started to creep in the
idea of privacy crept in but these
things weren't here on the first version
also this link or set date time we had
the idea that sometimes you actually
want to have a reminder to do something
at a very specific time you know
sometimes you want to say 10:00 a.m.
tomorrow I've got a car because if I
don't do it in the morning then I'm
gonna get swept up in things probably
right so but when we did the first
version of this screen it was really
field pull down pull down submit and
then having this this basic form laid
out in response to the key concerns then
we had this sort of pattern we could
follow like oh we could add another pull
down there you know if we add one more
it doesn't it doesn't give us too much
color it doesn't take us too far and oh
yeah you know we wanted to have some
kind of privacy to make tasks visible to
other people on the account we can
manage that here
this doesn't detract too much but it's
not that we started this for having a
requirement for all of these things and
they were all equally important so it's
a case again of looking at what are the
bones behind the design and then this is
one of the things that Alexander like he
mentioned it in in the preface of this
book actually the book was first written
in I think 61 something like that in the
in the early 60s and about half the book
is dedicated to this idea of
understanding form and context and
identifying these forces and then
balancing the forces out into diagrams
and the other half of the book is based
on is this sort of complicated formalism
like he wants to mathematically define
how you can have these forces and how do
you decide if they depend on each other
or not how do you have a probability
function of whether they're like it's
Alexander's actually trained as a
mathematician and he comes at this
he was really this was his doctoral
thesis I think and he wanted to really
go whole hog with this formalism but
then he writes in his preface on the
updated edition I'm sorry for that he
says but this stuff about this stuff
about independent groups of forces
becoming diagrams is totally right still
and is really important so please read
this book he says in the preface but
only only worry about the stuff about
the forces and the diagrams if formalism
I'm sorry so and you know I the first
time I read that book I was like yeah
preface whatever you know and and and
and I did what what a huge chunk of the
design community did for 20 years after
he published this thing which is get
obsessed with design methodology and
formalism oh if I can you know write all
the forces and then I can plug them into
this into this software and then it'll
figure out all the interactions it'll
tell me which ones I need to make
diagrams of you know I mean like this
this designer fantasy this like design
engineer nerd fantasy thing that you can
do something formal that is going to
tell you how to design and and then I
came back to the book again
recently maybe a year ago and I read and
I and I read the preface ha ha ha okay
you know he figured some things out this
stuff actually doesn't matter it was
like a relief and also what he says
about this being the key idea is quite
true when we which we see when we go to
a pattern language we can mention that a
bit later so but what we see here are
these two sketches now combined and
what's interesting here is that we have
like a whole design now you don't I mean
we're starting to get a more complicated
design and what this design is showing
is some kind of screen for a certain
person in high-rise so you you go to
Janice Browns page and you see this
history of everything that happened with
Janice and you have the ability to
really quickly if you're on the phone or
you just had a meeting or something
enter a new note about Janice and it
goes into the history but that's not all
not only do you have the past you also
have this ability to just go over here
and really quickly add a task for the
future about Janice and you can say call
her back
follow up with her check in on this
check in on that and this is a really
functional this is like a really good
combination of features it's like a
really good design that works well
together but the way that we got there
wasn't from starting at the top and down
and thinking oh we will have history and
we will have past and future and they
will all be together and it'll be nice
instead what we did is we started from
the bottom up building little chunks
that that were relatively what do you
say like self-contained as far as their
interactions go you know what I mean
like they have a lot of internal
dependencies but they don't have a lot
of external dependencies so there's a
lot of loose like forces that are
working together that we identified
actually before a subset of forces that
are working together to to to motivate
this form and then there's a different
set of forces that are working together
to motivate this form and we build it up
and then we're able to compose them
together and this is actually what the
whole book of pattern language is about
the idea that a lot of these forces that
we identify
if we're doing something that people do
a lot but say instead of designing
software let's say we're building a
house right everybody needs to cook food
in their house everybody needs to sleep
in their house and go to the bathroom in
their house and you know have a place
for the kids to play and stuff like that
so what Alexander noticed was that there
are certain patterns of forces that are
like recurring that if you try to do
this thing if you try to build a house
you're going to run into these things so
what a pattern language is is each
pattern is a little family of forces and
it says here are the different things
that you're going to notice you're going
to notice that there's this and there's
that but there's also this and then
there's this problem how do you deal
with that and then he has a little
sketch he said this is how you deal with
it the kitchen you need to do this you
need to do that and then here are the
different factors so make the counter
like that does that make sense so this
is like basically the key idea behind
pattern languages and this includes not
only building a house but also when you
hear about somebody doing design
patterns for for UI or design patterns
for software it's exactly this and then
another bonus that we get is aside from
being able to kind of modularly define
these situations is that after this
design is built out there's a modularity
oh how do you say it there's a kind of
independence between these two things so
that if we have some idea about how the
task feature could be better you know if
we have some idea that you know actually
it's really important that we schedule
things and that we want let's say let's
say we have a new realization that I
keep wanting to have some kind of
recurring reminder let's say I start
using high-rise a lot for billing my
clients and I have some manual billing
process yeah and I want every 30 days to
be reminded to do this for a certain
client now I have a motivation to change
the task feature so it has some kind of
like recurring thing instead of just
following up I can go into this block
and I can make a change to it I can add
a recurring feature or I can rethink the
design of this block and I don't have to
worry about this right
because the forces that are motivating
this blog are quite distinct from these
and if I just look at the ones that
affect this block then I have a kind of
confidence and a kind of boundedness to
my state of mind as a designer right I
mean like as designers we're always
thinking in terms of possibility spaces
right like I have this much room of
freedom and what are my options inside
this space right and what this does is
this gives us kind of defined useful
meaningful possibility spaces to work in
so that we don't make a change here and
then find out that the thing over here
is broken now and then when we go to fix
that the thing over here is broken right
because of interdependencies so this is
really useful so then in the end of the
day this is what we ended up with on
production for high-rise so this is
janice brown's page and you can see her
history here you can see that there's an
added task button again because of this
independence we were able to say you
know if the task form is displayed all
the time it's like a little too much
you know you land on the page and
there's like all these pull downs here
but if you don't want to add a task they
don't have any relevance to you right
only when you want to add a task do
these things matter so so we decided
that it would be better to just hide
that behind a button and we could do
that because of the relative modularity
of these two parts yeah so that is a
look at using these ideas to get from
starting from scratch
and identifying some forces in the world
and then resolving those forces and
diagrams and then building those out
such that we get to a design the other
thing that I mentioned in the beginning
of the talk was that we also want to
know how to look at an existing design
and judge that in a useful way and so
that's what we're going to look at now
and what Alexander has this is like
another this is like the other main idea
that he has which is that if if we just
have some requirements for our form that
we're designing yeah if we have a
checklist that says your app has to have
this feature that feature this feature
this feature and it has to be red pink
and blue then when we checked those
boxes we think that we did a good job
and we're done yeah but the the the
criteria was all internal it was like
you know I mean it doesn't tell us
anything about if we're actually making
something that's useful for the world or
not so Alexander takes a different view
and he says if we want to judge a design
he says we can't actually make
requirements how do you explain that he
he has a kind of a long way of
explaining it I want a short way of
explaining it basically if we just say
everything that the design should be
right then our list can be miles and
miles and miles long because if you look
at the screen that we were just looking
at this high-rise screen right how many
pixels do you think are positioned here
I mean pretty much you could do 1024 x
768 to tell you how many bits of
information are set here yeah it's a big
number I don't know what it is it's big
number and if we were to say like does
this meet the requirements or not we
would have to have a requirement for
every single pixel in order to have the
answer or not and this is ridiculous
right the only way that we can actually
have a useful way of deciding if
something is good or not is not by
seeing if it meets requirements but
actually by looking to see if it
collides with reality and produces some
kind of misfit or conflict so
Alexander's saying we defined all these
different forces that are out there in
the world right like the fact that we
want to go into high-rise and we don't
like data entry but we wish that we
could keep track of a conversation right
if if high-rise had a really painful
data entry process then I would go into
high-rise want to add a note and say to
myself I hate this I don't want to use
this and stop using it right and that
moment of like discontent or of
brokenness or of this isn't right
that moment is actually what we look for
in order to judge a design
according to Alexander he's saying that
design is an error-correcting process
and the only way that we can say a
design is good is if it just has an
absence of misses if it just hasn't has
an absence of friction points and this
is totally consistent with the way that
we're working at 37 we're looking at
things in terms of how many pain points
are here what's bothering me about it
and then when we can remove those
different points then we feel like we're
in a situation that is comfortable that
is without friction that is effortless
that's easy that's natural and then this
is this is what we're going for so let's
see this illustrated so in high-rise we
have some extra details there's not only
just the note itself just the body of
the note but we also have this link here
below the note it says show options
Files cases deals and permissions what
you can do is it's a little bit of a
junk drawer this place that we put stuff
that we didn't want to put out right but
it's useful so if I click that it
expands down and I get a whole bunch of
options and most of these were mentioned
in that little tip at the end of the
link write files set the date
permissions so here we can attach files
to the note we can attach it to other
other things in the app we can set the
permissions who can see the note we can
set the date of when it happened and
then finally we have a block here you
can email this note such that when you
click Add
anybody who's checked here will get a
little notification email that says
something happened with Janice Ryan
wrote a note about it here's what it is
now in theory this works really well
right because not all the time you don't
always want to notify people with a note
sometimes you just want to put it in
there sometimes you do so we make it an
option right but in practice what
happens is I get to this screen and I
type my note and I look at the note and
say does the note say what I want it
kind of proofread it yeah that's good I
hit add and then the opportunity has
passed then I realized after I read it
damn it I wish that Jason knew this or I
wish that you know somebody else I would
my options suck now I have to copy and
paste the note that I wrote go to my
email client think of who I want
autocomplete their email addresses you
know put all the names in paste it in
and then and then the information that
they get isn't linked in with all the
other history so they don't have a
context you guys get how this isn't
working yeah so what we have here is
some misfit we have some can we have a
conflict between the forces the facts on
the ground and the way that our form is
designed so um these are all forces that
relate to notification if we just kind
of pull some out of out of the air so
you know from any notes I don't care
about updating them again I hate through
data entry I don't want to check a whole
bunch of things it's too much work to
post an update on high-rise and
separately email people and a lot of
these are handled by the original design
but two of them are not I don't think it
turns out that I don't think about
notifying others of an update until
after I've saved it and this isn't some
kind of a priority like logical thing
it's one of these things that you find
out it's a fact about the world that it
just turns out like that right and we
didn't know and the other thing that we
might have known a little bit had a
sneaking suspicion about is that it's
hard to remember stuff that's hidden
behind a link you know if stuff is
hidden inside of a drawer and there's no
like queue of what's behind this drawer
what's behind this link then chances are
you're gonna forget that it even exists
related to that we actually have another
little note here if a cop if a comma
delimited list so that's referring to
let me show you again right here show
options files cases deals permissions
this is giving us a little tip here that
this is what's behind this link and it's
a shorter way of giving you a clue of
what all that stuff is without actually
showing you all that stuff now the
problem is that there's a fact that if
we put too many things in this common
delimited list it loses its quality of
being scannable you know when it's
shortened it's just a few things you're
I can go here it can skip pass and it
can be like you know files permissions
yeah but if we have if the list gets
this long
then your eye just says that's too long
I don't care and skips over the whole
thing or maybe you see the first it can
be that you see the first word on the
last word but you don't see the middle
contents at all when it's too long so
this is actually a force that affects
the form that we designed that it's if a
comma delimited list has too many
members it becomes unscannable so for
this reason we wouldn't go in and do an
alternative form where we say show
options files date cases permissions and
notifications right so what do we do so
what we want to do is we want to
redesign the form in such a way that
these forces aren't in conflict anymore
if we look at that so here's a quick
sketch here's that new note text area
here's the options link here's the
submit button when we type in a note and
we hit submit we get a new note that
appears at the top of the stream what we
could do is underneath that note we
could have a little call out and this
call-out could be these little like
little blinking majesty lines are
showing that it's like you know somehow
we're gonna draw people's attention to
this and we have a some text in here
that says like you want to notify people
you know click here and then if they
click there we can expand in line where
that little notice was and we can show
some kind of form that is like you know
here's the check boxes to check off who
you want to notify and click Submit and
it'll happen so let's look at what that
would look like so here we've typed in a
note it was added to the top of the
stream and immediately after was added
it has a special state and has a special
like just added state and here it says
notify people about this note and then
if I click notify people about this note
it can expand and give me that form
right where it is so this is a better
design because this is instead of
working against the fact against the
facts that I don't think about notifying
until after I do it it's working with
them so now if we look back at the
interactions between the forces in the
world in the actual form that we have we
can see that these are happy that these
things are working together now that our
form is using these facts and working
with people instead of against them so
that's a look at misfits if we can add
this on to the original story that we
looked at we have a fourth step we have
drawing a boundary between the part of
the world we're going to change and the
part we're going to leave alone we have
identifying the forces that bear on the
thing we're going to design we have
resolving those forces in two diagrams
and then we have the real test of
whether we did a good job or not and we
don't know until we do this which is
that we have to build the form make it
real put it into the actual living
context and then see if anything bashes
into each other or not actually see if
the form fits with the forces that are
around it or if there's some kind of
conflict and the only way to really know
is to do it for real now considering the
fact that it's expensive to build an
entire running application with
customers and everything for every
design idea you have we do our best with
prototyping right to kind of
asymptotically approach this ideal but
it the important thing is that we're
trying to do that and that we understand
that this is the truth right that we can
only really know if we put it into the
living situation and then look for
conflict so that covers pretty much what
I wanted to talk about there if you
takeaways that I want to reinforce here
that the main things we talked about
here were forms context which is a
system of forces around the form
facts on the ground facts about the
world and Fitness the relationship
between these two this is what we're
interested in and that we want to have a
different way of thinking about
requirements we want to forget about
this idea that requirements or
attributes of the thing that we're
creating yeah that it's not that it has
to have this and have that and be blue
but that instead that the requirements
the things that are required are that
what we create plays with the real-life
situation around it that it plays with
reality those are the real requirements
are the facts about the world those are
the things that you can't change
designing with forces means knowing why
it means looking at a design and seeing
the bones of it and knowing which parts
of the design are built out of
interacting forces that
and that impinge on each other and which
parts don't matter which parts are
separated why those things are there
what motivated them what we can change
what we can expand right having that
understanding and that starting with
forces allows us to instead of you know
instead of so often when we do a design
we draw a big box right we are like we
start with a big canvas then we say the
nav is going to be here and there's
going to be a sidebar here and we'll
have a main column and what goes in the
main column well okay we'll fill the
sidebar with this and then we'll fill
the main column with that and what we're
doing is we're starting from the frame
and we're going top down and filling in
well what we can do when we start
thinking about it in terms of forces and
then composing up from the forces as
we're going from the inside out there
are some posts that we've written a
37signals on our blog about this idea of
designing the epicenter and this is the
same idea which is finding those things
that we need to handle with design
building them as small chunks and then
aggregating them into larger holes and
then a design is good when it fits the
world not when it meets the list of
requirements or when it happens to be
the fashionable style or you know meets
whatever it is that we were playing
around with at the time it has to fit
the world so with these basic ideas I
talked a little bit about how you can
get into pattern language because now
you know what a pattern is a pattern is
a recurring set of forces and a way to
resolve them and then if you're
interested in this stuff there's two but
alexander has quite a few books but I
think some of them are more valuable
than others and in particular the Nate
first book of nature of order is really
interesting in the second book is really
interesting if you were to pick one of
these I would pick the second it's
specifically about the process of design
and how we can create things that are
like how the how the process that we use
to design leads to either good designs
or bad designs and it's some really good
stuff and the last thing I want to
mention to you is a book called domain
driven design if you're into software if
you create software including user
interfaces not just programming but if
you you know it's the same thing this
book is fantastic what Eric Evans is
doing is he's using the pattern format
the whole book is a collection
patterns but what they're about is
basing everything that we do off of the
so called domain have you guys heard
I don't know how common this is this
word domain used with design can I get a
hand if anybody who has heard this word
yeah okay so a little bit but the hands
aren't very high they're kind of like so
the it's kind of a problem actually
because a lot of people talk about
domains but they don't really it's hard
to define them because loosely domain
means well it's like the sort of
situation you're making something for
it's like you're making a shipping app
and your domain is like shipping but
what does that mean you know what I mean
Alexandre is actually giving a very like
clear definition of what a domain is
it's a it's a system of causal
interactions that are present in the
world that effect the thing that you're
making and Evan's takes this idea and he
has some awesome super practical advice
about making software and how to work
with our clients and working with
customers to produce software that is is
is totally fitting with with their lives
and what they're trying to do and
building up on this domain and the
taking the two together Alexander's work
about forces and Evans work about
domains is a really powerful insightful
combination if you're doing software so
I just wanted to take the chance to
recommend that


## Keywords:
