---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AL27nt4LhWc
---

# Video
Dialectics: Hegel Through Marx ft. Ben Burgis (TMBS 89)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AL27nt4LhWc)

## Transcript:

all right I want to talk I want to give
people some Hegel and Marx yeah so cuz
actually we do I think we do have a fair
amount of people as an example might be
in students they might be taking this
stuff or just come across in YouTube
people are interested in ideas and they
should have an opportunity and good
ideas but let's Center it yeah I think
the idea of dialectics is actually one
of the most exciting illustrious and
it's it teaches so even when I is an
example objective moral ism or tell
people that you need to like deal with
complexity and have infinitely more sort
of like nuance forgiveness and
compassion for fellow human beings let
alone people people you're in political
struggle with and then at the same time
I also unlike people on the left need to
learn how to be absolutely ruthless
serious about power and truly crushing
people right who need to be in a
political in a sense of political
opposition to people who hold and wield
actual power that in a way is
dialectical in the sense that and I
think David Harvey was the first person
who articulated this that I heard that
made sense to me is that it's a way of
thinking that is not directional and
linear it's interactive and dynamic your
instead of looking for first principles
or as you know one roadmap for
everything you're looking at the
dynamism to interplay that's why that's
a why it's such a great tool for even
you know for international relations
what what what's happening with Iran you
have this drive from Bolton you have
China calibrating you have all of these
different principles even in conflict
like opposing US imperialism but also
having solidarity with people that maybe
we're aligned with who opposed a
government in Iran or Venezuela these
are all happening dialectics is the best
in my view methodology for handling
these contradictions in a way that
doesn't just you know devolve to the
other
stream which is like hey it's all just
you know today it's complicated
bro so what is dialectics from Hegel to
Marx what is that idea and what is that
you know what what's the distinction
between a hag Elian and Marxist
dialectic yeah so I think one way to
think about what Hegel's doing is that
Hegel has the opposite view of Sam
Harris who holds that history and I
quote is completely irrelevant that is
the by the way teaser for my book the
title of the Sam Harris chapter is
totally irrelevant or or or if I may add
home for a minute as sam Harris said to
Ezra Klein in the debate the history or
is completely irrelevant all of a sudden
we can't talk about in the end with all
DNA anymore Oh God and people still
asking software your philosophy promotes
all sorts of horrible horrible ideas and
their scientific data you can't be
racist yeah okay what would Hegel say
about well Hegel actually has I love you
gave that a real like actually actually
has one of the few things it's not
committed the ad hominem fallacy we went
over this that's not what des means but
the kind of thing that like people on
Twitter would refer to as an at home
Hagel actually has a great at home about
phrenology he'd you know about how like
people who think that like they you know
mind and spirit is like importantly and
you know down to the skull shape that
like we should test this by cracking
their skulls that's I'm not making that
up
phonology of spirit Wow
oh my stereotyping the Germans aren't
funny it's not even Jewish German it was
impressive yeah so Hegel has this view
about historical progress towards
freedom
it's so
Hagel in Hegel's case Hagel is an
idealist which is to say that he thinks
that ideas are primary in a certain kind
of way and that this progress he sees
through history he's got this conception
of the world spirit which is this kind
of like mystical quasi religious idea of
like this sort of what's animated
civilizations you know to progress and
have certain kinds of national character
but the the through line of progress
that he sees is about freedom from from
the struggle with nature so you know
that humans can can subjugate nature to
their own ends which already by the way
the world spirit part doesn't sound very
Marxist but that last part does sound
Marxist right and that's going to be a
point of connection so but as far as
dialectical methodology Hegel knows as
he is offering this this analysis of all
of human history basically that to make
this this work given this just
astounding array of evidence that you
know all these different cultures and
societies at different times any kind of
like rigid this is gonna happen then
this is gonna happen you know very like
straightforward story just isn't gonna
fit the data which leads him to have
this dialectical analysis of course he
doesn't it's not the dialectics starts
with Hegel exactly you know he's he's
coming out of stuff from previous
thinkers going back to Aristotle but you
know he's putting the ideas together in
a particular way and Hegel's thinks that
you have to look at systems both as a
whole so you can see these points where
there are these opposed tendencies that
are pushing things in various directions
so you can see where they're you know
where the potential developments from
there might be and it's at also the
notion to that in some ways you could
understand a thing through its
contradiction yeah right
yeah so that's where then being able to
deal with that is very important yeah
that and that's the origin of gee Jax
jealous husband joke - yes right like
even even the the obsessively jealous
husband
whether or not his wife is cheating on
him is totally secondary to the function
of jealousy and you can't understand
that without that position in place yeah
it's right Trotsky has there's a really
good Trotsky text on this actually the
ABCs of material dialectical materialism
and as this line where he says just like
you can you know envision a pound of
sugar but a pound of sugar that's
covered in water is completely different
than a pound of sugar that's covered in
kerosene right well if you idea that
these things are changing in the context
of where they are actually yeah alright
and and and in in that article part of
what Trotsky is talking about is you
know we say a pound of sugar well
there's never it's never that there's
any exact point when it's exactly a
pound right you know that it's like one
grain you know more you know more or
less right it's actually this ever shift
in quantity and he says he's ultimately
talking about a debate within the
Socialist Movement about how to think
about the Soviet Union but you know he
says that you know you should never
think about the idea of a worker stayed
in abstraction you should think about
you know this particular worker stated
in this particular time to these
particular historical conditions just
like you shouldn't think about
capitalism in general you should think
about this stage in the development of
capitalism at this time this conditions
and so it's a way of as you were saying
thinking about messiness and complexity
without kind of losing the plot right
and I kind of have a love-hate
relationship with that article I talked
about it in the book because I think
that trotsky's description of
dialectical methodology is really good
but what he says about how that relates
to like propositional logic the kind of
logic that's about looking at statements
to see if they're true or false and then
to see okay if you construct this
argument if the premises are true does
the conclusion have to be true I think
Trotsky sees a relationship between
those two things in that article because
he's he's writing in the course
of this faction fight with James Burnham
who was a philosophy professor at NYU it
was bringing up some of the logic stuff
to Trotsky and Trotsky kind of overreact
into that I think you know sort of says
oh that's wrong you know you should be
thinking about this this way instead
when I think what what he should have
said is that's just irrelevant that's a
different thing right you know that they
have that this dialectical method of
analysis is totally compatible with
classical you know propositional logic
and in fact the ways that I think some
people might think they're opposed this
might seem what seem like a digression
but I think it's worth a second on is
that you might think that Oh traditional
logic is going to tell you that
everything is either true or untrue or
not both and maybe that's gonna like or
race certain kinds of messiness and
complexity but what I argue at the book
is that actually exactly the opposite is
true that when we just use the same
statement and then the negation of it
right we say oh yeah P is true and not P
is true as a way of kind of gesturing at
complexity we're not really getting into
what makes it messy and complicated and
so actually what the requirement of
logical consistency does is it forces us
to spell out the respected which things
are P there is respect in which things
are not P and so that actually forces
you to get into all that lovely Hegelian
complexity and was somewhat filling that
out sound somewhat invidious but this
MVP right there so it marks and
then is it and then is this the parallel
with is that Marx takes this and then
just materializes it yeah so so the
dialectic becomes instead of like a
contradiction about spirit expressing
itself in the German sovereign or the
French monarchy it becomes the
contradiction between modes of
production contradiction between you
know labor and ownership capital and and
you know in value and so on yeah so yeah
absolutely instead of there's still the
idea
that of historical progress towards a
certain notion of freedom we talked
about Mario's notion of freedom earlier
and freedom also from subjugation to the
sort of struggle against nature and the
DIF and I'd say as far as Marx's version
of it actually one really interesting
text to look at as far as Marx's
progress right mark starts out as young
a galleon there are like left two
galleons who are basically hit galleons
who like democratic and even proto
socialist politics and right to galleons
and Mark starts out as left Geylang and
one really interesting text to look at
is one of I think the most unfairly
maligned things that Marx ever wrote
which is on the Jewish Question
which if you ever argue with this if you
ever well Ben it's kind of okayed I
David nodded a little too vigorously at
this God let me tell you my story even
just the title let me tell you something
bigger that's the question you're gonna
need to ask can't afford that's a
question can't be avoided yeah well you
know the title doesn't age we'll know
it's actually a great essay it sounds
like something that was written by
Richard Spencer and there are quotes
which you know which you can find from
it where you know I mean where Marx is
saying things that are not very walked
by 21st century standards and this is
actually one of the things that I know
this makes me sound like an immensely
grumpy old man but I feel like this is a
way in which the Internet has made us
all a little bit Dumber definitely that
it used to be the case that if you
wanted to quote mine a book you had to
actually pick up the book and flip
through it to find the passage well and
in the course of flipping through it you
might at least accidentally get some
sense of what the rest of the book was
about right whereas if you've heard that
there are these bad passages on the
Jewish Question you can just google the
passage you want without contaminating
yourself with any of the rest of the
content of the book so which is which is
Mark's react into some of these other
left to Gayle Ian's who had more
traditional Hegelian ideas which is to
say they thought that
ideas rather than legal structures and
material reality were the sort of
prominent thing you know the main force
driving history and so these people
thought that in order to have Jewish
emancipation in other words to change
the laws so that Jewish people would
have equal rights then Jewish people
would have to give up their own
particular religious practices and
cultural differences in order to become
part of this kind of Republican unity
which is in fact exactly the kind of
thinking that still exists like with
France you know having you know laws
against you and Muslim women wear the
hijab you know things like that and Marx
is arguing against that because he
thinks that that this this there's a
sort of objective material way of
thinking about freedom that you don't
have to change the ideas in your head
you don't have to you know you don't
have to like start eating pork to be
like everybody else right that we could
all just have this kind of legal
equality and if there is something
that's incomplete about that kind of
legal equality Marx says that it's not
that like everybody needs to have the
same ideas at their heads so they're
part of this great Republican unity it's
that we need social equality to put
flesh on the bones of legal equality so
that like we have an economic system
under which people have meaningful equal
status in practice absolutely you've
just watched a Michael Brooks show video
and you can watch all of our full main
live shows every Tuesday night at around
7:00 p.m. Eastern Time and subscribe to
get all of the clips you want we're
covering the globe we're focusing on
international relations the intellectual
dark web we're having fun we're doing
deep dives with a lot of amazing guests
of course become a patron for the whole
thing at patreon.com slash t MBS or
subscribe to this youtube channel and
help us keep growing and get that
content out there subscribe below


## Keywords:
