---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MF855IkF1T8
---

# Video
Discussing system science in relationship to fostering societal change
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MF855IkF1T8)

## Transcript:
I think it would be it would be useful
just to so I've got a little bit of
spiel of introduction so I've said
enough and for now what I'd like to do
is you know is go round you know round
round round table style and just gather
people's perspectives and thoughts on
where we are at the moment before we we
start to dive into the details Peter
would you I'm going to go across the top
as I see it on my screen so Peter would
you mind go first
I don't mind I think it's given the
amount of time frame between where we
are today in the 1st of May and the time
for that potential paper or report
there's something about being
expeditious and fairly focused and so
I'd be cautious about taking on the sort
of you know wider societal redesign
effort and in this first instance to
focus on you know a and I Triple S
report on systems science systems
thinking system principles in in an
attempt to towards resilience and leave
it at that in the first instance and
because we don't have I don't have why I
can't recall a recognized process within
I Triple S as an organization for
creating reports I mean there's
obviously been reports and be good to
essentially have a step-by-step guide to
creating reports on behalf I Triple S as
a as an organizational process and that
could be an outgrowth of this as we make
it up okay yep well would you mind um so
as I understand that this group is about
preparing report for this conference in
Cambridge in July
is there a brief about what the paper is
or the subject the theme of it or is
there a lot of wide scope is it is it
rounder Society or is it so just some
pointers in that direction about what's
actually deliver and then second sort of
pointed questions who how is this paper
didn't be delivered is it being
presented by someone who's going to be
the face or the representative I provide
ripple
just trying to understand the mechanics
of it before we get into what's possible
yeah those are the things that we need
to discuss it is very wide-ranging at
the moment it's completely opening in
terms of its scope the title of the
paper is simply I can't remember links
for this that's just the event yeah okay
so you know we have a free contribution
to that essentially well I just thread
and they say it goes to UNESCO and who I
think they've got quite I think it was
someone at the 18th conference with it
must have quite a mature process for
publishing and sending out they probably
just deliver a copy of it but it'd be I
know it's probably only unreasonable to
expect that it's actually gonna go to
someone who's gonna read it or listen to
goodbye I decide to understand you know
what we're hoping to achieve from this
and how we can use it to as a platform
for us I took Lester and say what it
starts is two people other people who
might listen how can I say like a blank
slate although I've been going in
multiple directions in the past ten
years so I feel a bit confused and messy
with a movement but I was thinking that
if we if we focus on resilience yeah
maybe the angle that we evoked last
Saturday on regeneration or you know a
general I don't know if the theme that I
had contemplated long ago about
regenerate
and generating Commons and looking at
things from there what we need to care
perspective could be a way to tie things
I mean to have a Federative theme
without being too specific on what it is
we we want to go forward or regenerate
because this is highly subjective and
let's say locally yet wherever the local
locality is in the levels such as you
know described in for example George's
chapter 15 there are comments that every
you at every level of this okay thanks
for then Vienna so my thoughts are along
the same lines is Helene and I'm gonna
post article that I just found this
morning from Daniel wall on a model for
regeneration because the the real fault
now at least the focus that I'm seeing
with with the covered 19 response work
I'm doing is yes we want to be resilient
through this but we want to move towards
regeneration so and that's that's
worldwide like I'm hearing that
worldwide in different projects so maybe
I don't know if we have the the ability
to say something about their title being
raised you know
addressing resilience moving towards
regeneration or something like that so
that's I thought I had but other than
that I'm just I'm listening and trying
to connect the dots okay thanks
George following on Peter said I agree
that it really needs to be fairly tight
and not too complex because you won't
get anybody paying attention to it so my
thought was that along the following
lines the work that several of us have
been doing over the past several years
in using system science to find out
what's going on in society now or what's
been going on has led us to this point
of realizing that there need to be some
substantial changes and the Kovach 19
situation has exposed that in other
words our society was broken and now
we're realizing just how broken it was
and that at the I Triple S and this is a
this is an Anu the I Triple S we're
proposing to put together we can call it
a sig just to stay within the framework
but we're putting together a group that
will actually start to look at and I
like that idea of trying to be resilient
now but working towards regeneration
because that's that's exactly what I
think is going to happen it's going to
happen one way or the other it happens
with us providing some guidance of some
some framework for how that proceeds or
it's going to go on just through you
know hodge podge natural evolution
without any intentionality and we end up
with whatever whatever we end up so
that's that's kind of where my thinking
is right now keep the message simple
directed towards the I Triple S is
commitment to exploring this idea and of
how we get to regeneration and just give
us a very smallest glimpse of
the idea of what a society might look
like it's just an example it's that you
know I'm not claiming this is what its
gonna be or shouldn't mean applying
system science to getting to a point of
seeing what that regeneration looks like
okay
in terms of focus I think it would be
helpful to just skip ahead to what comes
after the paper so is this going to be
something that the triple-s just
publishes and then nothing becomes of it
or is this going to turn into an I
Triple S initiative and if it's an
initiative that and I am relating to you
what George is saying that we give a
glimpse because I would like to hope
that the work of the IEEE trinova less
just won't end after the paper that that
the reason why we would publish a paper
and present it at this conference was
because we would want to communicate
what we intend to do or work or thinking
that we intend to further so I'm
wondering if it's possible to think
about that and then loop back to what a
paper could look like to as George said
give a glimpse into what could come and
it would invite people to learn more
about the initiative we'll just called
an initiative work with the I Triple S
collaborate to could lead to network
building it could lead to a whole host
of other more practical applications of
this thinking so that's where my mind is
that
Gary you're muted so where does where
does that put us overall then and I just
add operation to follow on from
Jennifer's about what comes after the
paper the initiative cuz it it seems to
also tie in with the work that the
Saturday cigs are doing that started off
looking at the SD the sustainable
development goals which seems to be part
of what a future society our discussion
about what a future society should be
and so maybe those two strands the the
system side integration group and an a
focus on society can come together to
form a braid that I took less is working
with and can carry on working with into
the future so Jennifer I just like to
ask you to expand a little bit more on
what you said like not something coming
after what are you thinking what I am
thinking is that there is a lot of
information out there and how can we
present something at a conference in two
months and what can we present
realistically that is more than just
yeah what George says you know like
because George has a very fulsome body
of work that could act as a a guiding
light if you will to societal change but
how so we're at where this is coming
from as I'm thinking what is the
deliverable for the conference going to
be it can't be the answer or even the I
Triple S is version of the answer that's
just not possible to do in two months so
I'm thinking what can it be
and then I'm thinking you know longer
term well we want this we want to have
something we want to continue this work
we don't want to just
talk and add more words to the to the
world we want to actually create action
so so your question about what is the
action I think that can be a
constellation of much of the work that
the I Triple S does I think that this is
where we start to look at how we bridge
theory and practice and so take
Georgia's work for example take lens
Declaration of interdependence for
example what are if we were to take this
work and embody it and and and create it
put it into practice what would that
look like but those each of those
projects would take a team of people
committed individuals to look at it and
say okay how do we bring this to life
and I'm sure George also has materials
that can help us bring his work to life
so I'm thinking about picking and
choosing pieces in academia that we can
actually practically apply and this is
why I keep gravitating towards George's
work I've you know it's starting to dive
more into it I can see it actually has a
lot of potential to actually apply in
society and what that looks like is
going to be different depending on whose
work we decide to look at more closely
you know if you look at what mark
Pearson did well he took the VSM and
ashbey's law and brought those to life
in his Whatcom County projects so
something along those lines that's what
I'm talking about when I say bridging
theory and practice and this is also
ties into the vision that I have for the
I Triple S which is to do exactly that
can serve the theory and build out the
practice and that in itself is going to
require a lot of effort which is why I'm
asking what comes after the paper
because what I'm I'm not interested in
doing is writing a paper and then
presenting it and then considering that
a done deal I'm not interested in that
at all
I want them to see something come come
of it and I realize it's difficult to
think you know we don't want to build
the airplane in this
guys but there's a bit of a bit of both
writing the paper and also designing
what the paper is going to be about so
that we can write about it I think
you're right Jennifer and I think that
it depends on how we approach it and it
might be given to everybody on this call
that you look at the problem you're
trying to address and then what are the
system's approaches you need to address
those problems and you know and what I
saw when we had that discussion or what
I began to see as we had that discussion
about addressing code might mean with
system science and people were throwing
out different models to use or different
approaches or different characteristics
that they needed to address it came
clear to me that different pieces of the
problem need to be addressed with
different models so like communicating
with people about the issue that you
know you need bring some consciousness
or cognitive levels or whatever all the
dressing that with people but yeah I
think I think for sure George's work is
totally appropriate for using this and
George I don't I don't you might have
something to say about looking at the
problem as a whole and seeing what is it
we need to address and then what models
do we use to address those pieces of the
problem yeah I think I've what I've done
or trying to produce is a framework and
a raw skeleton essentially of some of
the giving some examples of work ago and
what my latest thinking is and I
mentioned the idea of creating a new sig
rather than doing battle with
reorganizing the I Triple S and so forth
or just do a sort of a takeover by by
organizing something within the existing
structure and then letting that expand
but my ideas have a sort of a master sig
that is system science applied to the
human social system that's just a name
off top my head and then have sub say
that what I would volunteer to do as
long as I stay alive is is you know
chair that master cig and then use the
book the framework to organize these sub
SIG's and then give them specific topics
to work on for example the economy for
example the governance structure for
example you know treating human beings
as agents that's the cognitive aspect so
each one of those we could draw people
who are interested in those topical
areas and yet the framework itself
already provides the integration for
making sure that they're all done and
then what I'm saying is I would try to
sort of oversee all of that and and make
sure it's constantly being integrated
but that's kind of what I'm thinking and
I would look for help Gary and Peter you
might have something you had said
something about way back Quinn in this
history of AI triple-s one of the goals
are one of the purposes was it was a
human
it was a human piece like there was
something about human in that and I
can't remember all of what you said the
reaction about the founders who won one
issue was observing that scientists have
created a nuclear bomb which had
destroyed him you know millions of
people and I think one motivation was
that they wanted to see science general
systems in service of society right that
was that's that's you know my
understanding so that's I think if I
said something it was something along
those like my concerns yes attendant
services Society but it's in service of
the whole earth
in other words we can yeah we have to
look at ourselves as just being a
subsystem I agree you know society is is
just one aspect correct
so in service of the planet and life and
society I mean that even with that
distinction and clarification is an
evolution of purpose which is not
something that was integrative Lee
expressed part from James Miller talking
about living systems so I think that's a
good that's a good starting point in and
of itself is to say that the thesis
might be that if we get the human social
system right doing what it should do for
the earth then then the rest of it life
is going to take care of itself well
that's a good that's a good it's also
rather egocentric isn't it it's rather
human centric because well not I mean
not not for me I'm I'm as far as I'm
concerned if humans are unfit to survive
then they should go extinct so I'm not
equating that with with we got to do it
for ourselves that's where I consider
ego centrism
yeah but it's also this is whole
business of consciousness and sort of
connected on a another plane to the the
realm beyond you know the mystery of
life and spirit which comes up from time
to time in so somehow holding that true
as well could be helpful I'm reading a
fascinating book right now something you
might have heard of it or read it it's
by Ian the kid no she I can't think of
his name it's called the master and his
emissary
and it's about the lateralization of the
brain you know the right hemisphere does
certain things in the left hemisphere
does other certain things and then they
somehow got a communicate and coordinate
I don't want to go into it right now but
in terms of the spiritual aspect Peter
went away in terms of the left in terms
of the spiritual acts aspect he points
out that the right hemisphere is the
hemisphere that processes the whole of
what we perceive as a whole and that the
left hemisphere is the one that's taking
it apart it's the one that that controls
language and languages of a very linear
parsing kind of process so he's making a
very good case for the fact that when
the two are imbalanced an individual
would have both a sense of spirituality
or being being part of a bigger whole
and be able to take into account all is
now I'm excited about it because I've
you know contended that that human
beings do think systemically naturally
for would he pegs it at the three Plato
the the pre plate tonic brain and the
post platonic brain one being with the
right hemisphere being more in charge so
to speak and the left hemisphere doing
the bidding of that that in charge
hemisphere but a very necessary thing to
do you've got to see things and be able
to pick apart and you know be able to
see the details of the relations and
then and then the right hemispheres job
is to put it all back together again and
that's exactly what I've been training
right in this book agenda Honda yeah
thank you that's what I was trying to
even what came across as clapping
something that I just wanted to throw
out there because I have to admit that I
these ideas are very half-baked and then
when Deana
that question of what exactly do you
mean I just started to think more about
it and it ties into something that's
always going on in my mind and that is
what what will the eye triple-s look
like you know what is that what is what
is the eye triple-s and as I've said
before I have a vision again in theory
practice but what does that actually
look like and what I'm wondering is and
George I was inspired by something the
way you described a possible new
organization of the stakes where each
sig is responsible for for researching a
particular area that can contribute to a
new you HSS anyway what I'm thinking is
that we know that there is ongoing
research in the Systems Sciences systems
in general it leads to very often
creation of new ideas whether those can
be theories models concepts frameworks
and very often it stops there and people
continue to study that and I feel like
that's where the I Triple S has been for
decades and that and there's nothing
wrong with that that has been that was
the reason why the I Triple S was was
formed and why it has lasted as long but
where I'm wondering is we've got this
interest in becoming more practical and
with that comes a group of practitioners
who also operate in that theoretical
domain and can then take those ideas and
start to design what I refer to as
programs that's just because that's what
I do for my work but designing programs
deciding what needs to go into the
programs whether that's education
systems literacy communications etc then
it moves as we all know to the
implementation phase the piloting the
trialing that that you know multiple
iterations and evaluation which is also
takes you back to the to the to the
research because the evaluation can form
reefs
unto itself and this is how I design
watershed management programs this is
what we've seen it's it's ubiquitous
this this cycle of research and and
design and so what I'm wondering is can
this form our new understanding of what
the I Triple S is part of it and
obviously well it's rough we could work
on it but then can it also form our
vision for what we want and how we we
propose we whoever we is humans do
things differently through

through this and so what I'm wondering
is is that reasonable you know and and I
feel like this is where you know the
cigs still have a place systems literacy
still has a place systems practice still
has a place it's it can all be there the
research the researchers can can still
debate whether there is a GST and they
can still further that research there's
a place for everyone because research is
is a really big tent and I don't know I
just see a way of this all being linked
together both for our product for the
for the paper and also for the I Triple
S in general Jennifer are you involved
in the management of the SIG's or you
know creating them or doing anything
like that no I've been I've been
engaging with the sig groups even though
I'm not there every week I do watch the
recordings so I feel like I'm watching
from an administrative Lee and you're in
your job no how does a sig get created
I'd have to look at the bylaws George I
think we have to have 12 people
basically sign a petition or some sort
of agreement that this is of interest to
at least 12 people in the membership and
then I'm sure it goes somewhere perhaps
the board for approval and then a stick
can be created I mean that's a really
rough maybe Peter knows I don't know
you've got it pretty much you know
whether or not that's relevant for the
future I'm not sure what I'm not sure
out at this stage whether that helps us
produce a report that's doing and I'm
thinking of a parallel process it
doesn't it doesn't have to happen right
away I'm just trying to get in my head
what are the possibilities that we can
work on well sure I mean I think those
are all those I think you know what what
this group at least what I hope this
group is focused on is producing a
document of some kind that meets that
requirement and also expeditiously and
an outgrowth of that
maybe cigs it maybe you know this bigger
vision that you've got George or some
evolution of it I think that's an
evolving piece that's coming about
through these discussions that we're
having not on Sundays but I would and I
take you know what Jennifer says about
it not just being report that's put on
the shelf but if it's a report Anna Anna
some suggestions about action steps that
I triple-s and in cozy and ifs are and
you know whatever whoever else might
want to consider you know which are job
less would be a part of then that would
be part of the paper you know or report
so it might be an assessment of where I
triple-s as a society if it's a Nitra
police report whereas i triple-s been in
the past about societal design efforts
about resilience and about regeneration
and we'll talk about that tomorrow Rob
and I in terms of the history let's look
at where I Triple S has been and and do
a sort of a quick summary doesn't need
to be comprehensive but say this is part
of an ongoing process of reexamination
of where we've been where we are and
where we need to be and just outline it
in that sort of way and it might not
need to be specific about you know the
elements of regeneration but more about
the process that I triple-s and the
system's community writ large has to
office you know in a in a broader sense
given all that we know you know that
even just stating that there are these
you know enormous number of resources
available around the world who people
who have a shared frame of reference
called systems and a shared language
albeit somewhat disjointed but there is
a bit of a struggle I mean healthy
struggle to have some convergence an
agreement that will be in in in service
of regeneration and and that could be
the essence of the paper really and you
could say that I Triple S is engaging in
in its own sense of renewal in in a
microcosm way and and we could bring out
principles of recursion and say you know
we're
we know the society writ large you know
but nation-states and regionally and as
a globe you know people are thinking
about all of these issues and we are too
you know in in a post kovat world you
know what does it mean for an
organization a voluntary organization
with membership and what does it mean
for the United States and what does it
mean for you know the UN or whoever
these reports are going to I mean how
does the UN operate is it is wh o
effective or not and if so why how and
all the rest of it so I think we can
take a sort of a really broad sweep and
a look at every level right from the
globe to some principal actors like wh o
and the UN and look at where this
reports going you know to our I Triple S
as a you know a recursive level and and
just look at some of these issues which
we talked about relationships governance
economics you know design process
collaboration use of technology like
this I mean there's a couple of like you
could come up with six or seven key
things that need to be addressed and
that we address in them we don't have
we're not trying to present answers but
we're raising the questions for people
to think about and I think that's all we
can do in in six weeks quite frankly I
mean to try do anything else is wildly
ambitious yeah I think that one there
are two things in my in my view that
that impede going forward in a grander
scheme of things one is that there is a
hell of a lot of initiatives and and
good willing people who are working at
their own levels on regeneration but how
does this fit together not in a grand
design you know top-down manner but how
can
different initiatives be made visible to
each other and and be be how can I say
seen in a systemic way of how maybe you
know type of initiatives a plus type of
initiatives at levels XYZ contribute to

more results than just you know the some
of the part so so it's how do do
synergies or or convergence ease or
federated efforts happen to create
impacts that are that are larger than
what we could and something that is so
it's also about taking people where they
are at and and not shoehorning people in
some models that we have you know we
would have predigested because you need
people to buy stuff you need some buyout
you need onboarding and and people are
dedicated to their causes they they have
focuses they invest their resources and
and and efforts in stuff where they
think they are effective and if they
change their focus maybe sometimes they
think they won't be effective as much as
they they can be in what they like to do
for example so so that's one thing that
the second thing is that can an
organization like I Triple S find ways
to model and represent

how I mean mate regeneration or
depletion visible so that we you know so
that at every stage or at every level
the efforts you know the the
contribution or the impacts can be seen
in a certain way if if we look at at
sustainability development goals and
things like that there's always a
question of externality and an
externality is a is a non regeneration
or is a depletion an externality is is
an out how can I say not outsourcing but
out throwing of a toxin or a of a non
rigid narrative thing and and most of
the time a depletion is kind of an
internalization of a resource that is
not available for for others so is there
something to do in this direction of
being able in the tools that we can
think about to see the resilience to see
how small you know creeks become greater
rivers to show I was thinking about
Vernor alleys was it value systems
analysis or value network analysis are
there ways to would there be ways to to
do value analysis of regeneration and
stuff like this I mean I'm showing this
for all this stuff that came to my mind
so I think it it's it's of course useful
to dive into some of these the topics
and you know start to explore it start
but these are things that we
we need to address in in the paper
itself whereas what we're trying to do
at the moment is we're trying to get a
grasp on on what is it that we're trying
to do and given the constraints of the
timescales and you know the various
different purposes that we have so it I
saw that that Jen had a comment in in
the in the chat but if I may is it okay
if I share with you some of the the
points that have been capturing from
from the conversation the discussion
you've been having if I can share that
on the screen is that okay yeah nobody
says no I shall do it so I I'm sure I'm
sure I've missed stuff but I tried I
tried to capture some of the the
emphasis of what it is that that people
were saying so yeah that there seems to
be a number of points that there emerged
so so first of all what is system
science you know that age-old question
what does what does this suggest about
society how do we bridge theory to
practice what do we already know so you
know this could this could be some other
thing you were just talking about Helen
who in terms of people and organizations
and what projects and activities are all
be happening and I think that the the
diagram that Rob pulled together in
terms of the stakeholder map is is
potentially a contribution in that area
and I'm sure there's a load of other
stuff we don't know about but
collectively we will know more than a
single individual what is the I Triple S
and how are weary shaping ourselves
using these principles of resilience and
how can we enable good transformation
towards a new society so how does that
feel to people and and are there any
other sort of key questions that we
would like to add let's just make a
distinction between society as in broad
society and the algebra less
though we take global society there is
that what we were aiming at well that's
that's the interesting question I mean
we're on the journey at the moment as
well in terms of you know reshaping the
I Triple S for resilience we could we
could use that as an analogy it's a
level of recursion that's all yes I
think if you think systems you have to
think about common properties and
patterns that occur at every level let
me know yeah yeah anyway let me put it
to you that way and I just think that
you know you can say you rethinking
organizational structures and
relationships in response to a need for

regeneration and you know some ideas to
consider I mean that's what the report
essentially should be I mean we're gonna
be putting ideas out there we're not
we're not gonna be putting a
prescription I think that would be
incredibly pompous so you know it's
things to consider I could recommend
instead of saying a global society I've
been using the term human social system
to and put it in the context of the
globe in cold earth as the super system
but the reason I say is because this
observes the legitimate legitimate sea
of multiple cultures they don't you know
you don't have to have everybody being
exactly the same there's a certain
certain structure systemic structure
that everybody would presumably observe
if they want to if they want to be
resilient if they want to be
stainable Dada but beyond that people
should be free to you know develop their
own views and ideas and all the various
cultural things so then that's why I
would steer clear of global society
it doesn't explicitly say you can't but
people okay Gary can I share my screen
with the map I think that you mentioned
I produced can you see the map now yes
okay so I think there's been some
various discussions around the context
of what this report could be and what it
could be to bless which would fit in to
a medium three to five year strategic
plan for I Triple S and whether we are
getting involved in social change or
societal change is you know one of the
questions and whether we have the
resources or whether we have to move
towards the resources but we're not
going to do that in six weeks I mean
that's that's going to take you know
quite a while but it's the essential
questions that we're trying to struggle
with about where we are and where we
want to be so that's my comment about
what's achievable in six weeks but in
terms of a possible approach for what is
a table in six weeks
going mentioned this map which is
something that I just smashed together
for an initiative I've got on to try and
capture what's happening or get involved
in what's happening with co-ed from
assistance community point of view and
so I started a resource page which
turned out to be always a Facebook page
which turned out to be a just a news
aggregator and collecting what's going
on from the system's community in
response to something as epic as kovat
and after a couple of weeks I you know I
didn't want to guide it but I started to
draw patterns and so I put this map
together
and what I found is that there are lots
of activities which I regarded as
systemic and they were they were
grouping into words at four different
areas and I've color-coded them from
blue to green to orange to yellow and
there was a bit of activity going on in
the blue areas what I'd call the system
sciences especially round complexity
around Santa Fe and of course the
systems and they're pushing a lot of
content out there I'm sure you've seen
it in even doing training courses about
what is covin what is complex systems
perspective on that there was a lot
round systems dynamics of course because
of the the models that governments are
using which the scientists were said to
have pushed but there's no question I'm
sorry I hate to interrupt you continue
but we've got a logging service here and
my wife is not available so I've got to
go talk to these guys I'll be right back
okay okay thanks George
okay so and then the next group were
well but they were very well they were
very PR based I suppose or at least in
the Facebook and online discussion
groups that I could see then there were
the practical organizations that
actually had to deliver things and
especially around the one at the bottom
it operations researching Management
Studies I mean the logistical change
hospital PPE and getting tests
information around that was self-evident
the yellow the ones in yellow were he
about our social systems work which were
heavily impacted by kovat and the keep
officials in the top right were the
medics and the retail people the impacts
were getting into the economic and
individual and then we were getting into
social change an individual and social
change and there's lots of people
working around these areas in terms of
futurists or social change people
community people and so on
and then at the top of in yellow the
governance you know the role of
government and international and
national organizations and then the last
group with the ones in green I've put in
green the systems thinkers and systems
communities out there and including the
system it thinkers there I have them
outside the community but the news and
media people we're starting produce very
systemic viewpoints about using models
and what does this mean in the whole and
have they thought about this as well and
the unintended consequences and so on
like that so that's just a brief sort of
overview map but my point is I Triple S
you know one of its strengths is in the
blue area that the system science and
maybe in the connections that it has to
a lot of these communities because a lot
of these communities are looking to an
ontological basis or just like in cozy
is an ontological basis for what they're
doing and and I took less can provide
that so maybe a six-week paper could be
an observation that there are lots of
systemic thinkers are out there more
than just I to bless a whole community
of people and the wider public as well a
lot of them are systems thinkers they're
looking at this in the round to say well
is what we're hearing about the
government is that correct and so on and
is instead of getting into strategic
questions about just what is system
science and what could be an i triple as
a view of the future we could just say
there are lots of systems thinkers out
there and we could connect the groups up
because the resilience is actually
coming from different levels and
different areas of society and that's a
systemic point of view yeah that's good
what's also evident to me is is you know
the way that you've shaped this diagram
it is also consistent with with the
emerging system science yeah great
thanks
so I I mean this has just gotten me
really going shall I take a crack at it
I've taken some notes here yeah go for
it various little bits of paper try to
keep it as gentle as possible and along
Peters suggested lines and try to just
formulate a more of a structure than an
actual text okay good yeah more than
outline but but not a full paper and
then I'll mail it to you guys and then
we can you know you can throw darts at
it or no that's great yeah shoot with a
shotgun or something like that
hmm Helen say something you need to calm
you I can I can unmute you I think no no
I didn't want to say anything I always I
mean making dots right okay I get it
yeah well if if people are interested I
can show you some of the things I've
been doing with with with George's work
day I read through the entire chapter
George I want some points for that there
is great I did really appreciate it yeah
we can we can have a conversation
perhaps about about the specifics of the
chapter afterwards because I've got a
few impressions I'd like to have a
conversation with you about but if you
don't mind I'll just share some of their
some of the the workings I've been doing
so we go into presentation mode you know
that that Len and Hillary and others
we've been looking at this there's these
leaps in complexity
you know emerging complexity in
different terms of layers and you know
most the focus of what we've been
talking about these three top layers
human tribal metal groups agro villages
and geopolitical states and if you look
at if you look at combo Genesis which is
which is where agro villages come
together to form geopolitical states
using using the model that Hillary
suggested that there's there's four
quadrants to this members are
constrained so in a grove villages
you've got roots in a locale members get
benefits so mutual life support for
these cultural meta groups the plants
and the animals the affordance for new
relationships is crops and the the new
systemic property is agriculture and
then when a grenade grow villages come
together they they they are the
components essentially for the formation
of geopolitical states and there are
technology subsystems that arose within
these contexts so in Agra villages in in
terms of ancient technology we've got
water windmills blacksmiths grain stores
and in terms of the geopolitical States
cities currency infrastructure and
industry now where things have gone and
you know I'm not saying this is this is
this is right but this is this is just
some of the things I I I pulled up from
from some my ideas but also I've
annotated it with things which were
coming across firm from George's chapter
you know clearly in our in our current
global human social system we've got on
sustained growth climate change mass
extinction pollution and toxins in terms
of that the current situation with agro
villages we've got mono culture we have
fragility now poverty for the many and
unfair trade and in geopolitical state
terms we've got uncontrolled growth yeah
massive massive dependence on agro
villages in terms of you know the
fragility of these things open security
is you know we can we have convenience
and a consumption based society
and that's what's offered to this level
and we've got debt and profit which is
dominating here in terms of the
geopolitical systems we've got mega
cities multinational corporations the 1%
who essentially pretty much rule the
world at night at the moment and we have
a we have a global economy and then in
terms of the the socio control
subsystems we got social media on-demand
consumption internet and things and big
data now I started to then think about
sorry I did this going off the end of
the screen but I started to think about
what what George was talking about in
terms of rethinking this and in terms of
the the the emerging technologies that
we we might need again you know I've
used the terms that George uses in his
book so and and a new value system which
is based on life benefit / free energy
is currency Democratic sepia Chrissy if
I've said that right George nations and
tribes as modules at this level at the
low level repair and conserve a culture
of repair and conserve Dhamma sales and
community modules community markets
savings and surplus management so this I
was just imagining this as a way of
communicating more simply the contents
of George's book and the final one about
any cost which is the term you use for
that for the higher level system George
and again thinking about what the the
constraints emerging properties and you
know all of that kind of stuff so I
guess I guess two messages I think I
think it's really worth reading George
George's chapters there's a wealth of
information in there but also maybe we
you know as part of our report maybe we
need to I don't know maybe we need to
think about how we communicate this in
terms of visualizations I'm not saying
this is this is it but we need we need
something
don't mind me sharing that looks good
Gary yeah makes maybe maybe you could
maybe you could take a look at it George
and improve it now yeah yeah okay so so
thanks for volunteering to to put
together the chapter structure George
that's great and anyone like to say two
final words before we leave off and when
will you have it ready oh I got an hour
oh great that's all right so we can
repeat it tomorrow
I really don't know but I'll put it at
the top of the priority list
great okay George sorry can you just
repeat what it is you're going to do
what is yeah I'm actually I took notes
on things that everybody said and
basically the idea of keeping it simple
is this is what this is this has been
the history of the I Triple S so far in
terms of you know in interacting with
other groups and things like that which
I'm counting on Rob and and Peter to
flesh out and then in the course of the
last several years we've begun to
realize the I Triple S members of the
actual palace have begun to realize that
we're not actually contributing to the
whole picture we're contributing to
little bits and pieces and then segue
from that to talk about how one the
kovat pandemic has exposed some of the
real problems with society and I
mentioned the three big ones being the
economy based on capitalism and so forth
the governance structure where
apparently our governments are just
completely you know can't really address
the problem can't provide the leadership
right those are just some sight ideas
and then
dad has gotten this this group of us who
are interested in saying how can we
apply system science of the whole and
systems practice I don't want to exclude
anything to the whole picture of the
human social system and that there are a
number of ideas about how to develop a
framework for doing that and and the
reason I was asking you about formation
of SIG's was this idea of could we
create a sig right now that we could
have internal working groups and that
sig would be primarily for addressing
this question of the human social system
and the future of the human social
system where we bring in the idea of
where the target is resilience and
sustainability and not but that we need
to regenerate
you know we need to go through a process
of regeneration and the formation of
this SIG is to address all these
different sub areas and bring them
together make sure that they get
integrated and that's what we're making
a commitment to bang on
yeah thank you George yeah there's got
me kind of excited alright so help hmm
don't glad about that I'm glad it's got
you excited all right well okay and my
impression then is that the outline that
George you just put is the rough outline
of the paper that proposing is submitted
to this conference oh yeah great yeah
okay yeah so we're not we're not saying
we've got solutions we're saying we've
got the power to find solutions
something else about the I Triple S
would so Peter admit made a comment
about how the the community of systems
people whether they're ni Triple S or
not are represents a rich resource of
contributions to some some kind of
solutions and so this I Triple S and
this gets back Jennifer's asking about
if we could create a cig and then by
assimilation essentially morph the
activity of the I Triple S to be this
activity by bringing more and more
people in as part of these working
groups we could eventually say that the
I Triple S is going to now provide the
total framework by which all of these
other the cybernetic society the you
know and maybe a sentence or two about
how many members of these other
societies are already members of I
Triple S I haven't got quite that far
yet but that's the basic idea well and
you know George I would encourage you to
I mean I'm very happy to go down that
stig road of exploration with you no
problem
but is there this comes back to the
whole question of whether eggs are right
for the I Triple S and what I'm hearing
you describe it could be something
different than six so could you yeah
yeah I thought that that also we were
way back at Boulder room or not Boulder
it forgot when we're trying to come up
with different ideas about how the SIG's
fit mm you know what they're doing and
all this kind of stuff that was the line
of thinking but as I as I've thought
more about it and I am I'm saying you
know if you look at living systems quite
frequently there is this process of
assimilation and synergy that works to
transform the whole into something much
more than it had been before and so I'm
beginning to apply that kind of thinking
to work from within don't don't try to
go revolutionize the structure right now
work from the men but assimilate bits
and pieces from all the different things
that exist right now
yeah these working groups would be
sub-sect they ultimately maybe that
would become the new formula yeah I
think there's a there's a diagram in
your chapter that explains what you're
thinking I think George if I can just
share it I think this is what's in your
mind George
yeah so we have we have essentially our
traditional SIG's yeah and what you're
thinking is that we need a new sig which
is our module or you know doing some
some true integration work and
coordination across all of the others
this is this is such a ubiquitous
pattern in nature for complex systems
that that seems to me to be the one we'd
wanna
adapt yeah yeah okay great Rob just a
comment in terms of capacity where I
took less is now Peter was sharing some
membership figures with me and he said
that is about hundred active members of
which thirty-seven of past presidents
who probably be very busy doing things
so 63 other members and doing the usual
ratio of people who are actually active
within that such a group maybe 10% of
we're lucky we're talking about six
people who might get involved in things
you know we're gonna be where we want to
be then we probably wouldn't want to
start here we need to move to somewhere
where there's a lot of active members
and Peter is about to announce tomorrow
about the digital assets and he's making
to me how he's going to announce it to
active members first the hundred active
members and then to past members which
might bring in a couple hundred more
emails out and then 2,000 on our mailing
list but me oh maybe we might grow and
then get more active members but just to
say we need to couch any strategy in
terms of the realities of where and the
resource that we have at the moment and
the energy that we have at the moment so
yes but we need to start laying the
groundwork definitely you know I'm not
saying we don't do these things we just
need to take number of different steps
to get to where we want to get to yeah I
just wanted to add something to that
conversation about membership I have
been reluctant to have an active
recruitment campaign because I have
currently nothing to drive members to so
when they arrived through our big red
website is there value there for the
diversity of members that I envisioned
becoming part of the I Triple S and
right now I am concerned that people
will arrive at what we have to offer
online and be disappointed or turned off
because it's a little
not equated it doesn't have the
diversity of ways that system science
can be applied and it you know I want to
make sure that when we go out to the
masses that I can offer them something
to have them stay with us and not just
buy a membership and stick around and
conference so just so that just so you
know that is definitely something that's
been top of mind for me it's just I have
to get certain things in order before I
can tackle that I suggest you have a
word with Peter then because sometimes
these have a life of their own and he's
on the verge of announcing it but I do
think he does have an answer for you in
terms of the digital content that he's
putting up there on not on the red
website but on the community website the
my I took less but yes I do absolutely
agree I took less needs to think about
the scalability as it ramps up the
membership intake you know before we've
got to be systemic about it yes
absolutely
a key aspect is for people to be drawn
to anything is their motivation their
connection their psychic connection to
what it is you're proposing if you're
saying in this time of Ko vat19 where so
many people are are not working or not
you know there's there's things and we
have yet to see whether or not some of
these lifting of lockdowns is gonna pay
off but in case we say look we
understand now what what is wrong with
the human social system we understand
what mistakes have been made we as a
society when it tackled the big problem
the the big aspect of it and each
individual with whatever talents and
knowledge they have will find a place
where you can apply that so you can fit
in and begin to actively support
that as opposed to just going to a
conference once a year listening to a
couple of papers and saying oh okay
whatever this will be something to do I
mean look at what's happened to us we've
become engaged involved because we think
we've got a purpose we feel that purpose
and and so all I'm saying is we that's
that's kind of a model for what we could
do for the larger the current members I
don't I think starting small for any one
of those things that Gary showed the
diagram any wireless modules I don't
have to be large they just have to be a
nucleus for the beginning of work to
evolve
George so hopefully I'll see you all
tomorrow what I'll do of course is I'll
I'll put this on to I think I'll
probably put it onto YouTube and
distribute it on there so you can get
hold of it yeah okay okay all right
thank you oh oh one last thing so if any
of you have any particular points you
want me to be sure to consider in this
send um I think I took reasonably good
notes but if there's anything that I
might have missed just send a minim work
it out yeah um that the few points that
I made George you can you can pull off
on slide 26 on that link I just sent it
it's in the in pursuit of a periodic
table Google slide set okay hold on a
second don't turn off yet oh I believe
I've got this but I should have yeah I
don't remember things all that great
okay hopefully I'll see you all tomorrow
I might send you a couple of things
George okay good I mean maybe not
formalized in the I did a couple of
things several years ago that might be
useful to ya particularly along the
these ideas of regeneration I'd be
really yeah and about the fact of you
know how do you federal rate efforts
that are fragmented without trying to
put people good fit to fit people into
boxes I mean I have a couple of
slideshows with not so many pages so
okay that'd be great
and there are that ought to be probably
a subject of conversation if we agree
that this kind of strategic plan makes
sense
then a key part of it is going to be
this this whole notion of how do you
federate all these things the ifs are
could use happen yeah yeah I mean that's
been my area of more or less I mean I
keep getting back to that okay I'd love
to see it I would love to see it -
Helene if you're comfortable sharing
broadly of course thank you yeah yeah
yeah I'll do that if my head works still
works okay right thanks thanks thanks
again for coming I really appreciate it
I know be short notice though it's great
thank you


## Keywords:
