---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0uAt3D1mQ-g
---

# Video
Do We Need A Powell Memo For Worker Co-ops??
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0uAt3D1mQ-g)

## Transcript:
are Jesse in Miami hey Jesse thanks for
watching Free Speech what's
up hey hi Tom hey uh the big divide I
see is the 1% and 99% I agree and you
pretty much describe with the
Republicans not being the Republicans of
all what I like to see us get together
behind besides you know knowing what we
don't like is what we do like Bernie
really pretty much became President when
he said greed is not good Elizabeth
Warren became President when she said we
help youall create jobs so let's go
beyond that and says I the original
question was we have a Chambers of
Commerce of basically capitalists
individual owners is there could there
be a a chamber of commerce of
cooperatives cuz oh there is as the
white rich white men came together the
over king and queen it's it's obvious
that we got to take a lesson from that
and us poor 99% have to come together to
overo the capitalist yeah so that's the
basic question who's going to bring the
cooperatives of the world together as a
chamber of or whatever yeah to over you
know what we dealing with when I was
when I was writing my book threshold um
the crisis of Western culture um and
then the paperback came out they
retitled at Progressive plan for America
I think the title is still threshold but
um Louise and I went to mandron Spain to
see the world's largest cooperative and
then went up to Madison Wisconsin which
is the most Cooperative intense town in
the country uh and Union Cab Company is
there and they and there's Peninsula
engineering and and I talked to all
these people working in all these
cooperatives and it turns out that there
is a cooperative inversion of the
Chamber of Commerce it serves to help
co-ops to Lobby on behalf of co-ops
there are more people who are employees
members of cooperatives in the United
States and there are members of unions
so this is
growing um the the difference though
Jesse and I think that you're putting
your thumb on it here is that that the
or your finger or whatever the
appropriate metaphor is that you've
identified is that the uh corporate
Chamber of Commerce has become a
political entity in addition to you know
just speaking on behalf of business
they're they're participating in the
purchasing of politicians and the
setting up of political campaigns and
even things that have nothing to do with
the corporations that they represent uh
you know and the and the co-op Chamber
of Commerce and I don't remember the
name of it and I've never been to any of
their meetings but I know that they have
meetings they have a couple meetings a
year there's there's a there's a fairly
large trade group for them um to the
best of my knowledge they're not
political they're more just you know
helping best practices so one business
can share one Co-op can share with
another Co-op well here's how we did
this and here's some new software to
keep track of you know employees or
here's some new you know whatever it may
be and so maybe you know the the just
like by the way Jesse the real chamber
the the US Chamber of Commerce was prior
to
1972 1971 when when leis Powell wrote
the PO the Paul memo was a letter to
leis cindor the head of the US Chamber
of Commerce saying you've got to stop
just being a business organization and
start getting political and which they
did and thus brought us the modern
Republican party if the co-op movement
there needs to be a poile memo for the
co-op movement Jesse I think I think you
you're on to something I think you're
definitely on to something thanks a lot
for the calls 20 minutes past
you to watch more clips from our
programs hit the watch more videos
button over here and please sure to hit
the handy dandy subscribe button so
you'll always be up to date tag you're
it


## Keywords:
