---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68eum5j6QXE
---

# Video
Does Objective Morality Exist? - A philosophical presentation and discussion
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68eum5j6QXE)

## Transcript:
we're all sorts of people here this is a
selfie this is a selfie this is a selfie
okay let's start with this a quick
shortish list of objects or things that
some people believe are real some people
believe they exist but that you don't
believe they exist because you know
better so like I need some examples
leprechauns are spelled like that

leprechauns
okay great something else unicorns great
shout out like two more Bigfoot I heard
and wormy it's good numbers no no gotta
leave that off that'll ruin the whole
talk we can we can tentatively also much
more controversially put God on there
for the moment we'll come back to God
okay so here's the thing
it would be nice if we had some sort of
principle that you are following that
explains why you don't believe in these
things but you do believe in the things
that you do believe in like you know
mountains and fried rice and all the
other stuff that really exists so well
here's a first go at a principle like
that the first thing you might notice is
looking at this list is that the stuff
over here that you rationally don't
believe in you've never experienced that
stuff you've never sensed it with any of
your senses so the principle that we
might start working with the one that's
operating in your mind a good one might
be something like you should only
believe in things that you experience
okay that's a first to go at a sort of a
principle that's going to separate these
from these but I don't think that's
gonna work because it's probably too
restrictive that is it's gonna it's
gonna get the result that you shouldn't
believe in all sorts of things it's
gonna rule out a whole bunch of stuff
because you haven't experienced that
stuff that you really should believe in
that it is rational believin so
presumably we could think of some
examples of things that you personally
have not experienced but that you should
believe are real what's that
Saturn well no you think well I don't
know about you but I took a college
course in astronomy and I've not only
seen photographs of Saturn I like looked
through a telescope and saw Saturn
personally so maybe you don't so we'll
go with you yeah good because if you
look through the telescope of course
like the actual light from Saturn that's
reflected from the Sun it goes through
the Sun hits Saturn and then it goes the
very light then goes into the telescope
and then goes literally into your
eyeball that's the very light that
traveled all the way through space so
I've like totally experienced Saturn
well some of you may get there anyway um
but good if you haven't experienced it
yourself then you might just trust me
like there might be enough trustworthy
folks right so maybe we quickly revise
the principle to a second go something
like you should only believe in things
that you or someone trustworthy right
experiences all right what do we think
about that still too restrictive Michael
Oh a good question that we will not
answer or discuss any further excellent
can no blind people have senses they
experience things they just experience
things with their um blind people
experience mountains they can hike they
can hike they can feel the mountain with
their hands they can smell the mountain
air they can hear the mountain breeze
now you get guys you can experience all
these things you can see anything you
can see you can experience anything you
can smell you can experience you can
smell all sorts of stuff but it seems to
me like there's things well let me just
like push this a little bit farther
forward like it seems to me that there
are things that like no one has
experienced or at least for a certain
amount of time no one had yet
experienced but that we still were
rational even at that time in believing
in the existence of those things Ryan
yeah something like an electron yeah
right like this rules out electrons
because like at least for a while no one
experienced electrons and now we have
electron microscopes and like do we
experience them now not clear too many
hands let's just stick with electrons I
mean there's going to be other things
like that like Pluto before we saw Pluto
right there was something about the
orbits of other planets and we knew
Pluto had to be there anyway so we got
electrons and we've got Saturn so we're
gonna have to revise this principle
again and a quick revision of it might
be you should only believe in things
that you or someone trustworthy
experiences or that must exist to
explain what we do experience right like
that's the deal with electrons I take it
is that we did experience all sorts of
stuff like I don't know electric shocks
and light bulbs and things like that and
it turns out that electrons needed to be
there even though we couldn't yet
experience them or maybe we still
haven't experienced them they need to be
there in order to explain the stuff that
we do experience so this revised version
of the principle I think this is the one
we'll stick with it seems to get it just
right or at least a lot of people
think that something like this gets it
right right it gets rid of oh wait these
should have been over here no one was
going to correct me did those should
have gone okay everybody understood yeah
because like electrons and Saturn are
real anyway it seems to be the right
principle for what sorts of stuff you
should believe in there are different
names that we could give a principle
like this empiricism is a name you might
have for it that's a certain application
maybe of Occam's razor whatever that's
another fancy kind of name you might
think that broadly speaking this kind of
principle if you're operating with it
could be called something like the
scientific world view maybe or a certain
version of it whatever we call it it
seems like a good one like it seems like
the right principle to operate with and
well we're not I mean we're not the
first people to come up with it this
principle or something like this was
very attractive to many philosophers
including the greatest philosopher of
the Scottish enlightenment David Hume
and here he is he looks like this okay
so here's what Hume does this was a good
idea it turned out at least a good idea
if you wanted other people to read the
stuff that you that you wrote for like
several hundred years um his idea was
take that principle empiricism or
whatever and apply it to moral reality
moral truths or moral laws so like real
quick here's what he says take any
action allowed to be vicious willful
murder for instance that is pick some
form of behavior that you think is evil
vicious means exhibiting a vice so evil
take any action that you think is evil
examine it in all lights and see if you
can find the matter of fact or real
existence which you call vice that is
take this thing so like take a willful
murder
so like someone murder someone else
intentionally willfully means
intentionally right someone murder
someone else intentionally
for with no justification it's not in
self-defense or anything like that think
about the example look at what look at
the event look at the action in front of
you and see if you can find the
wrongness he says in whichever way you
take it you find only certain passions
motives Volition's and thoughts that is
you're gonna see a whole bunch of stuff
he doesn't mention these but one thing
you're going to experience is you're
gonna experience like blood there's
gonna be blood and there's gonna be the
smell there's gonna be the arms moving
right and then you're gonna also have
well good enough evidence for for
believing in passions motives Volition's
and thoughts that is the murderer is
going to have some feelings in them
right and you're gonna have good reason
for believing that those feelings exist
because they you might think are needed
to explain the actions that you observe
right so you're following this dis
empiricist principle what do you find
what do you see and what do you have
evidence for well you've got you got the
blood and you've got the hands and the
and the legs and you've got the anger
and you've got the fear those things are
all real you see them when you look at
what don't do it don't do that to me
screen check the input yeah nice ok um
where was I oh yeah right
so you've got you've got reason on this
principle to believe in all those things
but then he says there is no other other
matter of fact in the case there's
nothing else there right there's nothing
else other than the arms and the legs
and the blood and and the anger and the
fear that's all there is for you to
believe in when you look at a case of
something that's supposedly evil the
Vice entirely escapes you as long as you
consider the object that is the evilness
the wrongness the moral quality you
can't find it it escapes you as long as
the only thing you're looking at is the
murder itself the action right that's
the object the object is the murder the
thing you're looking at you can never
find it to never find what you can never
find the wrongness the evil the badness
you can never find it to you turn your
reflection into your own breasts and
find a sentiment of disapprobation which
Rises in you towards this action here is
a matter of fact but tis the object of
feeling it lies in yourself not in the
object that is yeah yeah there's
something like wrongness sure but the
only wrongness that you find is not some
objective wrongness that exists in the
action of murder it's just a feeling
inside of you that you you dislike this
action that's all that's all that this
empiricist principle that we produced is
going to let you believe is real if you
really follow the principle then all you
can believe in is well blood feet and
arms and anger and fear and then another
feeling which is your feeling of
disapproval so that when you pronounce
any action or character to be vicious to
be evil so when you call something wrong
whenever you condemn something is wrong
or unjust you mean nothing but that from
the constitution of your nature you have
a feeling or sentiment of blame from the
contemplation of it that is look all
there is to rightness and wrongness is
feelings that people get there's no
objective rightness or wrongness in the
object it's not objective it's not in
the objects it's not really out there in
the murder there's nothing really wrong
with murder it's just all there is is
some feelings that people get about it
that's what happens if you apply this
principle
to moral facts or moral reality okay
here's the thing this principle is even
stronger I think than human realized
right if you really if you just run this
same argument that you ran you can run
it on even more stuff than just morality
so but if we're gonna understand that we
need we need to two distinctions there
one distinction and then one division
between three things like a tri station
I don't really know what the word for
that is anyway so like stick with me for
a few seconds here okay we need the idea
of a descriptive law and a normative law
right so a descriptive law is like a
generalization about the universe it's
just a pattern sort of that we observe
in the universe like you know Ohm's law
anybody know what Ohm's law is it's like
a thing in science yeah yeah
yeah it's like resistance in like a
thing it's like it's like it's like the
current is like AI is like the voltage
over the other thing resistance is that
Ohm's law
Derek is a PhD in science but not in
biology yeah okay anyway there are rules
like that so we're like Newton Newton's
law of like let's just let's pretend we
know what Ohm's law is and then Newton
had a law of universal gravitation right
and the idea was all the particles in
the universe are attracted to one
another at a proportional to their mass
fortunate to the product of the masses
you multiply the masses proportional to
the product of their masses divided or
inversely proportional to their distance
square root of all right
all right give the students a chance
okay right so descriptive laws are just
like descriptions they're just ways
things are like that's just the way
things are in our universe is that all
particles are attracted to each other at
bla bla bla bla bla that's just the way
things are then there are laws or facts
if you like about how things ought to be
right so like you know murder is wrong
that's not how things are it's not like
that's not saying murders don't happen
that's saying they ought not happen
right or you ought not murder you
shouldn't these say how things are and
these say how things should be but
notice there's more than one type of
this right there's the moral ones like
murder is wrong and then there's the
like well we call them Prudential ones
like diversify investments and then
there's ones about how to be rational
like believe you know the earth is round
this is the point so the point is we've
got a difference between descriptive and
normative stuff don't worry we're gonna
come back to this and we're going to use
Humes test again right we've got the
descriptive stuff is how things are and
then we've got the normative stuff
that's how things should be but there's
different varieties of this one here's
what I mean so like maybe we're very
comfortable on the surface with like
moral normativity right that's like
stuff that's wrong that you shouldn't do
maybe its facts that you owe to other
people you shouldn't murder them for
instance right the Prudential stuff they
understand the Prudential stuff okay
some of you are no doubt ignorant of
things that happened in the 90s here's
an example Beyonce was in a group okay
she was in a group before she was a solo
artist the group was called Destiny's
Child there were three of them okay
Kelly Rowland and Michelle I don't
remember Michelle's last name with an H
um anyway she was in a group right and
they were like very successful like you
think Beyonce's big that's a strong
like big-ish right the group was big and
then there was a point when she had to
make a decision about whether she was
going to stay with the group
or become a solo artist release a solo
album now I don't know what the inner
workings of the group or whatever but
you can imagine that the following
happen you can imagine that there was a
deal that that that the singers in the
group made it was like look we're gonna
stick together for four albums and they
make a promise and they shake hands or
something right
or whatever um so she's made a promise
let's say to stick with the group but
like you guys know how show business is
like you got a moment when you've got to
like take your chance this is your only
chance to make it as a solo artist
you're in the news and you're not gonna
be in the news in a few years from now
and this is the time to release a solo
album and become Beyonce right because
right now you're kind of Beyonce but
you're like in a group you know on the
one hand she's got like a moral
obligation or there's a moral rule maybe
the rule is something like keep your
promises keep your promises right so in
one sense that's the moral sense she
should stay in the group she made a
promise right but there's another sense
in which like like this is her chance
folks this is her chance to make it as a
solo artist so like if she was only
interested in what she should do for
herself then she should then she should
like look if he breaks his promise to
the other members of Destiny's Child
she'll be fine
she's gonna have enough money to get
other friends you know the difference
here is the difference between what you
ought to do maybe what you owe to others
and maybe what you owe to yourself right
what you ought to do what's in your own
best interest now you may think that one
of these is more important than the
other but all I want you to see now is
that they're both non-descriptive
they're both they both seem to be facts
about what someone ought to do not what
they do do right this says what you
ought to do morally whatever that means
this says what you ought to do for
yourself whatever that means but it's
still something that you ought to do
there's a third type right
these are all these are all varieties of
normativity the third type is epistemic
it doesn't work with the Beyonce example
as well because epistemic norms Piston a
is the greek word for knowledge so
epistemic norms are facts about what you
ought to believe not how you ought to
act so like given the evidence present
presently available you ought to believe
that the earth is round
you just really should if you don't if
you think it's flat given the evidence
available then you've made a mistake you
haven't done what you ought in the
epistemic sense epistemic just means
rationally what you ought to believe
rationally speaking okay so we've got
the descriptive in the normative and
then we've got different varieties of
normativity run Humes tests the same
thing where you just look at something
and see if you can experience the
morality the moral nasteria shouldn't
believe in it right run that test
against all types of normativity and
you'll get the same result right we all
know what Beyonce did she released a
solo album worked great right screw
Kelly and Michelle right I don't know if
I don't know she broke the promise I
don't like I don't know I don't want her
coming after me um the point is she's
thinking to herself look I at least
potentially speaking I ought to release
a solo album this is my time folks
well that fact she there she is she's
deliberating and then she's writing the
album does she write them I really don't
know um and then she's writing the album
and then she's releasing it look at the
action look at the object is there any
sense in in which she ought to do it
where is the art
where's the should of prudence you can't
find it all you see is Beyonce and like
records on tables and stuff like that in
her thoughts right she might have
thoughts about what she ought to do you
might have to believe in those because
those are needed to explain what you do
experience right but you don't need you
don't need to appeal to actual objective
facts
about what people ought to do even for
themselves in order to explain the
things you do experience so on this
principle according to this empiricist
principle you shouldn't believe that
these laws these norms are real these
facts if you like and the same goes for
a prosthetic facts facts about what is
really rational to believe those have to
go as well ok so that's the argument
against the existence of objective
morality and it's an argument well
against more than that against any kind
of normative stuff at all any kinds of
facts about what's right or what's wrong
even not just morally but for yourself
or or rationally right
ok that's the argument is that you
shouldn't believe in those things for
the same reason that you shouldn't
believe in leprechauns there's I think I
now Hume I don't think realize this
although I haven't read every word that
Hume ever wrote there's a big problem
with this argument it seems to me I'm
sure other people have noticed this also
but I don't I haven't read them saying
it right but there's a big problem with
this argument it gets rid it looks like
it looks really good because the
principle is great or at least looks
great right and it looks like it does
apply in these ways to moral moral
reality credential reality reality but
there's a problem I'll say what the
problem is unless someone interrupts me
umm the problem is that it's
self-defeating what the hell is this
this with one of these in it
here's the thing this I called it a
principle a bunch of times like it's an
empiricist principle but well it seems
like we could have also called it and in
an epistemic law right it says what you
ought to do specifically it says what
you ought to believe should you believe
that leprechauns exist
it says no should you believe that
morality exists it says no should you
believe the unicorns exist
it says no right okay should you believe
that the epistemic fact that you should
believe in things that you experience or
things that have been experienced by
trustworthy people or things that must
exist in order for you to have those
choices like should you believe in that
fact that normative fact it says no so
if this principle is right if if you
should adopt it then it then then it
gets the result that you shouldn't
believe that there's any normative law
objective normative law like this if you
adopt this principle then it says that
you should reject this principle that's
a problem folks
that's enough it seems to me to save
from this one particular attack like
objective moral facts we haven't of
course by that move right shown that
objective moral facts do exist but it
seems to me like that's enough or close
to enough to save objective moral facts
from what is a very famous and seemingly
very powerful argument against them let
me say one more thing and then I'm out
of stuff so then it'll be what everybody
else wants to say should we just trash
the principle that right if something is
self-defeating you usually just toss it
in the garbage because if something
defeats itself then it's been defeated
and once it's defeated there it goes
right it seems to me like no it seems
it's too good it's too good to let go
the right move I think is to just say it
only applies to descriptive entities
right so like this is a principle it
should we could just revise the
principle right we just build that into
the principle it says you should only
believe in descriptive things you should
only believe in descriptive things that
you or someone trustworthy experiences
or that must exist to explain what we or
you experience then well if we revise
the principle like that then it'll still
get rid of unicorns it'll still get rid
of leprechauns
it'll keep electrons it'll keep
mountains and it'll keep fried rice
anyway that's it that's all I've got
this talk is done
now we'll just like take questions and
like talk philosophy for until they kick
us out of the room Frank yeah yes Frank
yeah let's just say it again
good that's always the best I agree I
agree okay here's the thing the
principal says you should only believe
in the existence of things that either
you experience or that someone
trustworthy experienced or experiences
or that must exist in order to explain
the things that either you or someone
trustworthy experiences right but if
this is a good principle it's because
there's some objective normative fact
out there in the world a normative law
if you like it there's some law out
there some normative law about what you
ought to believe right and this is the
sentence that writes down that law right
that expresses what that law is so a law
or laws an entity why not right um if
you follow this principle without the
little word descriptive up there right
then you get the result that you
shouldn't believe in normative laws but
it is itself a normative law right
because you don't experience normative
laws no one trusts where the experience
is normative laws and you do not need to
posit their their existence in order to
explain the things that you or others do
experience so according to this
principle there is no objective
normative law that says that so
therefore you should well if there's no
objective law that says that then you
don't need to adopt this principle so if
you adopt this principle you don't need
to adopt this principle that's how it
defeats itself it categorizes itself as
it categorizes itself along with
unicorns and leprechauns and Bigfoot
Ryan
you think they're they hate it I don't
know maybe principal empiricist
principal good good yeah is it miss well
I don't think tomorrow well here's the
thing here's how I'm gonna here's how
I'm gonna respond I'm gonna lean heavily
on the word exists right so here's the
thing um should you believe that
tomorrow exists well actually I think no
it doesn't I don't first of all I don't
know if times exist at all
that's but but maybe if times exist I
mean you'd have to ask the metaphysician
but maybe if times exist only one of
them exists and that's the present right
now so yeah I don't have to exit you're
right I didn't put yeah well believe it
yeah yeah good let's just yeah good
but you can always lose more carrots you
just stick a little one of these in
there and you just go with you should
only believe in the existence of yeah I
mean that's kind of what I had in mind
the whole time actually so actually
everybody go back and just stick in the
existence of the whole time right yeah
so you only believe yeah good I don't
even know where in existence up there
fine you should only believe in the
existence of things that you or someone
trustworthy experiences or that must
exist in order to explain what you do
experience and then maybe maybe maybe
this principle says tomorrow doesn't
exist but it doesn't it will
yeah yeah that's the best I got I don't
know any grace you're good yeah good
yeah good it's one thing it's one thing
to to defend a claim from an attack it's
another thing to well demonstrate that
that claim is actually true because of
course you could defend something from
some attacks but some other attack might
kill it right well here's the best I got
um this is this is good this is written
on my notes it's like bonus if I need to
kill time give this give this positive
argument this isn't and this isn't
really so much a positive argument for
the existence of objective morality but
it's but it's something we already
believe so we believe in certain things
certain mundane things like mountains
and molecules and you know milkshakes or
whatever and I want to say we already
believe in some normative entities like
if we look at this list of normative
stuff we we definitely believe there are
real objective ones of these epistemic
laws oh goodness we we believe in these
all of you right pick pick the fate your
favorite Flat Earth or in your family
who comes to Thanksgiving and gives
their like Flat Earth speech right it's
really flat and the photos are faked and
etc so on and so forth right are they
are they doing something is it really
true that they're breaking some some law
some real law that says look given this
evidence you should believe that the
earth is round
my suggestion is yes they really and
truly objectively speaking are being
irrational at least as regards that
thing so you already believe in these I
want to say this is a part of reality
for you right look yep huh
oh good power off are you sure yes yes
okay um you already believe in these
these are already things that you think
are real and then the thought is like
well why not just add some more that is
you might have been worried that moral
stuff moral entities moral objects we're
like weird and different than other
stuff that you ordinarily believe in
right then then pretzels or whatever but
you've already got some normative stuff
and so if this is real then this might
as well be real too that is there's
nothing additionally spooky or bizarre
or weird about moral facts about what
ought to be the case then there are
about epistemic facts about what you
ought to believe and then once you
realize that once you realize that moral
facts are no spookier than epistemic
facts well then it just seems like well
you kind of have like a prima facia like
on the face of it inclination to think
that look look it's just wrong
like torturing kittens or wilful murder
or pick your favorite evil thing you
think that that thing just is wrong
objectively speaking I suggest and if
that's true we you might have to fight
that inclination but the thought is like
look if you already got these then
there's no reason to fight it you've
already let the normativity into the
gate or something
so some metaphor so just let them into
that's that's the best I got on the fly
yeah yeah yeah or he like write it down
and give it to you or something like
that yeah yeah yeah good there's I mean
one way to put it maybe this is too
brief of a summary of your point is
there is just and this is true you're
just right there's massive disagreement
right globally speaking well or it seems
like there's massive disagreement you
might think on closer inspection it
might be that like yeah there's a
marginal disagreement but like there's
there's more agreement than there is
disagreement but let's just assume that
there is massive disagreement I'm not so
sure that that shows that there's no one
true objective fact of the matter right
I mean like there's massive disagreement
about a lot of stuff and so what's
something that I mean Flat Earth is the
example that it sticks in my mind
because it's stuck there already so
there's some significant disagreement
about that but like do we then we don't
then think like look they've got they've
got their earth shape and we've got our
earth shape and there's apply to them
and honors apply to us no it is wrong
those flat earthers we disagree and
they're wrong so like if we disagree
about moral facts like maybe maybe we're
just right or maybe we're wrong and
somebody else is right but like the
here's the thought the mere fact of
disagreement I mean maybe if you build
it up a little bit more it might suggest
that there's no objective fact behind
there making one group right and one
group wrong and one person right in one
person wrong but the mirror
act of disagreement doesn't seem to show
that there's no objective fact of the
matter
yeah yeah yeah yeah good yeah good good
so so okay so we have technical terms
for the distinction that you're making
so the technical name is the difference
between a consideration of ethics and
meta ethics you don't have to remember
that because there's no quiz because
this is in part of a class or anything
um but right so like an ethical question
a straightforward ethical question is
like what should be honest they do right
um I this won't get us an answer to a
question like that because this is about
a sort of like bigger broader question
not actually a more important question
right but a bigger broader question
about are there even moral facts at all
right so like the whole talk actually
has been about this broader we'd say
meta ethical issue about whether moral
or ethical facts I just switched to
ethical from moral I use them
synonymously some people distinguish
them sorry um it's been about this
bigger broader issue of like whether
there's any morality at all but then
you're right it doesn't give us any
answers to the question of what are the
moral truths
what are they specifically I want to
list I want to know what they are for
that you need so we have a philosophy
119 that's introduction to ethics
that'll that'll deal with first-order
ethical questions 121 that's
contemporary moral problems that'll deal
with first-order ethical questions
there's a class in metics there's all
sorts of other you know there's whole
listen how many are there hundreds of
philosophers who focus on those issues
thousands yeah of course them so sorry
Michael oh I already got Michael Michael
already said something stop pause
Michael was there anyone else who had
their hand raised I know that you did
but now you're not raising a game which
is perfectly fine unless okay Heather
had something oh yeah um well good so I
said good good right so we shouldn't I
think I hope that I phrased it right
you should only believe in the existence
of descriptive things that you or
someone trustworthy experiences yeah
yeah experience yeah that's right
right so like so you have some
trustworthy folks right like your aunt
or or someone right um and and I'm just
gonna grant that your aunt is
trustworthy right um but that doesn't
mean you believe everything your aunt
says you should only believe that things
that your aunt says about things that
your aunt experienced right you
shouldn't believe everything that your
aunt says and then of course if your
aunt says that she experienced some
things that plausibly she didn't
experience and there's other reasons to
think she's not trustworthy
then you shouldn't even believe her
about things she claims to have
experienced but yes it's only things
that they have experienced that these
trustworthy people should be believed
about I don't see why no no they'd have
to be alive yeah I mean anyone yeah you
might think well you're good it could be
people it could be people through oh
good
because they were there Wow
right yeah good I mean there's original
try right well and then those other
prophets who got to see things or got to
smell or hear things right they got to
experience things like that I should
have added I think I forgot to add this
when you when you add this last clause
at the end that you can believe in
things that must exist in order to
explain what you what what what you are
others experience like that clause will
will almost certainly get you Pluto and
electrons um but it will may they also
get you God like there are arguments for
the existence of God you'll have to take
philosophy of religion for these right
there are arguments for the existence of
God that go by way of look here's some
stuff that you've experienced the only
way to explain this stuff or the best
way is is by believing that some God
exists okay anyway but that's not
directly in response to Gary's point the
point is just well okay well so then I
don't need to say it controversially
this will get you you need you need
three to exist yes yes yes
although although you know and maybe I
shouldn't say controversial things but
like I kind of don't think the number
three does exist anyway don't tell the
Dean yeah
yeah good yeah good yeah good so the I
think we're gonna have to modify the
principle in some way or we're gonna
have to build it all into trustworthy or
something like that
it's definitely going to be the case
that people do have experiences that are
illusory right hallucination is a real
phenomenon right it's a real
scientifically legitimate phenomenon and
what you don't want is for your
empirical principle like this to tell
you to believe in the reality of things
that just anyone including yourself has
experiences or as if of those things
yeah I don't have it on the fly
we have modifying it but it'll have to
be modified Michael I like I like I like
retracted calling on you before so now
yes it's it's yeah I mean something like
um you know facts about which actions
are right and wrong we can say for
everyone everywhere regardless of what
anyone thinks about that yeah yeah
yeah yeah yeah that's that's he's
definitely right about that part yeah
yeah well so there's there's multiple
steps right so I like ran through Humes
argument kind of quick but there's
different steps in the argument and you
can think that some steps work and other
steps don't or some claims sometime a
season the argument working and some
premises don't right so like one claim
that he's making is you don't have any
experience of viciousness or vice that
is you don't have any experience of
wrongness
that's one claim and then there's the
additional claim sort of like therefore
well then there's a principle like this
right and then you put the fact that you
don't experience the vice together with
a principle like this that'll be another
premise in the argument and maybe
there's some more in there right and
then you're gonna get a conclusion
something like therefore you shouldn't
believe in the reality of objective
moral facts that is a fact about what's
really right and wrong in this case in
the object in the act other than just in
your in your mind and so the thought is
he can be right about he can be right
that you don't experience the vise but
then he can be wrong about this in my in
my like line the line that I'm pushing
is that is that this principle doesn't
apply to cases like that cases of
normative objects like moral objects
yeah
yes well I'm not sure just like if you
take it just like that we don't yet have
an argument against objective moral
facts we have a statement that there
aren't any like a very kind of
attractive statement that there aren't
any right but nonetheless it's just a
statement it's not an argument yet right
if we just say look um all the cultures
in the world and indeed all the people
if you get detailed enough um
disagree about which actions are right
and which actions are wrong and then
what else do you say then you had then
you had something like and there's no
objective moral facts about there's no
objective facts about what's right and
wrong well if you just take that
statement as just a statement then it's
just a statement of that I that I that I
think is is incorrect but I haven't
really argued against you could change
that and there to a something like a
ther four and then you've got the
beginnings of a loose structure of an
argument it's like there is all this
disagreement therefore there are no
objective moral facts right and then
it's closer to the argument that we were
talking about before but maybe I've
missed something Adam seems like he's
gonna
I don't know business the big problem
with Ricans some of these things
yeah yeah might save the principle and
sorry Ryan in the process maybe lose
yeah good good if you want to believe
right right or something like that right

yeah good good um well let's try it the
way you said it was something like I
mean I want to object to the first way
you do it with hypothetical izing it
right so if you go if you want right
dollars alright then release then
release solo album right something like
that but it only applies in a limited
domain Beyonce and from 1995 to 1998
that was her window something like that
when was Destiny's other thing 92 96 I
think I googled it earlier yeah okay so
anyway I mean this it is now
hypothetical right it's got this
structure where it's like about like oh
it's got a an antecedent with a desire
in it what you want um but then I think
it's still it's still normative like
like really
is just elliptical for then you ought to
write so it's still a claim about what
ought to be the case it's just it only
ought to be the case if something
happens if you would want this right
it's you so it won't work like this yeah
yeah good yeah releasing now now we've
gotten rid of the odd that I was gonna
do this but then you know matter it
happens the same like pace or whatever
releasing solo album will cause money
right like now it's just a causal claim
right so now it doesn't tell you what to
do it just tells you what will happen or
whatever and I mean you know yeah maybe
that's all there is if you know right
right you might have thought like well I
mean it just works so good with evil
things
pick your favorite terrible truly evil
thing right so what that it will result
in something we want to know whether it
should be done or not and presumably you
think it shouldn't that's that's the
important or interesting thing not what
follows from what causally yes
yeah good good so so this is a way of
pressing against the other premise in
the argument right so like I like in
responding to Michael's question I like
sort of like roughly without even
writing it down sketched out like the
steps in a human argument it's like you
don't experience the evilness you
shouldn't believe in things that you
don't experience something like this
right
therefore you shouldn't believe in
evilness right and so the thought was
the original well there was a problem
with this but the thought is it might be
wrong you might be wrong that you don't
you might also be wrong he might be
doubly wrong that you don't also
experience evilness maybe when you have
that's just what an experience of
evilness feels like just like you didn't
know maybe you didn't know that you had
experienced I don't know what's like a
like a platypus
you think you've never seen a platypus
but that's me but actually there was a
platypus at that thing that you were at
and you smelled it and you're like
what's this smell I don't know
turns out you had experienced a platypus
olfactory right um you just didn't know
what platypi smelled like right and the
thought is maybe maybe vice maybe he was
wrong about his other claim maybe vice
is something you experience and hugest
doesn't know what it feels like that
feeling of disapprobation maybe that's
just what evilness feels like when you
experience it huh yeah maybe he was
wrong yeah double wrong Derrick and then
oh yeah you go ahead getting this across
so what happens if you find out that
there is a descriptive morality that you
can extrapolate to
hmm I'm not sure so with the way I'm
using word morality it just is a
normative thing so I'm wondering what
the descriptive morality is so yeah the
way that I see it is like morality could
be biological good okay so Hume
I think agrees that there that that
Moral Sentiments are a biological thing
right so the thought is something like
yeah I mean it's an evolutionary thing
you might think the species evolved I
mean this is controversial I guess I
don't know enough about evolutionary
biology to know but like maybe it's true
that our species evolved certain Moral
Sentiments certain moral feelings
because it advantaged us in some way and
so there's totally a biological
explanation and evolutionary explanation
for why we have these feelings the trick
is to go from these feelings to the
existence of universal moral laws or
universal moral facts that are just out
there saying which actions are truly
right and truly wrong regardless of what
anyone thinks about it maybe the route
to go is that that's what that's what
moral moral reality feels like is it
feels like that so that I think your
best bet at making that jump from
descriptive facts about how people feel
morally to normative facts objective
normative moral fact is by route of well
or one good bet is by route of well
that's just what normative morality
feels like
yep we like we condemn people that
behave in certain ways and if we hadn't
started condemning people that behaved
in certain ways indeed some of us did
back in the day those groups didn't they
didn't make it
evolutionarily and so we resulted from
the ones that that censured and
condemned certain forms of behavior and
we made it and that's why we all have I
mean you might think that that's why
something like that this is really very
speculative but something like that
might be the reason why there isn't a
you know widespread disagreement like
there's some disagreement but you might
think like there's actually a lot of
agreement and the reason there's a lot
of agreement is because of these
evolutionary forces but but like always
keep in mind the difference between our
moral sentiments or moral feelings what
we feel is right and wrong and the moral
truth if there is one yeah and then I'll
get Ryan yeah sorry
yeah that's what I said that's all I
said and then I stopped
well it doesn't good good the reason I
stopped following you is that it doesn't
follow so all I was doing when I said
look we already believe in epistemic
normativity so like there's nothing
spooky or weird about moral normativity
that's not a decisive argument for the
existence of moral reality it's just
like eliminating what I take to be one
of the barriers indeed it's like kind of
the same barrier that this argument put
up in the first place so if you're
disappointed because I haven't given
like a full blown direct argument for
the existence of objective morality then
you may remain disappointed because I
don't have one that I really want to get
at was that every statement here someone
has made either try to reduce it to a
descriptive plan or just flat-out reject
then we have these normative claims were
implicitly it it's a normal behavior
because what you're saying
you're saying no no that's not true
you ought believe this which is what's
true and what can see that's wrong to
say no are you now now also trying to
push you towards truth
yeah good well right well yes and no I
mean well yeah well I'll tell you how
yes I know yes in the sense that often
implicit in a discourse is are certain
epistemic or discursive norms right but
it doesn't directly felt like it's not
it's not entailed by the fact that
there's some evolutionary fact and that
someone uh turd that fact it doesn't
follow directly from that that everyone
else ought to now believe it you need to
add this normative premise and and
although that normative epistemic
normative premise is plausible well it's
an extra step or whatever that's just
one little point I want to add oh good
so this point about evolutionary I
didn't see it till the end okay
this point about disagreement and
there's maybe not so much disagreement
and there's maybe this biological or
evolutionary thread behind our like
moral opinions or Moral Sentiments or
whatever the default view you might
think in morality is that if there's an
objective moral truth it applies equally
well to Android's
aliens if there are such things or if
there were such things right like if you
have an alien if an alien shows up and
then it'll is like hi I'm conscious
I have rational thoughts I can get a B+
in a logic class like I've got like a
hyperspace Drive and I can communicate
with you and I'm just as good at humans
at this whole chitchat game but like I'm
all tentacles or whatever right if the
alien shows up like that
the default view you might think is like
look they're bound by the moral laws
that were bound by but the thought is
they don't have that evolutionary
history or whatever yeah I take it that
that the main upshot or what up shot of
that is just that that makes the story
that you have to tell going from like
evolutionary facts to real objective
moral facts it makes it even more
complicated or whatever but you might
have already thought that that story was
very hard to tell in the first place
yeah yeah epistemic yeah norms yeah yeah
yeah oh good good it's jump man I just
jumped I didn't even put down the floor
or whatever to the bridge yeah no that's
right look there are there are arguments
to be made and there are reasons to
think that one variety of normativity is
real and another variety is not the
thought the thought though was just like
these are all broadly of a type and once
you let one in all of the arguments
against the other one all of the
arguments against moral facts more laws
more reality that hinged on their mere
normativity must have failed because
there really is some other type of
normativity so that move was still a
kind of merely a defense of moral
reality against a certain specific kind
of attack it wasn't really an argument
for us reality and ya know there's a
there's a jump there
I sort of made it but like but now I
admitted it so that makes it better
maybe
yeah look there's a there's a lot of
ways in which people diverge from the
evolutionary norm I mean of course every
mutation even the ones that lead to
adaptations diverged from the
evolutionary norm right so you know
someone someone is born and they like
you know I mean one like I don't know
they don't have a tail anymore I know it
was slower than that I guess it's got
smaller and smaller but but like as a
dummy example they diverged from the
evolved pattern of the species and then
it turned out it was great and then they
Pro created more and then you specie
eight the species splits and right and
then and then then there's the monkeys
and they're the Apes and then UPS or
whatever so those are the cases where
where some individual that that deviates
from the evolutionary norm successfully
procreates enough or whatever but the
answer the the only response I have to
that is just like yes people do deviate
from the evolutionary norm or whatever
but remember keep in mind if the
question we're interested in it is
whether there are objective moral truths
objective moral lost facts about which
actions are really and truly right and
which actions are really and truly wrong
that apply to everyone everywhere if
that's what we're interested in then
that's a different thing
from whether we evolved to have moral
opinions though those moral opinions
maybe get us an argument for the
objective more facts or maybe down
Heather
yeah yeah yeah right right right right
yeah good good yeah yeah what we're even
yeah yeah yeah well you only have like
how I mean I had like 40 minutes but
okay but like years ago
let me try well let me just try and now
in one minute to specify you know to
give you a unicorn story about you know
objective moral facts right it is that
is a unicorn story is just like I said I
tell you it's like well looks like a
horse has it has a horn on the middle
and the top of his head it farts
rainbows if you drink its blood you
become immortal or whatever that
whatever the facts about unicorns are
right um
and then you're like okay okay now I
know what it would be for there to be
such a thing thank you um now I know
what it would be for there to be such a
thing and then we can go looking and see
if we find one right and so let's like
spend a little bit more time saying what
well this isn't gonna be that satisfying
I don't know but here here we go anyway
um the objective moral like entities or
whatever it seems like we can call them
entities if we if we want to talk about
in terms of laws they could be entities
laws or entities there are two things
right or we've talked about facts even
one will do I can run it either way
right if we're happy with certain facts
or patterns right you know there's a
fact that like you know people
attend you know movies it's a fact
right and you believe that that fact is
true it's a true fact fine if we're
doing in terms of facts then then I'm
just going to write a moral fact
underneath it now it's gonna have a
moral vocabulary it's gonna have some
moral terms and and and this is gonna
have some cinematic terms right but but
the thought is like you you understand
what these terms mean what's it you know
people ought not murder right and like
what is the art well you know maybe it
is a little more mysterious than like
cinematic stuff but like look I just
always just lean back on that epistemic
stuff because like you know people want
you know believe whatever they ought to
believe you know the earth is round or
whatever like it just seems like we know
if we're coming with that with that
being true whatever that is the messages
are meaningfully different laughs okay
so like here's my here's my unicorn
story that I that I've given very poorly
and quickly it's something like oh what
kind of a thing it is it it's like a
horse right except for it's a little
different than a horse
it's got like one of these in the middle
of its head and you know and whatever
like okay so and then you're like okay
I'm looking for something that looks
like a horse but it's got one of these
and I said I get it okay I'll see if I
find that it's best I guess
yeah
well she tells you that she experienced
unicorn right so she didn't just tell
you she doesn't just tell you there is
unicorn she tells you I saw a unicorn
and I wrote it or whatever
yeah good yep right good yep right I
don't so here's the thing I don't think
the principle gets the result nor do I
think it should get the result that
under no circumstances should you
believe in the existence of God or
indeed it shouldn't even get the result
that under no circumstances should you
believe in the existence of unicorns
right listen someone tells you that they
met a unicorn or God right
otherwise you think they're very
trustworthy person maybe you think that
this is a rather exotic claim so you
look into their trustworthiness in
greater detail you subject them to a
brain scan if you like you you do a
background check
you call up all their neighbors and you
ask about their recent behavior if you
conclude that this person oh and then
there's more people - right and they saw
the thing as well they saw the unicorn
also they you're heard the Word of God
right you do brain scans on all of them
um you you call all of their references
you really have excellent evidence that
they're trustworthy then this principle
it seems to me within us then this
principle gets the result that you ought
to believe in unicorns but that's the
right result it doesn't guarantee that
there are that's right oh good good
distinction that is thick so like just
because you follow this principle it
doesn't mean you'll be infallible yeah
right right right
yes harder harder fact-checking yeah but
you call their living references and/or
their you know
yeah it's harder to fact you put the
point is just to put it and let me just
repeat this and then I'll get Gary um
the point is just one this principle
only says what you should believe it
doesn't say what's going to turn out to
be true now if you follow this principle
the thought is the empiricist says
you're going to be right more than
you're going to be wrong but look you
follow this principle and then sometimes
it turns out that a whole group of
people was hallucinating trustworthy
people but you were right to believe
them because the evidence available to
you at the time suggested that they were
trustworthy
that's exactly right you did the right
thing it's just you know you're not
you're not perfect yeah when you need to
bring in two feeders well I have here
the only that would be the anomaly right
there's you should believe it if and
only if right right that's right that's
right that's right
I mean the principle is I've written it
here is maybe not all the together clear
about this issue but I suppose actually
but I think you only in his the only
that's right it doesn't indeed indeed
one way of following that principle is
just to not believe anything yeah yeah
yeah but all these principles have the
problem you know
that's right that's right Frank this one
is just this one I think if you're
reading it strictly where this says only
if you should only believe in these
things the the direct implication is
like this is this just some stuff you
should not believe in right but it's
hard to well that's a vaguely worded you
think we should yeah we will give people
the chance to leave if they want to
leave we'll sort of call things off but
then I and some others maybe we'll hang
out in the room and chat for a little
while longer but before I before that so
we're a whole philosophies the whole
thing it's like a whole discipline we're
all whole department there's like
several of us there's all sorts of
activities that we do there's something
coming up called public republic which
is happening on September 27th and it's
all day and it will be out by the
Minerva statue and that's a reading of
the masterpiece of Plato maybe you've
heard of him he was a wrestler from
quite some time ago and he's a big deal
and that's a fun activity and then
there's all sorts of classes and then
there's an ethics Bowl that's like a
debate style competition that happens
and there's a philosophy Club and
there's all sorts of cool stuff and
thank you very much for coming
and and if you brought a chair in please
leave it
do not remove it just leave it where it
is


## Keywords:
