---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m5rtUZlGABo
---

# Video
Economic Update: A Critique of Government Spending
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m5rtUZlGABo)

## Transcript:

Welcome Friends to another edition of
economic update a weekly program devoted
to the economic dimensions of our lives
and those of our children I'm your host
Richard wolf I want to remind you that
we have a volunteer Charlie Fabian who
is standing by if you have suggestions
for topics you'd like to see us present
here on this show you've been doing that
we've been getting them and they are
very valuable and I want to thank you
but if you're of a mind to do that
here's the email
charlie.in
438 Gmail
.c
charlie.in
438
gmail.com today's program excuse me is
going to be devoted to how to understand
government spending I'm particularly
interested in government spending on
major projects the defense of the
country if you like Bridges roads
highways
Medical Systems all kinds of goods and
services I'll go over them I want to
present an analysis of government
spending along the lines you probably
haven't thought about but should be part
of our national discussion and there are
fairly obvious reasons why that hasn't
happened and I think you'll see the
relevance and the importance once I go
through it
one way to get into it is to say that
when the government spends
money there are kind of two things to
think
about what is it spending the money on
is it to repair our bridges is it to
provide uh a kind of insurance program
for the elderly is it to support Health
in our hospitals is it for National
Defense is it and to answer those
questions these are questions about what
the government is spending
on but the next question is not asked
but ought to be
how is that money going to be used how
is the bridge going to be built how are
the bullets going to be made how is the
health care services going to be
supported to make it dramatic let me
give you an example suppose the
government said that one of the things
it was going to do was build some roads
in an area that needs them and that it
was going to sign a contract with a
slavery
outfit you know a group of Masters who
have a bunch of slaves and they were
going to get a contract to build the
road and they would do it by putting
their slaves people they own
to that project well I can hear this the
screams of outrage and rightly so we
don't want our government to be what
supporting slavery by giving contracts
to slave masters I get that so in fact
we do care don't we about how the work
is done that the government decides to
spend
on let me give you another example
suppose the government was going to
build some roads but decided that the
way it wanted to have it done was by a
Cooperative a group of people who
together would build the road it would
include Engineers to design it and Earth
moving Specialists and machine operators
and all the different people needed for
road building but they would work as a
Cooperative as a little Community one
person one vote who decides everything
collectively in a democratic way in
other words it would be a worker
Co-op well that would be a completely
different
arrangement in our society United States
today and in most of the
world when contracts are given they are
given to what are more or less
capitalist Enterprises not given to SL
Masters not given to worker co-ops given
to
capitalists and what does that mean
owners of Enterprises Boards of
directors of Corporations they get the
check from the government to pay for
building a bridge building a road
building a aircraft carrier whatever it
is operating a
hospital so now let's be clear
when the government gives money to a
capitalist corporation which is what
most of government spending is
about it is pouring money into a
particular social organization the
capitalist structure of Enterprises
because that's what we
have but that has
consequences let me be very
clear
capitalist corporations when they get
that money from the government will do
with that money from the government just
what they do with money from private
people who buy from them who sign
contracts with them we as consumers
other businesses who buy from one
another and what does the corporation do
with all of that Revenue well we know
because the corporations tell us they
maximize profit with that money cuz
that's what they're in business to do
they try to minimize the amount they
give to working
people by getting cheaper workers if
they can by automating replacing workers
with machines if they can by moving
production overseas where workers are
cheaper to buy if they can we know
that's what they do because they've been
doing it for as long as we can
remember you know what else they do try
to give really nice high executive
salaries you know what else they do pay
dividends to their
shareholders capital gains by growing
the company and you know what else they
do and this is the cute part they take
part of the money that comes in and use
it to donate to the political parties
and candidates who voted the money into
their hands with the contract in the
first place oo this getting down right
incestuous isn't
it here's the way to say this in a
simple way when the government of the
United States hands out contracts it
isn't just building a bridge or helping
a hospital it is also here we go
reproducing capitalism the inequalities
all those corporations will make sure to
give the most money possible to the
shareholders and the top Executives and
the least to their workers that's why we
have the gap between the rich who are
the first group and the not so rich who
are the rest of
us we are reproducing and the same
politician who signs the inflation
reduction act or the we will rebuild the
infrastructure of America Act or
whatever the same politician who said
says I'm concerned about inequality by
signing contracts with these
corporations is making sure that that
inequality is reproduced by those
corporations who are the ones whose
payment program produced it in the first
place that's why it matters that you
might give it to a worker Co-op contract
you know why because worker co-ops don't
give huge amounts of money to small
groups of themselves while everybody
else has a hard time Liv living from
paycheck to paycheck giving their kid a
college education and all the rest in
other words it matters a
lot not just what the government spends
on but what kind of an entity it gives
all that money too by giving it to
capitalist corporations it
reproduces the
inequalities that haunt this
Society it subsidizes them them it
reproduces them and it doesn't have
to it doesn't have to the government
could decide that it would be much more
healthy for the United
States to have the government give half
the money to capitalist corporations if
you still want to and half the money to
worker co-ops help develop the worker
co-ops so you can give them the contract
and then let the American people see how
they perform who does the better job why
are we not having these discussions
these experiments and deciding on the
evidence rather than refusing to give
the money to anything other than a
capitalist
Corporation look other Americans have
understood this if not quite in these
terms
minorities in America noticed over the
long history of this country that
government captured mostly by white male
persons tended to give contracts to
corporations run by white male persons
so the women said there has to be money
set aside for or or the ethnic
minorities it doesn't matter whoever was
left out of the game said hey we want
some of these contra s set aside for us
and there are some programs to do that
well worker co-ops have are just as
deserving they've been excluded even
more than corporations run by women or
corporations run by
nonwhites and they could
revolutionize the way this country works
because they have different ways of
Distributing income they're much more
egalitarian and they much more take care
of their members many needs not just the
salary and so
on so it
matters we ought to broaden the
conversation about government spending
so it's not just on what is the
government
spending but how is it spending whatever
it decides to spend on what kind of
Corporations who have what kind of
impact on our society we know that the
capitalist system has had the impact
that we have women's earning less than
men women subordinated to men non-whites
earning less than whites non-whites more
unemployed than white we know the story
we know a few people are billionaires
while a mass of people are having hard
time we know that capitalist ways of
doing things are producing a society
which has many weaknesses flaws and
failures it's simple common sense then
if we know that the government has it
within its
power to buy the things we want as a
society from worker co-ops who would
handle all those other issues
differently instead of capitalist
corporations there ought to be a lot of
that going
on this is an argument that the worker
Co-op movement ought to develop
or to put in the Forefront of its
organizing activities because millions
and millions of people who already see
the benefits of a of a mutual
fund where they
work of a credit union where they work
those are the beginnings of efforts at
Collective Behavior they could see that
worker co-ops would be a better way for
the government to get the things done
that we need as as a
society it's really important to
understand that what the government does
is not any more important and probably
less than how the government goes about
it to whom they
entrust the people's money collecting
taxes from all of
us to give to corporate leaders which is
what in the end is going on reproduces
the inequalities we say we don't want as
a society well here's a way to get
beyond the
inequalities stop giving all government
contracts to capitalist
corporations build on develop a worker
Co-op sector so that it can get the job
done for what the government needs why
at the same time achieving much less
inequality and thereby a much better
Society than what capitalism has been
able to
achieve stay with us we've come to the
end of the first half I will be right
back in a

moment welcome back friends to the
second half of today's economic
update in the first half we made a
general
argument that the social impact of
government spending is not restricted to
just what the government spends on guns
versus butter social programs versus
military programs and so on those are
important questions for
sure but they leave in the shadows where
they don't belong the equally or more
important matter of
how the work gets done
that the government is spending money on
how is the bridge going to be repaired
how are the roads going to be built how
is the medical care going to be
delivered how is the educational
experience going to be
organized these are questions that are
not asked because we are supposed to all
believe that the capitalist system is
the only way to do it the necessary way
to do it the universal way to do it none
of that is
true it is true that the American
government gives money overwhelmingly to
capitalist Enterprises that means that
the check goes from the government of
the United States Washington or by the
way the same applies to state
governments local governments and goes
to the board of directors or the owner
of an Enterprise the construction
company that fixes the bridge the
university which undertakes courses in
education where it gets help from the
government to do so whatever the
Enterprise is the overwhelming majority
of them these Enterprises are organized
as capitalist
corporations they have a small group of
people at the top who make all the
decisions the corporate board the owner
the top Executives or some mixture of
those and they take the money they get
the money from the government they
literally sign the contract with the
government for whatever it is that the
government is spending
on and then they take that money
together with revenues they get from
selling to other people businesses
individuals and they do what we know
they do and here's what it is they they
spent the least they possibly can on
workers and on
laborers why because they're in the
business of maximizing profits not wage
bills to their
workers if they can save by having
cheaper workers they do if they can save
by replacing the workers with machines
they do if they can move production out
of the country they
do they try to make the most money they
can they want to grow the business they
want to pay dividend want to pay we went
through that the first half of this
program it's clear what capitalist
corporations do reproduces the
capitalist
system and
therefore what goes with the capitalist
system enormous disparities between
those who live on dividends capital
gains and executive salaries versus
those who live on wages the gap between
Elon Musk and you and me etc
etc if we want those qualities of our
society to be
overcome we have been asking for at
least 100 to 200 years for the
inequality of wealth and income in this
country to be reduced every poll shows
it Americans want much less inequality
than they
have but we haven't been able to get
it and that's not because we didn't try
and it's not because we aren't smart or
any of those other silly reasons it's
because our capitalist system doesn't
work that
way and one of the ways it does work is
the government think of it this way is
like a vacuum cleaner sucking up all the
taxes you pay and I pay when we embibe
alcoholic beverages when we drive on a
rubber tire when we put gasoline in the
car when we pay our income tax when we
pay our sales tax when we all that money
collected is then taken by the
government and you guessed it given to
the heads of
Corporations to do what the society we
are told
needs how very nice for them
and here's the
solution I'm going to borrow from the
head of the labor party in England
Jeremy Corbin he's not the current head
they bounced him out and replaced him
with Casper milk toast Keith
starmer uh who will be another Tony
Blair which is to say
nothing that's what we got but
Jeremy Corbin had a different plan here
we
go a law would be passed said Jeremy
Corbin which is why they pushed him out
a law will be passed the minute we win
the election and become the government
of Great Britain and the law will say
any business that wants to stay as the
capitalist business it is can do so but
any business that proposes to
change and by that he meant shut down or
leave the country or merge with another
business or go public by issuing shares
any company wanting to make that kind of
change will have to offer its own
workers something called the right of
first
refusal another words it has to offer
itself for sale to its own workers if
the workers don't make an off offer then
they are going to be free to go and do
whatever they want but if the workers
are willing to meet the the company and
pay the price then they get it they get
priority they can buy the
company when the Press heard
this they became
skeptical not because they're good
journalists but because they're not used
to this kind of
thinking they they said well where would
the workers ever get the money
and then Jeremy Corbin and John
O'Donnell
his chief advisor
smiled and said we're the government
we'll lend it to
him
ah the government would have a lending
program specifically geared to enabling
corporations to convert from the
capitalist top down system they were to
becoming worker co-ops
instead the government would lend the
workers the money to buy the company if
it were part of such a conversion and
then the reporters turned to Jeremy and
John and
said why would you do this and the
answer they gave was we
want a worker Co-op sector of the
British
economy and here's why we want it we
want the British people to finally have
some genuine Freedom of
Choice the freedom to choose whether to
do business with a capitalist topown
company for the things you need or a
worker Co-op for the things you need
will you buy your toothpaste from one or
or the other will you go and get a job
in one or the other what do the British
people want we should have an economy
that mixes capitalist and worker Co-op
Enterprises according to their
preferences nothing else would be
Democratic in terms of an economic
system chosen by a one person one vote
Pro process of the
people but they could have an answered
with another argument which is what I've
tried to make today they didn't but they
could have Jeremy Corbin and John
O'Donnell could have
said we want government spending the
many many billions of dollars that the
British government spends each year on
roads and highways in schools and
hospitals and Name It We want a
percentage of that spending to go into
producing The Goods the government wants
by worker co-ops so that the money the
government spends will be distributed
relatively equally the way worker co-ops
do will be used to take care of the
needs of the community and the people
who work there
first not some private investor
because they don't have
those we want that because it'll make a
better Society for all of
us and that's why we're do they could
have made that argument they could have
taught the British people
look the impact of the government is not
only on what it spends but how it spends
it to whom it gives taxpayer Monies to
perform services to produce products
because how you do that shapes the
society that's what the whole program
today is designed to get
across Corbin showed us the way the
government can develop the sector to
which it then gives
contracts and that could be done
everywhere in many countries already
there are co-ops even here in the United
States where there are are relatively
fewer of them we have many of our
businesses now in various kinds of
Cooperative structures we have the
United States Federation of worker
co-ops an association that's been around
for many years that has accumulated
skills and
resources to share to help governments
State local Federal
develop worker Co-op sectors we know
about how to finance them how to manage
them how to solve a whole host of
problems the most developed worker Co-op
system in the Western World the mandron
corporation in Spain they have their own
university mandron university where they
teach
courses in how to organize set up manage
Run Rescue Finance worker co-ops we're
not starting from nothing there's a
whole developed logic history
record
knowledge it lacks only the economic and
even more the political will to do this
to take
advantage of the resources already there
the knowledge already
accumulated to produce a worker Co-op
sector that can deliver enormous mous
benefits to our culture if only we let
it get
going so let me end with an
appeal do not let the bad habit of
having nothing but capitalism taught to
us all the
time I took a look recently at the
curricula in Business Schools do they
teach anything other than capitalism by
and large no no courses on worker co-ops
certainly no curriculum devoted to how
to set them up or run them it's as if
they weren't there even though they are
and have been for a long time all of
that would change if there were a
political will and we would get as I say
much less
inequality and a much warmer more
Community
oriented production
system it's been the
dream of critics of capitalism for a
long time whether they call themselves
socialists or
not to move in these kinds of directions
as a way to have a competition with
capitalism but in the end to show people
that this way of doing
things can take us to a better place
than capitalism has been able to achieve
when the French and American Revolutions
brought capitalism to the modern world
and overthrew feudalism they promised it
would bring Liberty equality fraternity
and
democracy it brought some of those but
it didn't bring them far enough and for
that we need the next step and that next
step is all about worker co-ops in the
field of production
thank you for your attention I hope you
have found this interesting and as usual
I look forward to speaking with you
again next
week


## Keywords:
