---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JHN1XXShObU
---

# Video
Economic Update - Where Profit Motive Leads - Prof. Richard D. Wolff - Feb. 18, 2013
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JHN1XXShObU)

## Transcript:
welcome friends and first of all as
always thanks to John Lee Hooker Carlos
Santana for reminding us about change
that's coming this is economic update a
program brought to you every week by the
Pacific of network our purpose is to
analyze major economic events and trends
the forces shaping our jobs incomes
taxes deaths what we buy and what we pay
for the goods and services on which we
all depend i am your host richard wolf
I've been a professor of economics all
my life at several universities
currently I'm a visiting professor in
the graduate program for international
affairs of the new school university in
new york city i also write columns of
economic analysis for the website
truthout org a courageous source of
independent news news analysis and
commentary daily please keep sending in
your questions and comments we read each
one and select the few we can respond to
on the air but we also use them to shape
the programs and the content of our
programs send them as always please to
democracy at work dot info a website
that you will find interesting and that
also brings your communications to me
this week there were more events and I
could possibly analyze or present to you
really was a tough choice so here's my
selection of things I think might be
worth your thinking about first a
materials factory a factory that
produces building materials in Greece
captured an enormous amount of interest
this week because the workers there
about 40 of them in the northern Greek
city of Thessaloniki or Salonika in
English took a step that is going to
change Greece and Europe Greece is a
country and extreme economic decline
largely resulting from the economic
crisis of the last five years
plus the government's response there
which is an extreme form of austerity
and this has produced the highest
unemployment rate now in Europe over
twenty eight percent at the last count
and workers instead of waiting as they
have been now for several years for the
unemployment picture to get better have
decided to take some action of their own
after the capitalists abandoned the
factory because they could not get the
concessions from workers that they
wanted and they could not find the
market to survive in so they decided to
close this building materials factory
the 40 workers in there decided okay
we're gonna run this enterprise
ourselves we're going to get it back
into shape produce the goods and
services that we know how to produce and
we'll do it without the supervisors we
used to have without the management
levels without the need to produce
profits for absentee capitalists who own
shares all over the world we'll run it
for ourselves and with enormous work
they opened this last week they're
running well they have orders it's going
to be interesting to follow this
concrete example of workers becoming
self directed in their own enterprise
the second item I want to talk about
this week has to do with President
Obama's State of the Union message and
one particularly important economic item
raised there and now spreading across
the airwaves in a national discussion it
has to do with the minimum wage back in
the Great Depression 1938 to be
particular the United States for the
first time mandated by law a minimum
wage federal minimum wage below which
nobody engaged in federal activity that
is cross border between states and so on
could pay less than a certain minimum
that was deemed
the only decent minimum below which
nobody ought to have to work for a
living and we've had a minimum wage ever
since as indeed many countries do it
reached a high in 1968 in 1968 we gave a
minimum wage that was higher than it had
ever been before not only in terms of
the money that we actually give the
money amount per hour that is the
minimum wage but in terms of what that
could afford to buy what we call the
real minimum wage because you adjust the
money that the minimum wage represents
by virtue of or in relation to the goods
and service prices that a person earning
the minimum wage has to pay so it
reached a top in 1968 and I need to tell
you what it was if you adjust for the
prices today then what we had then was
the equivalent in 1968 of something
close to 10 and a half dollars an hour
it's important to keep that number in
mind because today well let's use last
year as an example 2012 the minimum wage
adjusted for what it is worth now was
seven dollars and twenty-five cents in
other words in terms of what you could
afford to buy with your minimum wage it
was basically declining from 1968 to now
a 40 year period and there were some ups
and downs along the way but a 40 year
period of decline what does that mean
what means two or three things that are
important to keep in mind first
President Obama said he would like to
raise it from the current seventy seven
dollars and twenty-five cents an hour up
to nine dollars an hour between now and
2015 in other words the president's
daring proposal was to raise the minimum
wage to something that would still leave
it significantly below
what it was in 1968 you might call that
a modest proposal it's even modest in
relationship to President Obama himself
because during the campaign his first in
2008 for the first election that he won
he proposed a minimum wage of nine
dollars and fifty cents so he's become
more modest now even than he was back
then second thing millions of Americans
are affected by the minimum wage not
only the several million of our fellow
citizens who work and receive seven
dollars an hour 725 an hour but also
many others who get a little bit more
than that but who are paid because they
are told by their employer look I'm
giving you a bit more than the minimum
wage obviously if the employer wants to
give a bit more than the minimum wage
and you raise the minimum wage then the
bit more would also go up so that a lot
of people are affected by the minimum
wage even if they actually get a bit
more third thing to make sure everyone
understands there are exemptions to the
minimum wage if you are the kind of
worker who earns a tip a bartender a
waiter or waitress and so on you are not
under the law for seven dollars and
twenty-five cents your minimum wage is
reduced and drastically to two dollars
and thirteen cents because your assumed
to make tips for the rest of it but of
course it allows the your employer to
pay you the stunning amount of two
dollars and thirteen cents for an hour
fourth let's compare do all Americans
face a seven dollar and twenty-five cent
minimum wage well there are many states
in the United States last time I looked
about a dozen states in the United
States that feel that that's too low and
so the states have passed laws making a
minimum wage in the state that's higher
than the
725 that the federal government uses and
indeed you might be interested that the
northwest of the United States is in
that regard the most worker friendly in
the state of Washington the minimum wage
today is nine dollars and nineteen cents
an hour not seven dollars and
twenty-five cents the federal and Oregon
is number two with eight dot ninety-five
cents instead of seven dollars and
twenty-five there are states that have
set a minimum wage lower than the
federal and most of them are in the deep
south I thought you might be interested
also in a piece of information about the
country that in many ways is the most
successful economy in Europe and in many
ways the closest to that of the United
States and a country that is doing
particularly well during this economic
crisis at least compared to the likes of
Great Britain Italy Spain France and the
United States I'm talking about Germany
of course so I thought you might be
interested in the minimum wage situation
there first of all the country as a
whole doesn't have a minimum wage or the
way many other countries do they leave
that to bargaining between their highly
unionized and organized workforce and
employers but we can tell by looking at
what the negotiated minimums are across
all the different industries and by also
looking at what several of the states in
Germany have done in mandating a minimum
wage both for public employees and for
any in all industries and enterprises
that are helped by the government which
in Germany are most of them so here and
I've done the work for us here is what
the minimum wage works basically out to
be in Germany eight euros and a half
translated in dollars that would be
eleven dollars and forty-eight cents 725
is the minimum here
1148 is the minimum in Germany 919 is
the minimum in Washington State you
might think that if they make a high
minimum like that in Washington state or
a high minimum like that in Germany that
they would have unemployment because
conservatives like to argue that if you
raise the minimum wage well then
employers are not going to hire the
kinds of numbers of people they would
have hired if they could have got them
cheaper but you would be wrong
unemployment is much lower in Germany
than it is here despite the fact that
they have a higher minimum wage so let
me turn to that key point how much you
pay a worker and how many workers you
hire is dependent on many many factors
the cost of hiring the worker is only
one of those factors how do we know that
well let's do the math back in 1968 as I
told you the minimum wage was the
equivalent then of what 10 and a half
bucks an hour would be now but we had
much lower unemployment with that high
minimum wage than we have today today
the minimum wage has been dropping as
I've told you for the last 40 years but
we have higher unemployment so if
there's an association between minimum
wage and unemployment it goes to the
opposite direction of what conservatives
have argued but of course it isn't about
that the truth of the matter is how many
people you hire and how you pay them is
a function of many many influences
raising the minimum wage doesn't
determine how much employment or
unemployment you have finally and
perhaps most important this is a matter
more of politics and ethics and morality
many people like to speak of the United
States is governed by a judeo-christian
moral code let me ask you a question
by what moral code would you pay a
worker in America for 40 to 50 hours of
work a week seven dollars and
twenty-five cents an hour if you do the
math assume a person works 40 week hours
a week 50 weeks a year has two weeks off
that works out to significantly less
than the poverty level in this country
do we want millions of our fellow
citizens to work at that level you know
by the way that if you're that poor and
you're a full-time worker you are
qualified to get all kinds of government
assistance in effect what the private
employer gets by paying workers that
little and often up giving them no
benefits to boot that employer is
imposing costs on the federal government
to help those people because they're
paid so little if the employer paid them
better they would have less reliance on
tax paid social services think about it
think about what it means to condemn
families children born into families
that get a minimum wage that low it is a
scandal in our society last point will
there be a few businesses that might not
hire as many people if the minimum wage
goes up no doubt there'll be a few but
here's something to think about the vast
majority of corporations particularly
big ones that are paying the minimum
wage for all kinds of service jobs they
are enjoying the ability to pay way
lower than they otherwise could afford
to pay the big hotel corporation a big
restaurant corporations the big home
health care providers they're getting
away with paying people the minimum wage
they're allowed to but if the wage went
up one two three four dollars an hour
they're more than profitable enough to
pay all of that it might eat into some
of the high pays of the top salary
people but they could pay and they would
pay and they wouldn't lay anyone off
because they're that profitable we're
subsidizing high profits by allowing
corporations to pay extraordinarily low
wages and that's what the minimum wage
demand is about let me turn to another
one and this one is one that it's a bit
of a scandal but I want to bring it to
your attention because I think it raises
an interesting question in France and in
Britain over the last several weeks
there has been a scandal around horse
meat if you're not aware of it in France
it is a long tradition of having two
kinds of butchers in the neighborhood
the one that deals in beef pork lamb
chicken and what you're used to and then
another one that specializes in horse
meat which is both legal and regulated
and everything else however you keep the
two things separate according to the
Reuters news service now in England and
also in France horse meat has shown up
in products marketed as though they
contained beef and not only that but a
recent dispatch late this last week
indicated that a good bit of the horse
meat has in it a drug called phenyl
beauties own which is something provided
as a painkiller for racehorses and
things like that and that is dangerous
for humans so now we have the problem
that you may be eating horse meat when
you think you're having beef and you may
be ingesting a dangerous drug many foods
including beef lasagne hamburgers hot
dogs including in Britain in the Burger
King chain and other outlets turn out to
have horse meat why because horse meat
is cheaper and if you can market it as
beef you can improve your profits the
profit motive is contributing to a
dangerous
in the food industry and if it can
happen in France in England well draw
your own conclusions last week as we
turn in this part of the program to more
detailed analysis last week was
characterized by an announcement from
the united states postal system that it
is planning on ending the delivery of
first-class mail on saturdays across the
united states that will lay off postal
workers in sizable numbers worsening
unemployment in the united states and it
will of course affect countless numbers
of people and businesses deprived of
saturday delivery let's look at what
that means and what it represents it is
of course part of the austerity regime
being imposed here in the United States
as it is in many European countries as
well a program of raising taxes for
example the payroll taxes that
everybody's paying more this year than
last year and at the same time cutting
government services in in this case
saturday delivery the post office is a
government activity serving the American
people started by Benjamin Franklin back
in the origins of our country and it now
competes with private enterprises and
you know them united parcel service
fedex and so on let's compare the public
mail delivery with the private delivery
by UPS fedex and so on the public one
was originated and governed throughout
its history right to the present by a
concept of need we need to have a postal
system to keep us connected to one
another to allow grandmother's to send
cards to their grandchildren to allow
the local business to reach people who
live in rural areas out of the way areas
slum areas you name it you might say
that the
postal system is governed by need by
comparison the UPS and FedEx system is
driven by profit one of the first things
that will happen with the end of
saturday delivery is that people will
have to switch if they need something
delivered on saturday from a public to a
private enterprise and that's good for
the private enterprise but it's doubly
good because across the board the price
charged for mail delivery by the postal
system is lower than the price charged
by UPS and FedEx for what they deliver
and that's been true a long time and
there's no mystery about it here's the
simple logic the postal system in order
to accomplish what it does has to pay
for the labor it hires all the workers
that process and deliver and collect the
mail and for all the materials those
workers need to work with the trucks the
bags the sorting machines and so on by
comparison UPS FedEx and the other
private companies they have to pay not
only for labor and not only for
materials but also their price has to be
high enough to secure the profits they
pay to their top executives in high
salaries and to their shareholders in
dividends so that's why the price is
higher with the private competitor in
this case and that is often the case
well let's go the next step what about
innovation to the two sides innovate to
become more productive sure they do the
post office has updated and improved its
machinery it is let go over a hundred
and ten thousand people in a in a
progressive way worked out by the
management and the trade unions that
represent postal workers and indeed UPS
and FedEx have also innovated and used
modern technology but you know we have a
little piece of his
tree that helps understand what that's
all about a few years ago the Postal
Service wanted to run and did run for a
while an ad campaign pointing out that
it was able to deliver mail packages
letters and so on at a price
significantly lower than UPS and FedEx
showing the American people that they
could do better with a public service
fedex and UPS were outraged by this and
went to court to try to get the
government stopped the courts throughout
their case and so they had to go to the
United States Congress where they were
able in the ways corporations are
usually able to get a law banning the
United States Post Office from carrying
out an ad campaign to teach people the
price benefit of using a public system
they were likewise prevented from
offering all kinds of services in the
post office like photocopying and so on
in other words the very private
enterprises that love to celebrate
competition don't want it from the
government and shut it down every chance
they get but the end result will be as
it has been so often fewer people with
good jobs at the post office more
expensive postal services for the
majority of American people and the
shutting down of a public service not
because it wasn't inexpensive not
because it wasn't the fishing and not
because it wasn't self-sufficient
financially it was but because it wasn't
convenient for folks with big and deep
pockets who are driven by the
maximization of profits
and there again is an example of the
profit motive leading to results that
should question make us question that
motive itself as a driving force of any
economic system I want to turn next to a
discussion of the economics of education
in the United States today many of you
have asked about that we're going to do
a little bit then we're going to have
our break in the middle of the program
and then return to it so here are some
items in the economics of education that
I think you might want to think about
the New York Post recently revealed
interesting information about a
top-of-the-line private school in New
York City it's called the Dalton School
and it was involved in a bit of a
scandal recently about fundraising
that's not the interesting question but
in the course of the reporting that
inquiring reporters did they came up
with two pieces of information I wanted
to share with you the Dalton School is
AK through 12 primary school it enrolls
about 1300 children in the upper east
side very elegant luxurious part of new
york city manhattan its alumni include
Claire Danes Chevy Chase and Anderson
Cooper just to mention a few the tuition
this year that is the annual cost for
your child to go from kindergarten
through 12th grade worked out to an
average at that school of thirty-eight
thousand seven hundred and ten dollars
per child per academic year to give you
an idea of what that might mean for the
people working there we learned that the
head of the school the principal at
Dalton earned in 2010-11 in that
academic year for her position as a
principal six hundred and twenty-seven
thousand three hundred and eight dollar
in salary and benefits private school
really is very very expensive meanwhile
across the country in public schools we
have cutbacks in the services in the
equipment in the programs in the number
of teachers in the quality of the upkeep
of the school and everything else how is
this being understood how is it being
worked out how is this process to be
analyzed I think what we're seeing
across the board in the United States is
a ratcheting down of mass education for
most people the public education system
is being downsized one of the reasons
people are willing to pay thirty eight
thousand dollars a year and try to
imagine k through 12 that's 13 years of
paying almost forty thousand dollars a
year before your child is thinking about
college and all that that costs I mean
we're talking now that to send a child
to a high quality school at a time when
the public education system is being
ratcheting down is something that's
going to be affordable only by
millionaires and here's some more signs
of this we are pressuring people around
the country pressuring them in public
schools to take these standardized tests
the idea is there's a test we can
administer to every student everywhere
one and we can measure how well they do
and then we can reward the schools where
they do well and punish those where they
don't that was never the idea of
education the idea of education was
precisely to produce a high quality
education for those who are able to do
it because of their income background
because of their parents because of the
commitment to education at home but even
more to equalize our society to give
everyone an equal chance by providing
even more importantly the education to
the children who come from disadvantaged
backgrounds who don't have the supports
at home who don't have the income at
home public education was to be the
equalizer give everyone a chance to
develop his or her abilities the tests
do the opposite they reward those who
need at least and punish those who need
it the most and that perhaps that's why
such a remarkable thing has been going
on over recent weeks in Seattle high
school teachers in Seattle are saying no
to the spread of standardized tests last
month the staff of the Garfield High
School in Seattle voted unanimously to
refuse to administer the measures of
academic progress m AP tests to their
students they say it destroys the
quality of education the relationship
between a teacher and a school and its
particular student body working out ways
to provide the public quality education
that is everywhere the mandate I think
things are happening in education that
we need to look at and after our short
break we will return to look at it some
more welcome back to economic update
this is richard wolf I want to continue
talking about economic changes in
education one of the things that caught
my eye recently while researching this
topic was a decision made apparently by
Governor Rick Scott in Florida a
commission that he has working down
there to allow the state's public
universities to start charging
undergraduates different tuition rates
depending on what major they're deciding
to study here's the idea if you were
going to study something that Florida
employers want more workers in they
lower the rate whereas if you wanted to
study something that Florida employers
weren't interested in
you'd have to pay more what about this
is Florida the only state no North
Carolina's new governor has been talking
exactly the same thing and other states
are considering it we are going to
organize the education of a person
literally down to the price you charge
to serve the employer and let's make no
mistake if we cheapen the cost of
education at a time like this when many
students can't afford an education when
many students are worried about the
debts they're going into to be able to
get an education you're going to sway al
awful lot of people to study engineering
or nursing or something where the
governor has determined and we don't
really know how that employers wanted so
he's going to give you a price break on
your education we're going to shovel
people into those majors and you know
what will happen as it has happened
before with more and more students
studying those topics where they can get
a college degree for less money there'll
be more and more of them coming out of
there and looking for jobs in florida
doing that kind of work which the
employers will take advantage of by not
having to pay as high salaries because
there's so many of the students with a
major in that degree nice move for the
employer and what about the student do
we want the lifelong decision of what
you study what capacities you have that
you develop let's be honest most young
people 17 and 18 years of age
considering and going to college don't
yet know what their own capacities are
that well they're still developing those
the point of a good college education
was to give young people a chance to
explore their interests and their
capabilities to take courses in a
variety of fields so as to determine
what gives them the most satisfaction
what they're the best at what would make
life interesting and exciting you're
shutting that down by telling them
you're going to take advantage of the
financial mess of the cost of higher
education in this country with
unparalleled debts being imposed on
young people you're going to take
advantage of that by shunting them into
particular majors because you give them
a price break that's good for the
employer it's not good for the mass the
majority of people who deserve an
open-ended college education you don't
solve the problem of insufficient jobs
for the young people come out of college
by grading them into areas before
they've known what they themselves want
and need you do it by creating the jobs
that should be created for the people
who need them rather than bending and
twisting the people to fit into the jobs
that employers are willing to offer
something is wrong with our priorities
and the last thing I want to mention is
about something called massive open
online courses MOC it has become an
acronym that is discussed in the
literature more and more mo o see a
massive open online course that's the
fancy name that's come to be applied to
all those courses online that you can
take at first years ago these were
courses in little interesting things
people might like to learn when they
have a few free hours on an afternoon or
an evening or a weekend technical things
practical things then they started
getting interested in maybe having some
college course type programs open course
then the universities got involved
because this became known as distance
learning a way to deliver college
courses to hundreds thousands hundreds
of thousands of people with one
sir doing a course and that is now
proliferating but I want to raise a
question why is the quality of education
you're going to get by watching online a
better quality education then you would
get by sitting in a room with 7 10 or 20
people intensely interacting with a
person during the classroom before and
after the classroom in a variety of ways
is it going to be better watching maybe
at night after your day work is over
maybe on the weekends competing with
what you normally do then I don't think
so this is not driven by an ocean of
quality education hardly well then is it
driven by a desire to bring education to
large numbers of people well if by
education you mean something of much
lower quality yes and here's something
else if one professor however well-paid
can stand in front of a camera and
prepare a course that is now available
video it's certainly going to be much
cheaper education because you don't have
to pay for a university where students
live and work together and talk together
and go through the education process
over several years in the kind of
intense way with lots of teachers lots
of classroom and lots of interaction
with one another face to face all the
subtleties of what face-to-face means
all that's gone but it's much cheaper to
deliver a lower quality different
experience and therein lies the
explanation American capitalism is
changing more and more of our biggest
corporations are moving production out
of the United States why because it's
cheaper to hire workers in China and
India it's more profitable and therefore
they don't need
need and want the kinds of educational
apparatus that used to be supported in
this country when corporations felt they
needed to have a broad-based education
system to provide the workers the
managers and the executives across the
board they don't need them here they're
more interested in developing them over
there where they charge less money not
just for workers at the bottom but less
for managers and less for their
executives so education needs to be
cheapened here and it is being an mo
sees massive open online courses is a
way to cheapen the cost of education
pretty soon our corporations will say
you don't need a degree from a college
really you can get a degree representing
how many of these online courses you've
taken narrowly focused non face-to-face
distance learning because it'll be
enough for what is needed here sure a
lot of the people will not apply
themselves the rate of completion of
people who sign up for online courses is
very low very few stay with it fine
that's all the system needs and the rest
of the people will not only be
relatively underpaid and relatively
unemployed but relatively less educated
it'll be cheaper for people to pay for
it it'll be cheaper for the universities
to provide it and the educational system
we've had is being downsized and we
ought to be very very concerned my next
economic update an economic update in
detail is devoted to a question that was
stimulated by a remarkable up Ed on the
editorial pages of the New York Times on
februari eleventh it was an op-ed
written by our Russell Rumble
and I want to tell you who he is he is a
veteran of the United States Army after
he completed his army service he became
an analyst for the Central Intelligence
Agency in Washington and he was also an
analyst for the Senate Budget Committee
so with those kinds of qualifications
his op-ed was all the more remarkable
here's what he wrote we ought not to pay
for the wars we engage in and he was
referencing particularly the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan that are still
ongoing he said we should not pay for
them the way we currently do we ought to
pay for them he said with taxes in other
words when the President or the Congress
or both together are debating and
discussing whether to go to war they
ought to decide not only about shedding
the blood of American troops using up
American resources endangering the lives
and civilizations of the countries into
which they go but they also ought to
discuss paying for it the way it works
now is the United States wages war and
borrows the money to pay for it imagine
he asks us if we decided whether or not
to go to war in Iraq and in Afghanistan
by saying honestly to the American
people it's going to cost you the lives
of sons and daughters the mental and
physical health of sons and daughters
but it's also going to cost you two
thousand eight hundred and forty three
dollars a year per family in extra taxes
that would be paying with the national
treasure his phrase and not only the
nation's blood that's a courageous thing
to say because we all know don't we that
if we ask the American people about
going to war
and said to them it's not only a
question of military conflict and all of
the costs of that in life and injury and
treasure but it's also going to cost
each and every one of you as citizens so
and so many dollars in taxes this year
the next year and the next year we might
see a questioning of the war and a
debate on the war much more intense and
realistic than any we've seen but we
don't do that in the United States hence
mr. rumbles remarkable up ed he thinks
we ought to and so do i but whether you
agree or not be clear about this which
mr. rumbles op-ed brings forward one of
the major causes of the deficit we hear
so much about these days the fact that
the government borrowed more money than
it raised in taxes to cover its outlays
that one of the largest contributors to
the United States deficit was the
decision to on top of our regular
defense budget which is in the hundreds
of billions of dollars to spend hundreds
of billion dollars more for wars in Iraq
and Afghanistan which the government
borrows to pay for it's something worth
thinking about in this part of our
program I like to talk about a worker
self-directed enterprise to bring home
the point that these are things
happening around the world some old some
new the one that caught my eye this last
week is a pizzeria it's called or was
called the upper crust pizzeria and
located in harvard square cambridge
massachusetts right near the university
there and it turns out it is about to
change its name from the upper crust
pizzeria to the just crust and what's
interesting about it is that it was a
capitalist corporation actually a chain
of
out 10 or 12 pizzas pizza joints and it
got into a legal hassle in 2009 the
Department of Labor mandated that the
company pay approximately three hundred
and forty thousand dollars to a number
of workers who had not been paid
overtime at least that was their claim
the the case was taken by a graduate of
the Harvard Law School Shannon listen
who's been working with these workers
about it and so when upper-crust partly
in reaction to these suits and to the
bad publicity filed for bankruptcy last
October the company closed ten
storefronts and so the workers had to
decide what to do and here's what they
did decided to do and why I'm mentioning
them they're reopening the pizzeria as a
collective enterprise something that the
workers themselves are going to be
owners and directors of together with
another local business in order to keep
it open and in order to show that
there's another way to deal with
capitalists who behave that way and with
the problem of unemployment whether
you're already unemployed or it's
looming take over the enterprise run it
yourself our hats off to the folks at
the just crust pizzeria opening in
Harvard Square in a new way for a new
future for those folks finally we turn
to the questions that you send in and
that I want to comment about and I've
picked two from the many that you're
sending in and again we very much
appreciate them and we use them not only
to pick these we respond to but also to
shape the contents of our programs the
way for you to participate that we
appreciate here's this question came in
on the electronics before and from a
person who gives us the right to use her
name so I want to thank Peggy Kenny
specifically for offering this here's
her question while our culture presents
democracy and capitalism as two sides of
the same coin are they actually opposed
to one another Wow powerful question let
me try to answer
monthly and briefly because it is so
important and I thank Peggy for sending
it in we are a nation as are many
nations committed to democracy and in
most places that seems to mean the
opportunity for people who live in a
community a cydia town a village a state
a nation to have political leaders
people who make the important political
decisions accountable in other words if
you have to live with the decisions of
your mayor your governor your president
your prime minister then you ought to be
able to select him or her and to make
them accountable to you to remove them
if they follow policies you disagree
with or are opposed to if that's your
understanding of democracy and let's
stay with that for a minute then you
have to face something that is
unavoidable when you go to work in a
private capitalist enterprise you have
to abandon your commitment to democracy
upon entering the front door let's see
why most capitalist enterprises are
organized either as corporations or as
partnerships and basically have a small
number of people at the top who make all
the basic decisions in a corporation
it's a board of directors most
corporations have boards of directors
numbering between 15 and 20 individuals
most partnerships are also small the
typical capitalist enterprise large
small or medium has a small number of
decision-makers at the top and a large
number of employees below them if you're
a corporation in addition to the Board
of Directors it makes all the basic
decisions every day what to produce how
to produce where to produce and what to
do with the profits you have the
shareholders and most of those are a
tiny group of people we call them major
shareholders shareholding is highly
concentrated in the United States for
example 1 % of shareholders owned more
than two-thirds of all the shares shares
are highly concentrated so a few major
shareholders select the board of
directors who make all the decisions in
short when you go to work in a private
enterprise that does most of the
business in our capitalist world system
you are going into an enterprise with
the people who make the decisions are
not accountable to the people who have
to live with them the mass of workers
will be affected if the company decides
to close a factory in one place and move
it to another if the company decides to
use a toxic technology that fouls the
air the executives can escape but the
mass of people can't and when it comes
time to distribute the profits the
people at the top make the decision to
give those at the top big salaries and
to give everybody else as little as they
can get away with in short the
distribution of income in a society the
environmental pollution in a society the
very decision whether jobs will be there
or not are made by a tiny number of
people and all the rest of us have to
live with it that only is that is not
only not democratic it is the opposite
democracy in politics in most capitalist
societies is matched by the strict
absence of democracy in economics
leaving to the following basic political
and moral question how real can the
democracy in politics ever be if it's
absent from the economy well we see that
every day if the economic system
produces and it's hardly a surprise a
core a very small core of people with
enormous wealth sitting on top of
corporations with enormous profits while
the average person struggles to get by
we know which of these two will most of
the time have the preponderant influence
on politics therefore our political
democracy will be hedged about limited
constraint
by the fact that there is no democracy
in economics unless of course the people
decide to use universal suffrage the
right to vote to use politics to offset
the undemocratic nation a nature of the
economy but yes it's a good question
because capitalism and democracy have a
very rocky and conflictual relationship
and are not guarantors of one another
not even close the next question and
final question we'll have time for today
is an interesting theoretical question
I'd like to have these from time to time
because beneath all the details that I
go through there are basic theoretical
questions here's this one is labor
always the source of value when profits
are made is it always true that labor
was exploited meaning that workers do
not get paid the full value of what they
produce good question when workers
produce things think of it this way
workers working today are obviously
helping to produce whatever the output
is but they work together with machines
equipment and raw materials about which
the following is true they too were made
by workers only at an earlier time so
both the labor today and the equipment
and raw materials that labor today works
with were made by workers at one point
or another so all of the ingredients
into production today is labor and so
the output the value of the output is
determined and shaped by the labor past
and present that goes into producing
anything but from that it does not
follow that the reward the payout to
workers
should be the full value of what they
produce in capitalism we know that the
workers don't get the full value of what
they produce because if they did the
capitalists those executives at the top
and even more those shareholders who
have nothing to do with production don't
lift a hand don't move a chair don't
even show up at the workplace ever how
do they get money well some part of what
the workers produce they must not get in
order for the folks at the top and the
shareholders to get their cut now the
point is not that workers should get it
all the point is if there has to be some
set aside for new technology to grow the
company who gets it and who makes the
decision it's exploitation if the
workers who make the goods in value
can't participate in deciding how to use
it in a worker self-directed enterprise
the workers wouldn't get back the full
value of what they produce as individual
wages and salaries they would produce a
surplus or a profit too but the
difference is it wouldn't be other
people who get it and decide what to do
with it and run the lives of the
majority it would be the workers
themselves acting as their own board of
directors who would get a part of the
value they produce not pay it back as
individual wages but they would
collectively decide what to do with it
that's the key issue and that's why
exploitation ends when the workers are
their own directors and no longer give a
portion of the value to people other
than themselves and other than
themselves deciding who to give it to
thank you again for your attention I
appreciate your listening and I look
forward to talking with you again next
week


## Keywords:
