---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SOReweZI92I
---

# Video
Economic Update: What Socialism Needs to Succeed
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SOReweZI92I)

## Transcript:

Welcome Friends to another edition of
economic update a weekly program devoted
to the economic dimensions of our lives
and those of our children I'm your host
Richard wolf I want to remind everyone
that a volunteer Charlie has agreed to
process any suggestions you have about
topics to cover segments to prepare
documents to review uh that can Aid and
support this program in effect we're
inviting you to be partners send
anything that you have for us to look at
to
Charlie doino
438
gmail.com
charlie.in
438
gmail.com today's program is going to be
devoted to politics in particular
politics of the left it's not the
caricature of the left that
right-wingers like to propose in which
all the distinctions among socialists
marxists uh
Independence left-wing Liberals are all
smashed together and made into an evil
awful that's not serious that's that's
the kind of hatchet job that passes for
politics in some areas but we're not
going to bother with it and we're also
not going to deal with the dismissal of
the left that you get from leaders of
the democratic party particularly its
Centrist Wing like the Biden folks or
the Clinton folks who deal with the left
as if it were an irritation except of
course during campaigns when Progressive
ideas are all the rage until the
election is
over no I'm talking about the real left
that is something I need to Define it's
millions of people in the United States
and for that matter abroad who have come
to understand that the problems we Face
are the problems of the whole C system
we live in and that system
change is the solution one way or
another that we are in fact aiming
at that's for me the real
left it has many forms it has many
particular objects of its interest
whether it's the relations between men
and women between white and non-white
Regional ethnic whatever else
people concerned about the planet and
the destruction of nature people who see
the injustices of economic political and
cultural
inequality they understand these are not
particular problems these are particular
aspects of one big problem and that is
the economic political and cultural
system we live with the people who see
that who understand that systemic change
is on the agenda and is what we need
those are the people I call the real
left in the United States you'll find
many of them supporting Bernie Sanders
AOC you'll find some who are critical of
Bernie Sanders and AOC but usually the
grounds for the debate and the arguments
are among people who agree that that we
need systemic change in the United
States the other preliminary to getting
into this has to do with this word
socialism it's a difficult word here in
the United States because so much time
energy and money has been devoted to
demonizing it to making it a bad word to
making it somehow so awful so evil that
people don't learn about it don't
understand the differences among
socialists don't much care and simply
demonize coming out of a religious or
other traditions in which there is God
and the devil and you make your choice
between
them I'm trying to talk to people who
are not in that either or frame of mind
they are open enough to understand that
there might be something to be said for
making making a systemic criticism that
is the problem is the system and coming
up with a systemic
solution well over the last three
centuries the number one tradition that
has achieved that is the tradition of
socialism and by socialism people have
meant many different things just like
the word capitalism has meant different
things to people it's simply ignorance
or malevolence that makes believe there
are no differences it's all one thing
never was and it is not
now but the Socialist tradition gathered
the critics of the system they're the
ones who came up with the convention of
calling it The capitalist system to give
it a name to give it a core which had to
do with the economics of that system the
organization of the the production of
goods and services in a very particular
way with employers a tiny minority and
employees a vast majority but a
production system inside every Factory
office and store which gave a tiny
minority the owners The Operators the
board of directors the power to control
to organize to dictate what goes on
inside the
business the small group was a
dictatorship of the capitalists the
people investing to make money and the
mass of people they were the working
class or the employees or whatever you
wanted to call them but they were at the
bottom in the production system of this
Society they had to do what the
dictatorship of the few the
capitalists made them do on the job you
were like a slave slave that's why they
used to call workers wage slaves hint
hint in case you didn't get it and so
socialism became the framework the
identity the
focus of those who made a systemic
criticism they argued that the Human
Relationships that constitute Our Lives
can and should be changed by having a
focus on making sure that the economy
was fundamentally changed that was quite
different from the way critics of
systems in the past
understood their situation and developed
their strategies for
change the problem is that in the 19th
and 20th
Century socialism the key traditional
critic of capitalism
made a strategic decision that was on
the one hand very successful yet on the
other a problem first the
success socialists barely existed in say
1820 200 years ago today socialists
exist on every corner of this planet
socialist parties socialist newspapers
socialist trade unions socialist
governments there
everywhere the idea spread like wildfire
in the 19th and 20th Century one of the
great expansions of a set of ideas that
exist in the history of the human
race and their idea was very
particular the problem of the system we
live in they
said was the private profit driven
capitalis
that's partly why they called themselves
socialists their interest wasn't the
private individual making money their
interest they explained was in making
the community including the economy work
for everyone be a
social institution not so much a private
one a social institution that put the
people as a whole front Center not
making everything Hostage to whether or
not some private capitalist founded
profitable to hire people to produce
things
Etc and so these socialists began to say
we have a strategy and a vision for the
future something better than
capitalism and it begins in
politics because capitalism brought into
being universal suffrage the idea that
everybody should have a vote and so the
Socialists quickly
understood that the majority of the
people in every capitalist Society are
the
employees and that the owners the
employers the capitalists are a tiny
minority so they said let's use the
vote we're the majority we can change
the society to make it serve all of us
without the intermediary role the
middleman if you like of the private
profiter the private
Enterprise and they look to the
institution of the government the state
by winning elections we capture the
state if the people who have the state
now the employer class put too many
obstacles in the way will make a
revolution just like the French reevolu
reolution or the American Revolution
moved in that way when the peaceful way
of doing things simply didn't
work and so the
Socialists organized political parties
to win governmental power which they
have done over the last 200 years in an
increasingly common
achievement they also decided to fight
the battle in each workplace in the
factory the office in the store by
forming labor unions that could contest
with the employer right there where
production occurred and the big
socialist Alliance of course was then
the Socialist Party trying to take state
power and the labor union trying to be
the base of that state power the the
majority inside each
workplace the state became the focus the
state if you captured it would be the
way to move a society away from
capitalism and its focus on the minority
who have the profit who control the
industry who become the dominant wealthy
because of that
Etc socialism became a commitment to the
state to manage
things and therefore there are three
kinds of socialism in the world today
the Scandinavian or Europe European
where the Socialists win a government
that regulates industries that remain
private that's what you have in Norway
Sweden Denmark Western Europe and so on
the second model of socialism the Soviet
Union where the government not only
regulates but takes over the private
Enterprise and runs production factories
offices stores as governmental owned and
operated Enterprises
and then the Third Kind of socialism is
a hybrid of the first two a mixture
that's the People's Republic of China
huge private capitalist sector huge
government-owned and operated sector and
a Communist Party controlling the
government that supervises them all
these are alternative kinds of socialism
but they have one thing in common it's a
focus on the state the state is
regulator the state is controller the
state is owner operator or mixtures of
them and that became the great struggle
of capitalism and socialism in the 20th
century more government government
intrusion government control socialism
less and less government involvement
capitalism private versus State that's
the way the argument was
put that worked to spread socialism
globally but it also produced the
decline of socialism in the last 30 to
40 years something was wrong something
was missing in socialism that gave them
on the one hand the great success of
growth in the 19th and 20th century and
the stalling of their growth pretty much
the second half of the 20th century
getting worse and worse as the years
passed in this second half of today's
program we're going to identify what was
wrong what was missing and show how a
socialism for the 21st century by
repairing the Omission by fixing the
problem can give a whole new impetus to
what socialism can and probably will
mean in the century just now
beginning stay with us we've reached the
end of the first half will be right
back welcome back friends to the second
half of today's economic update we were
talking in the first half about
socialism its success is in growing in
the 19th and for much of the 20th
century it's becoming a global phenomena
we talked about the differences among
the types of socialism but we ended up
with my pointing out that socialism has
hit some kind of problem time in the
last 20 30 40 years the 21st century is
not experiencing the further growth of
socialism that we saw in the 19th and
20th now part of that is the Relentless
opposition to socialism that the cap the
supporters of capitalism have always
waged part of socialism's difficulty has
been the enormous repressive effort put
against it everywhere in the world it's
in an amazing success story that it
spread and if you understand against
what a kind of Oppression and repression
it spread well the success is more
impressive still and yet it's in trouble
now and I want to say what I think that
is but before I do I want to say that
every movement that has ever developed
in the world had on the one hand
pressures against it that it had to try
to
overcome but that sometimes its own
difficulty was not only about the
repression against it but also about its
own decisions some of which had to be
acknowledged as either wrong-headed or
maybe good ideas but whose time has
passed I'm going to argue that that's
exactly what happened to socialism very
good idea built it in the 19th and 20th
Century but is now a problem the very
success of socialism exposes its problem
so let's make that
argument socialists in many parts of the
world are now
governments Russia for a long time under
the Soviet Union the People's Republic
of China now refers to itself as
socialism with Chinese
characteristics the governments of
European countries several of them are
now socialist parties that are in power
virtually every government in Europe has
had socialists who've been presidents or
prime minister socialism now has a
record not only as it did in the 19th
and early uh 20th century as a critical
movement against capitalism but
socialism now has an identity as a way
of running a society and therein the
problem
arose because when socialists grabbed
the state either through the electoral
process or through revolutions or
sometimes mixtures of
both we now know what they did in
Scandinavia and Western Europe the
government became an overall director a
controller a regulator even in the
United States there were examples of
that in the Soviet Union the government
became the actual operator owner of the
Enterprise sort of like the United
States government post office or Amtrak
or the Tennessee Valley Authority and
then there were the mixtures here in the
United States 95% private a very small
governmental sector in the People's
Republic of China kind of 5050 and in
the Soviet Union 100% the government but
here comes the problem wherever the
government took
over whatever it did the regulatory
examples of Western Europe the control
examples of the Soviet Union and even
the hybrid examples of
China what has not yet been shown is
that the socialism was actually able to
overcome the economic and political
inequalities that plagued capitalism
that plague it to this day as we can see
when we look at Elon
Musk or Jeffrey Bezos and the vast
majority of Americans having trouble
feeding themselves giving their kids an
education and all the
rest socialism didn't
deliver it didn't deliver the promise of
an equal Society
a just Society where everybody starts
more or less on the same Level Playing
Field and can use
their talents their Drive their ambition
to get as far in life as those qualities
make
possible and the people in modern
society know it they're no longer
willing and able to follow the argument
if only the state is brought in more
than we can do yeah didn't
work so I prefer to go in a different
direction and say those socialists who
did all that in the 19th and 20th
Century who focused on the state who
hoped and dreamed that the state would
enable them to make the change of system
from capitalism to
socialism they did and they dreamed
productively but they overlooked
something they omitted something and
that's something is what held them down
now what plagues them now what prevents
them from being the beacon to draw the
work in class together
now it's not a mistake so much as it is
a failure to recognize an omission and
to repair it it to fill it in to do what
you didn't do before not because what
you did before was wrong but before what
you did before wasn't enough and you got
to do something else and here is the
argument to change the relationship
between private Enterprise and the
government to give the government more
or less interference control
intervention whatever you want to call
it
that doesn't change here we go now the
basic
organization of
production the actual lived reality of
Human Relationships inside the factory
inside the office inside the
store when the Socialists took over they
didn't change that very
much where socialists took over nothing
was more frequent than the joke of the
worker gee it isn't all that much
different than it used to be whatever
the change from capitalism to socialism
meant it didn't include a revolution
inside the
workplace it made big changes in the
relationship of the government to
private capitalists controlling them
regulating them replacing them whatever
it was big over there and the macro in
the large picture but in the daily life
of the working class the vast
majority whether the government
regulated industry or not whether the
government was the industry or not they
came to work around 8 or 9 in the
morning and they stayed until 4:00 or 5
in the afternoon and they did what they
were told by the supervisors and the
employers who made all the basic
decisions that the mass of people had to
live
with
socialists kept their revolution in the
community and in the larger society they
never brought it into the
core of the production system they
omitted
that what could they have done well the
answer is human history for thousands of
years working people whether they were
villagers or slaves or surfs or
proletarian
workers have had dreams of a way of
working radically different from what
they were subjected to a way of working
that was a community of equals who got
together to produce something the larger
society
needed they wanted to do that as an
community of equals
we have seen efforts to do that in every
society in every
religion as a noble effort to break out
of the dichotomy master slle or the
dichotomy Lord surf or the dichotomy
employer
employee what socialists could have and
should have integrated into the core of
what they're about is not just to bring
the state and Society in to the economic
decisions to not let a small minority of
capitalist owners profit driven be the
intermediary who decides
everything that's not enough and that's
what the 21st century is teaching
socialists it's not enough it was a big
step it was an important step you made
huge gains you established an important
law of society being directly involved
but Society has to be directly involved
inside every Factory office and store
too it turns out that socialism faced a
question it did not come to terms with
here's that
question
maybe it's the
case and let's put it as a
question can you sustain a socialist
Revolution that puts the state in a
powerful position in society as a whole
without putting workers in
a powerful position inside the
workplace I think history's answer to
that question is you
cannot you cannot even sustain the
socialism you were successful in
establishing in starting with the
Russian Revolution and spreading ever
since you weren't able to save it to
preserve it to sustain it and maybe
question maybe was that because you
didn't change the reality
inside where people
work the factory the office the store
and that other place where people work
the household Soul the
family
maybe the revolutions that changed
families when slavery gave way to
feudalism that changed families
again from feudalism to capitalism maybe
the whole concept of family has to be
rethought reer stood
questioned socialists have to have the
daring to recognize the omission of that
level of society when the Revolution was
discussed fix it bring the revolution
into those areas from which it was
excluded if democracy is the central
principle we want to uphold then we have
to democratize the workplace
too democracy in the workplace is the
opposite of the autocratic dictat Ator
ship of the
CEO in a business of the owner of the
operator either you live in a community
and understand the community as
necessarily Democratic or you
don't socialism can reimagine itself
redefine itself and become even more
powerful in the 21st century in my
judgment if if and to the extent that it
offers a vision of a new workday life
that's where most adults spend most of
their lives at
work and work can be a democratic
community that you enjoy that you want
to go to where you learn where you are
nurtured in your relationships with
other people not a place of being a
drudge being a drone and listening to
the orders of employers whose only
interest is making money versus building
a society a socialism with that kind of
vision that will be a socialism that
builds successfully on what it did in
the 19th and 20th Century but also
recognizes what it didn't do what wasn't
enough and what will be necessary to win
the support of the mass of working
people in the years
ahead thank you very much for your
attention as always and I look forward
to speaking with you again next

week


## Keywords:
