---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BGYuKz5Qvn8
---

# Video
Elinor Ostromâ€™s Design Principles for Institutions
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BGYuKz5Qvn8)

## Transcript:
I would like to go over Eleanor ostrom's
seven principles for Designing
institutions
and let me give you the context for this
in a moment because it's really she's
doing a study of a particular type of
institution but first I just want to
read out the the principles so you can
get a sense for where we're going like
if you're designing an institution you
need clearly defined boundaries of that
institution you have to account for
local conditions you need Democratic
participation at least in the kind of
institution she's setting up here which
relates to Collective action you need
monitoring you need graduated sanctions
which is actually the the item she spent
the most time explaining and you need
conflict resolution mechanisms between
people and you need recognition of a
group's right to organize their own
institution so first quickly before I go
through each of those what is the
context for her book what are the case
studies she's looking at and she's
actually looking at the development of
Institutions by small communities
and not just by small communities but by
small communities doing a specific thing
and that thing is that they're managing
a common pool resource which is
oftentimes a river that comes through
and irrigates people's crops sometimes
it's a fishery sometimes it's a forest
that the community shares and
um basically if you overuse that
resource you degrade the resource and
everybody in this small town is going to
be harmed by that and the classic
example I think from the book is that
the tone that has a river that's going
through it where the river will dry up
too quickly if people overuse the water
and that means that you're only going to
irrigate your crops for part of the
season and then the river goes dry or
the Water Source gets depleted and you
can't finish out growing your crops so
that's bad for everybody so to manage
that these are all cases where the town
came together and came up with this
Council where everybody in the town came
everyone had a vote or sometimes the
votes were by household or sometimes the
votes were by property ownership ship so
there are going to be different rules in
the different cases she looks at but
they're all trying to make sure
everybody only draws enough water such
that if everybody draws that amount of
water they can sustain this this river
that was the context and she's trying to
figure out how can communities develop
their own institutions without the
government coming in and doing it for
them or without private firms coming in
and doing it for them and one of the
reasons I'm really excited about this
concept and I think we need to actually
understand this is because we live in a
time when we're trying to figure out how
do we manage uh digital resources such
as social media algorithms artificial
intelligence algorithms and right now we
have a lot of private company
involvement in doing that we have a lot
of government involvement so the
question is can communities come
together and govern themselves when you
have one of these Collective action
types of problems going on now it is
worth noting that in these historical
examples she's looking at there are some
traits of those communities that are not
necessarily going to apply to digital
Industries for example a lot of times
these communities have really
long-standing personal relationships
with each other they know that their
kids are going to inherit their land and
their grandkids after that so they have
an incentive to do the hard work to set
up an institution and make it last
through the years she also points out
that there's a bit of a homogeneity in
the amount of assets people own like the
firms were roughly equalish and like
homogeneity and culture a lot of the
problems we have in managing resources
today are are very different than these
cases but still I think the principles
she comes up with are really really
insightful so the first rule clearly
defined boundaries is that if you're
going to have a community that's
governing that that lake or that River
you need to clearly Define what are the
boundaries that you're managing and an
example of a violation of this would be
a case she looked at where everybody
sort of had a time period that was their
time period to draw water
and that sort of limited everybody's
water drawing to a certain amount so
that they could sustain the river et
cetera Etc but the the and of course
like they had maybe like a hundred
different time periods for the 100
families that were watering their crops
but the government came in and said
actually we're going to add a few extras
we're going to add 10 more people to
your time window ticket and the
community of course felt like violated
and they felt like wait how can I trust
this institution which requires a lot of
investment in monitoring each other it
requires a lot of investment in
resolving conflict so the amount of
community investment from each person to
to maintain an institution like this is
really high and if that if the benefit
to them if they're a little window of
time when they can irrigate their crops
if that is something that someone from
the outside can come in and degrade so
that they get less of that resource then
it's no longer worthwhile for them to
actually maintain the institution
so you have to have clear boundaries on
what does this group have a right to
self-govern and to make sure that
um that other people from the outside
can't come in and encroach upon both the
benefit and the efforts of them doing
that the second principle here is that
the institution needs to account for
local conditions and local conditions
here can be things like variation in the
rainfall throughout the year or are
there certain times when you can predict
there's going to be an overflow of water
and people might think it's not fair for
somebody to have their time slot when
there's an overflow and other people
have a time slot when there hasn't been
a lot of rain for a while and maybe that
varies by the season maybe you can
predict it by looking at the sky so if
you have an institution from the outside
that doesn't understand all of those
local conditions then people are going
to feel like the system's unfair when
they feel like it's unfair they may not
invest as much of their energy and
maintaining this whole rule structure
and following the rules and monitoring
each other so it's important to match
all of the rules and all the structure
you're coming up with to this specific
conditions on the ground her next
condition is democratic participation
and of course this just means that the
people who actually are drawing the
resource and abiding by the rules those
people have a say in creating the rules
so that they feel like there's this
mutually beneficial relationship while
they you know they adhere to the
community guidelines but that feels fair
to them because everybody else is and
because they have a say and she also
points out that Democratic participation
is important for like understanding the
local conditions and building the local
conditions into the rules you come up
with and so Democratic participation is
really more efficient
um because it means somebody's going to
bring up some some issue with the the
way the fish reproduce in the lake or
whatever that that
um if they didn't have a democratic
voice they might be off doing their own
thing and they would never bring up the
issue with the fish and if that's not
accounted for then the set of rules that
make up the institution don't really
work
oh and I should stop here and say like
what do we even mean by an institution
um it's basically like nested sets of
rules where there's sort of
constitutional rules that guide the
Democratic process and then there's
rules that the group comes up with that
they feel is a fair way of allocating
that scarce resource and then there's
rules about enforcement and how do you
actually make sure the rules are
followed to maintain the scarce resource
so it's these nested rules and it
includes things like who has the right
to monitor who has the right to enforce
what what are the benefits guaranteed to
people who participate it's it's this
whole structure that people set up
including norms and official rules on
the book that sort of make sure that the
community cooperates in not drawing too
much water the next rule is monitoring
that there has to be monitoring to make
sure people follow the rules and in her
setup it's the community them so who
monitor each other so they're both the
beneficiary of the resource that doesn't
dry up but also they they have a work
that they have to put in to make sure
other people don't violate the rules
which can cause a collapse in in
everybody violating the rules if they
feel they're being taken advantage of
and the next rule is graduated sanctions
this is actually the longest section in
this part of the book so she noticed
when she looked at the community
guidelines and these historical small
towns she noticed that a lot of the
sanctions were really minimal they were
kind of like a slap on the wrist or a
small tax that was certainly not you
know worth the water that they drew that
they shouldn't have drawn and so she
asked the question why are the initial
sanctions for people who violate the
rules so small
and she came up with a bunch of
different reasons one of them that I
thought was particularly compelling is
if you have a sanction that's too large
that creates resentment and resentment
tends to play itself out in some
negative ways both in terms of like
violating the rules even more just to
like have spite toward the person who
caught you and sanctioned you but it
also can play a role in terms of that
person not communicating or not
participating in this process and this
this is a fairly fragile process like
these institutions can fall apart easily
if you don't have this constant upkeep
and monitoring of the rules and all that
so if you have a couple of families in
the community that feel resentment
toward the system that's going to cause
backlash that can can play out in terms
of degrading the institution itself
So to avoid that the initial sanctions
are low and the sanctions get bigger as
um repeated offenses happen
now she pointed out some other reasons
for the graduated sanctions so one of
them is there could actually be a
benefit to having people sanctioned once
in a while and the benefit there is that
everybody is not going to cooperate with
the rules of the institution unless they
feel like everybody else is cooperating
and that's not going to happen unless
the you know methods of detection are
actually working
so if a couple times a year you have
someone who's sanctioned in a little way
it shows people actually yes this
community is effectively detecting
people who violate the rules they're
effectively addressing it and that means
you can trust that most people are
following the rules because you see them
being enforced once in a while
so it could actually be good to
occasionally see that and of course
everybody's going to be tempted to take
more of the resource than is there fair
share so occasionally giving into a
temptation is not going to destroy the
whole system what's going to destroy the
whole system is if someone does this
over and over and over so that people no
longer trust the system itself and the
graduated sanctions sort of takes care
of that oh and by graduated sanction
this means small sanction for initial
violations of the rules bigger sanctions
As you move along and
um yeah the more times a person violates
the rules the bigger the sanction for
them will be conflict resolution
mechanisms are also going to be
important in the system because it's
impossible to have rules that account
for every possible scenario and every
possible like difference of opinion of
how to interpret the rules
and what you need to sort of sustain
this system is everybody buying in
everybody believing everything's fair
and one helpful example she gives is
let's say you um part of the rules they
come up with is that everybody has to
contribute one person a week to help
clean the canals before the season where
the canals will be used so that's a
reasonable rule but what if one of the
families sends like their nine-year-old
kid or their 70 year old grandparent is
that a violation of the rules and you
can see people getting upset about that
but having ways that they can come
together
resolve the dispute that might happen
over that and perhaps build that dispute
into the rules moving forward so that
everybody knows it needs to be an
able-bodied adult over the ages of 16
and under the age of 50 or whatever you
you need these conflict resolution
mechanisms so that people don't get
upset and degrade the institution
now of course if you put that in rule in
place then there's there's the
determination of what is able-bodied and
you could have disputes over that but as
long as there's a mechanism for
resolving those disputes people will
still trust the the system
and then the last one here is the
recognition of a group's right to
organize
and this one kind of goes back to the
initial example I gave where the
government came in and added a few more
people to the rotation and everybody
thought that was unfair
um the government needs to recognize
actually that group is handling the
enforcement and the management of that
resource and they have a right to do
that because if people outside the group
you know think the group doesn't have a
right to organize the group is
vulnerable to all kinds of attacks of
sorts from the outside so these are her
rules for building an institution in a
community to handle Collective action
problems


## Keywords:
