---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fpq_t2WHZf4
---

# Video
Evolving Pattern Language Towards an Affordance Language (Almaden, 2018/05/08)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fpq_t2WHZf4)

## Transcript:
David David Angus here he loved this
almost 30 years 28 years yeah so good
friend and collaborator with a slow
start but I'll let I'll let him
introduce himself you've got quite a
track record visiting and to hear his
talk all right thanks
thanks Raphael it's always interesting
being a retired IBM if you have to exit
the company
I recommend exiting feather I agree
because you can offer the benefits like
that that's really good so I've been
doing research and it occurred to me
that on the pattern language stuff I've
been pushing this since 2014
I'll explain why I've been doing it but
when I talk to people about powder
language it turns out that they don't
know all the history and so much of this
is going to be a history of science talk
there's actually 50 slides I didn't go
really quickly I'm here for a week but
here for a week so I'm happy to unpack
all of this but the the purpose of this
is to get to give you a feel of the me
and I've been working since 2014 after
trying to push forward the pattern
language work and with plop and the
purple sock and so there used to be a
lot of IBM words over there than a few X
IBM right now probably everyone that's
been in the field has been retired so
this really is a history of science talk
for some of you who actually lived
through it you'll actually get toss all
the time through it so I've been trying
to push to work for pattern language
towards an affordance language the
affordance language is in the last two
slides and so I'm actually not going to
talk about that but that does nothing
I've been working on so just give
background on myself
start start from the back so I was I be
M for 28 years IBM Canada which does not
have a research division had multiple
runs are getting into research in
Hawthorne led a first-of-a-kind project
which I'll explain which didn't go very
far but it came out much later and but
what's at the beginning of IBM business
I've been consulting before it became
GBS before it changed though actually
have all that history and during that
period when I left when I retired from
IBM I was asked by some unnamed IBM
where's X IBM er to start an idea and
business partner which I did they asked
me to be 50 percent chief scientist
there was 110 % CEO and I said and sign
up for this
so I extricated for myself from that and
have been for finishing my PhD at Ulta
University and so I took some years off
and actually wrote it I told my wife
that I wouldn't do any commercial work
until I actually got the manuscript done
which I did that's not but published of
the book open innovation learning and
Jim spore or had written the foreword
for me we could've been a lot of stuff
in service science together and so now
I've formed a new innovation collab in
Toronto with 2x IBM errs and we're
figuring to do it's new but it'll be
stuff associated with a book and so in
my career at IBM if I go all the way
back when I joined IBM 1985 I was a
dropout from the ph.d program at the
American British Columbia primarily
focused on decision support systems I
got hired into IBM to do econometrics
for IBM Canada so a lot of the stuff
Lily and Lou was working on graph staff
came up and we're working on that at
that time so it's a long time ago after
that I kind of went into a really
interesting project with metaphor data
interpretation systems where this is
predating the talent relationship that
IBM had with Apple and so as a midst of
all that and so I'd go back on a visit
where I where the office used to be and
of course that's where the Google
headquarters is now so what I want to
talk about is essentially three ideas
and I really gonna go through these
quickly 1964 1991 and 2012 starting off
with Christopher Alexander notes on the
synthesis of form loops of 1996 which
was quite important and then
Alexander's latest work in 2012 which is
the battle for life and beauty on the
earth which has to be the gutsiest title
ever talking about the
school that he built in Japan in 1985
then I'm going to come back inside of
IBM a little more talk about 1993 with
the formation of the hillside group
where the pattern language started in
2002 in 2000 2006 we start getting into
some of the stuff where a pattern
language that the core of the IBM Global
Services method and you kind of go did
have a method until
PricewaterhouseCoopers came over and
thought there for the teachers
consulting and dissected it so this is
the problem and I don't think that you
can actually get IGS method inside of
IBM anymore because they were notes
databases that were eradicated so the
people understand all that stuff IBM
said very good about it moved a lot of
it out into into Eclipse and the
architects workbench project the Steve
Abrams was leading was part of that
initiative so all that stuff is based
off pattern language but you have to
have been through all of that the kind
of experience and know what it's all
about
so for 2014 this is where I am now
trying to focus on moving pattern
language specific ways towards wicked
messes and service system thinking so
we'll see how far we get on that ok how
many people actually know a pattern
language book ok this book is available
in practically every library in the
world in a major library so 1977-1979
and and and though if you're gonna
recruit for Alexander the way I
recommend you read Alexander is you have
to start with a 2012 book and work your
way backwards because he's he's actually
like a scientist and so he's changing
his language and people go all the
trying to figure out what he was saying
in 1977 like oh but if you actually look
he actually changes his language so
people are confused and this is one of
the problems that happen the pattern
language community is they're all trying
to look at this book and say well this
is the answer but they don't quite
understand that the pattern language is
actually in effect what an IBM we call
the work products and the timeless way
of building is the processes the
timeless way building that the
foundation of almost all the stuff that
happens in agile development and and
this has to do with a chain of people
working on it
the Oregon experiment was in putting it
into practice which is doing
the urban plan for the University of
Oregon campus and so he's a builder is
actually working on stuff and as he's
going along so pattern language comm is
still up Alexander is still alive but
he's no longer active so at the
conferences they have a few videos from
down then but up to giving him speaking
anymore
there's the 250 V patterns on towns
buildings and constructions I talked the
name of the house an example of a
pattern and this goes kind of from large
to small pattern 159 light on two sides
of every room and so essentially the
idea is that people like buildings have
lights up to decide the room if you have
a narrow room it doesn't mean it feels
funny so you do stuff like well this one
I just like but you kind of blocked off
now coming up two sides so you know but
that is a pattern in the way they've
done it the pattern is agent as he
describes it they you see we use of
light positive outdoor space it connects
to other patterns and if you have jacana
this is a now there's issues with the
pattern language book because now we're
working with the technology of paper
we're predating wiki and so the only way
to publish this thing with the publish
it by Oxford press the books are public
for Oxford press and they will not
release the copyrights on it so even
though the community would love to be
able to update the patterns they can't
take the patterns because a copyright is
frozen by Oxford University Press but
they've got this extract on it and so
when you can see the light on two sides
of a room there are higher order
patterns and they're lower order
patterns so they connect together
somehow here's another one is an example
which is intimacy gradient it's the B
gradient is interesting because it's
been applied not only in physical space
but also in social space and so into
semi gradient have this idea I'll give
you the the net is that when you walk
into a house very few people make it to
the front door if it's raining you have
the mailman step into the house go get
out of the rain for a second that's as
far as he gets you know your friends get
to the living room you're really good
friends may come the parties always end
up in the kitchen
hardly anyone ever sees your bedroom so
if you go to an instant gradient where
you have an apartment and you open up
the door the first thing you see is the
bed it's just weird
right so that's that sort of thing that
interests me Grady it has and so this
sort of thing also applies to you look
at social media and so I've taken this
idea because I'm all over Facebook and
you know Google+ all the start stuff I
do want blogging but there's actually
stuff that my family if I use Facebook
for family I don't use it like
multi-value Facebook just for family I
use Google+ for also things you know and
that's just the way I do it because I
understand this gradient so this is I
just running joke which is uh close to
you to David in the questions having
Pennycook for you yet because I haven't
habit of invading people's homes of
cooking this is what the pattern
language looks like in 1968 this is from
the pattern manual and so you see all
these patterns are linked together so
why do we want it three types of help so
we want the unique features of each
special building it tells which patterns
consider first with once you consider
later and you obviously want to the
bigger ones first then work on the
details it tells them which patterns go
together and so the pattern and the
language there's one person have nine
community it says I want to understand a
pattern and then I'm gonna stay in lane
there's no you have to understand a
pattern language in the way that
Christopher Alexander actually expressed
it and they may want to change that bd8
from that but the idea pattern language
itself is this network when you get to
focus on just the pattern you say oh I
want this just as one thing it's like no
you're missing the point
it's a language okay so the definition
and this is from the original pattern
Mendel 1967 Alexander founded the center
for environmental structure at Berkeley
in the architecture program and the
format says whenever there's a certain
context exists a certain problem will
arise the state and pattern will solve
the problem and then that should we
provide in the context so essentially
three ideas context problem so and and
its solution in effect which is the
pattern now this is a 1967 and so you if
you actually do the diligence you'll
find out that the language changes a
little bit
okay so 1977-79 1994 how many people
know the Gang of Four book okay now here
is where the
breaking point is the Gang of Four book
dauntless cities was at Hawthorne he is
the guy that actually led the pattern
language stuff and when he died you can
see all of the accolades in the computer
science writing saying who we lost
someone really really major like really
major you the guy that's driving all
this I was working with with Ian Simmons
in IBM Research he comes up to me he
says I had the world's best programmer
working on my team I go how could you
possibly say that he said I've gone both
cities on my team I said okay
maybe you do have a program on your team
because these guys have a hot war and he
said literally what he would do is they
they would hit an intractable problem
and they had to call John and give him a
problem and in 24 hours he would come
back would be elegant it'll be simple
and it's like you know how do you do
that I don't know but this is a pattern
line guy this is how he did it so so
1994 is when this book came out in 2005
Jim kopelyan
was working on organizational patterns
and so he's taken the idea that that
comes from architecture has gone into
software and heating up organizations
so to give some history now or some
context for this Jim kopelyan he was at
AT&T Bell Labs he is now the chief
methodologist the scrum plop so the
scrum he is the chief ethanol business
so what is this guy doing and they're
actually the scrum QWOP they have an
online community I see they're actually
gonna release a book I think it's called
with scrum book but he's all this goes
back to all this history ok so this is a
Copeland's definition which gets a
little more complicated you know the
pattern name you have a problem you have
the context you have the forces the
forces is an interesting problem in the
description when you talk about physical
forces it's kind of like well you can't
put this in front of that because it
will be strong enough to support this
you know that sort of stuff you get into
but it's different considerations or
different ways of assembling the pattern
but after you have this and you put a
solution to that problem you have
complex he'd also suggested that you
have to explain why the rationale is
done and they're related problems so
there's actually a lot
and a lot of people go back to the
original 1993-1995 hillside stuff when
they start doing the formatting of how
do I write a pattern and and this is how
you do it so we get to oops late in 1996
Christopher Alexander gets invited to
oops law this talk is on YouTube and it
gets published in IEEE Tripoli software
in 1999 and I did a blog post on this
because it's actually pretty close until
you get the last third of the book What
did he say in effect and this is a
really really famous talk
he says firstly I'm an architect I have
no idea what you software people gave me
into to patterns okay okay
but then he looks at what they're doing
and saying you guys have missed the
point on patterns what you guys are
doing is using the pattern language to
write software in a more efficient way
that's not what it's about
the reason we use patterns and
architecture is for beauty we're trying
to get to a higher aesthetic than one
thing to change the world and so so this
gets into the issue of what we call
quality without a name and so Richard
Gabriel is an interesting guy this book
is available I call them one of the gods
of computer science now in 2014 when I
started looking what's this guy doing
because he's one of the founders of plop
pattern language of the programming
conference turns out he's at IBM it's
like oh well that's a really long and
narrow road and it's kind of start
contacting just for help me contact them
they say wow this is an IV ever who
doesn't even answer his email you have
to go to his external email so anyway
the idea that he was looking for in what
Alexander calls is quality Loden name so
why is it the building feels great so
why does this feel good to be here in
this room and you can ask the same sort
of questions well the software that
you're building why is the software
great like what gives it about the
design so I was I was talking Raphael
that Gabriel has this interesting
article he's famous for it called worse
is better and so his argument do you
want great software or do you want bad
software you actually want bad software
because if it's bad and you learned it
you could actually
prove it if it's great you're stuck
there's nothing you could do that feels
oh it's great
don't touch it but then the world
changes right and the same sort of thing
happens with ward cunningham who
invented the wiki and war disasters wiki
have to be ugly and he says yes it has
to be ugly because if it's beautiful
people will not edit a page so these are
sort of things have come out of Christie
Alexander's thinking and and through the
community so over 50 years Christopher
Alexander has done these so you start
off with notes on sentences before we
talk about the process of designing
goodness is a fit in 1965 he writes the
city is not a tree and this is talking
about a mathematical semi-lattice so
when you're connecting those patterns
together how do they connect it's not a
strict tree it is a lattice because the
bottom nodes connect to each other 67
the pattern manual at which starts at
Berkeley 68 a pattern language generates
multi-service Center that's the first
work and I like using this particularly
for service science because what he says
in it is ok so we're back in the night
in 1960s and they haven't figured out in
government yes that when giving city
services for people who are homeless you
have to give them medicine you have to
give them tiled Karia to give all these
types of things I'm in design a building
we're doing all these properties all
together into one building that was
revolutionary back then he also says I'm
not an organization guy I don't do the
organization stuff my patterns are about
the building and so so that's what
happens there there's an article in
1967-68 called system generating systems
where he is a now trying to explain the
systems theory behind what he's doing
now I wish he had participated more with
the system's community I was president
international society but system
sciences and Jim was one of my speakers
in the conference in San Jose State in
2012 and we have a whole community that
understands biology and sociology and
all these sorts of things
he's coming out from purely a physics
standpoint and so he's trying to get
this idea of generating systems and sis
was a whole 77 the pattern language book
time his way of building he wrote the
origins of pattern theory he's working
out the openness Magna is actually the
2000 to
five the nature of order it's a
four-volume book on what is order and
and people try to understand how that
fits in and they don't quite understand
as we got these papers underneath but
complexity theory sustainability and
morphogenesis generative codes and then
empirical findings from the nature of
order cuz he's trying to be a scientist
you know I have these patterns I have
the wins way of seeing the world how is
it actually working out so the problem
that I've been having with the patent
line pattern language community is
they're all frozen back here and they're
kind of going oh we pick and choose that
from up here and I'm going you need to
understand what this that he was doing
he was increasingly increasingly working
on spatial and stuff physical geometry
which doesn't necessarily apply to
software and it doesn't apply to social
systems so if you're taking that case
you should stop and do little reflection
on that okay so let's switch to the
second part hillside group how many
people know that Moore Cunningham
invented the way okay Ward Cunningham
invented the wiki specifically to create
pattern language Ward Cunningham is in
Portland Oregon
those not the guys invented Wikipedia he
invented the wiki technology
specifically for the design patterns
movement an IBM like what Ward said is
that there were as many people inside
IBM working on design patterns as it
were outside of idea that was how big it
was at IBM so the design pattern stuff
this is actually really old so this is
probably like 95 and they have this sort
of stuff and eventually the hillside
group which was formed in 1993 they have
their own website hillside dotnet it
still looks the same
they haven't not very good about
updating stuff but they move some of the
pattern stuff over so they have their
own website 1997 this is where I let a
first-of-a-kind
project I had dig up these slides it's
pretty interesting in 1997 this was a
Watson research with consumer driven
supply chain that's a retail industry
unit that doesn't exist anymore it was a
really interesting endeavor it took me
nine months to get to the general
manager of Ivan Consulting Group II
asked why are you here and what do you
want though guys in the research folk
want you to say okay
is that what they want they don't want
money you know what no they want to say
okay okay and I went back to the folk
people say thank you very much for
improving our process it took nine
months to get a the folk approval
they're saying it's supposed to be an
easy win easy kill it takes money mutton
salt so that's why the poke was but the
idea was that we would have a technology
and we would have a supply chain
reference model built there we were
working with Steve heckle of the
managing by wire idea executable
business models is originally what they
were called Enterprise Builder with the
technology we had the marketing models
because we're working with industry and
we had alignment with the enterprise
support systems cross industry product
people so I was needing this project and
the reason they got killed was really
one of those IBM things that happen
Rondo sepia who was leading this was in
Boston and he says the way that IBM
finance want to do this the funds that
are going to research they have to float
through my business unit if they flow
through my business unit I will lose
money I will kill this project before I
allow this money to flow through my
business users the project was killed
so it started Ellis work and we never we
were prepared to go to the first
customer and get sign up stop
thank you okay so 1998 while installing
this project at loop slob there's a
system of visioning workshop ralph
Hodson which consulting the IBM Tom
bridges from IBM Canada dubbed McDavid
was enterprise architect and so I was
there I wasn't one of the original
people but at that point we're looking
system inventing technologies and
discussing this in 1998 tie-in in 97 so
you have Rachel Bellamy I think she's
still around Thomas Ericsson just
retired
John Thomas just he'd retired a couple
years ago and and you have this idea
Tariq several the paper lingua franca
for design sacred pattern the favorite
places in pattern language so these
people are actually all interested in
continuing to have discussion on pattern
languages if you really want two
thousand two because this is an article
by John Cameron on the IBM Global
Services map
is published and so that's why I can
actually talk about it everyone it's
published and so what is in this thing
you have a work products what was the
problem
IBM had in the area of object
orientation you had the Bhoots method
the Rambam method you have the yak
absurd method and IBM is going up to
clients and saying you want to do this
they go ok but we just did ashlar Mellor
method and so it's try to rationalize
this literally because IBM would come
out and do a management consulting
project and and say this is your
strategic direction here's your IQ
strategy and then the IT implementation
people come and say we need to do this i
key strategy work is at IBM i just paid
you half a million dollars to do that
what why'd you guys talk to yourselves
because i'm not gonna pay you again did
these gravity work you've already done
and that was fundamentally why the work
product base Bethan came about and
meanwhile we've got progress on the
architects workbench project IBM systems
journal there is a technology that was
developed didn't become a product in the
way that we look at it it actually was
part of the rational toolset and you see
elements of it kind of hanging around
but this thinking is there but it's
forgotten right so 2007 eclipse on of
open unified process this is the IBM
Global Services method externalized now
I just checked open this page is on
archive.org it is not on eclipse anymore
because no one uses it so there is
actually tooling available that was
developed and all the stuff is there so
what's it look like
here is what it looks like so we're in
the equipment of the Eclipse process
framework Composer is actually the tool
and there was a rational tool that was
associated with this but you have more
content you have more coordination you
have the work products it has all the
activity processes all the estimation
this is how you've run a consulting gig
and it was all worked out 2006 wiped out
IBM with the acquisition of
PricewaterhouseCoopers who said ok well
you know IBM we bought us because we've
got to thought that we were you guys
know how to consulting IBM was doing
consulting fine for
PricewaterhouseCoopers came
and now we reasonably don't have a
method is because they didn't understand
all the stuff that had been done in
research before to develop all this
right so IBM in 1992-93 hired hired a
principal from Booz Allen actually teach
IBM consulting so I'm one of those IBM
errs then and and the practice later
came in and said we have all these
really smart IBM works and they have no
skills you guys want to go into
consulting ok we're gonna teach you
three weeks of consulting school two
weeks methodology training so I'm a
certified argument consultant actually
not once but twice
but meaning ok pattern language so I'm
interesting John Thomas who just retired
who retired a couple years ago has
started blogging again on pattern
language so March 2nd and he also
received a sick high like time service
like that so those guys around he's in
San Diego you want to talk pattern
language he wants to talk pattern
language he really wants talk pattern
language now he and I have not talked
about this stuff because I'm going a
different direction from him but he is a
traditional approach that's kind of
extended from what you see in research
ok 2014 where am I and I trying to go on
with wicked problems and service system
thinking so in to 2016 I wrote this
paper for the Perl conference this is a
architecture conference this is not a
software development conference and my
proposal was that we should do service
system thinking so in this paper which
very few people have read but loved
discuss with people they have the ideas
Alexander had some great ideas but it
doesn't apply for everything it doesn't
apply the social systems he is a
building architect and when I deal with
the people there the conference they go
well we know how people software not
what we do for a job
we don't know thing about services we
don't do that so we have service science
coming in this is a typical in stupid
manufacturing definition we have
services what's different about services
is that it is interactive
the stuff that Alexander was looking at
you have the building and the building
sits there and it's non interactive so
we need to adjust the way that we look
at patter language and move towards
something more interactive which is not
only just about the way that we manage
software but this is where all the
design stuff comes in because design as
a field itself move from product design
into interactive design so you have the
same sort of split the design community
okay and service science is kind of
where that comes so going back in
history I'm now back this is a blog post
that I have on Christopher Alexander
horse brittle and West churchmen these
are three professors that are all at
Berkeley in the late in the 60s and into
the 1970s and what I've been doing in
effect is going through and working with
all their grad students their grad
students are retired now that's how long
was it okay West churchmen you joined
Berkeley and he's one of the founders of
operations research that's how old he is
he was leading the space sciences
laboratory and eventually retired into
Peace and Conflict Studies he is he has
Russell a cost PhD supervisor he was
also I'm Mitch Roth PT supervisor I'm
going to see ion on Friday he lives up
in Oakland and all this stuff is there
where we have in effect the whole
system's movement there Horst Rittel was
hired at the same time as Alexander into
the same College and from thorn man
who's one of the grad students he's
actually a TA for Horst Rittel he says
both Alexander riddle were at what time
would call the design methods moving in
architecture and these guys in the same
building and church Woods in the
building next door and so they can't
drop a lunch it so my question is what
are they what are they talking about
lunch you know how much can you take
from one to the other you've got
churchmen working on social systems
you've got riddle who's focused on
environmental design but he's really an
urban planning kind of guy and you've
got alexander who is a building
architect okay so I mentioned
Alexander's 1968 systems generating
system so while I examine system
thinking you have the idea of a system
as a whole and the gen
reading system system of the holes not
an object this empty system generating
what do you mean by generating but his
idea was that a functioning building the
building and the people in together form
a hole so this is a guy architect
actually recognizes that people live in
buildings which is good the people their
architects it you know build the don't
consider the people but that's where you
design the system and so he's saying
that the building systems created so far
have do not generate holes at all ok
what do you buy generating a hole a hole
what and that's a lot of the language to
end up working with run for Alexander
riffle on the other hand wrote this
article in 1973 called dilemmas in a
general theory of planning this is
actually published by West churchmen in
management science about two or three
years earlier and he and churchmen cites
riddle and then a couple years later
publishes it but he came with idea of
what are called wicked problems people
know wicked problems ever heard of the
term wicked problems right
the problem is that people that actually
have read the taco would get problems
I'd say they're gonna solve a wicked
problem they don't understand what a
good problem is the wicked problem is
not solvable so there's a lot of people
writing now but solving with the
problems it's like no this is wrong what
you need to do is go back and read the
original article there are 10
distinguishing properties of planet egg
problems
so a team problem you could do an
exhaustive formulation you can figure
out mathematically whatever it is but
there's no definitive formulation with
the problem you go to everybody and ask
what the problem and have a different
answer so all the stuff deals with with
social systems and how you actually deal
with a problem in social systems so go
through 10 of them churchmen is is
focused on the systems approach the
system approach is puts in morality
religion and aesthetics into the system
and the reason is that the system's
approach has rationality in it but you
have to use of rationality with the
other things combined so he actually in
suggests that you have to face the
reality of these other enemies and deal
with the enemies because you're not
dealing with the enemies we're not
taking a systems approach
the problem is the reality the enemies
cannot be conceptualized approximate or
measure first man was a professor of
metrology the philosophy of measurement
and the question is can you measure
something and so if you're looking at is
this a better system what he's in effect
saying is there are parts of the system
that you create that are not measurable
and no matter what you say it is not
measurable so I'm trying to change the
language a little bit from the idea of a
wicked problem to a wicked mess
I am the trough use the term wicked mess
a mess a mess is traditionally called
formerly called problematic it is a
system of problems you have a system of
problems the dynamic system complexity
and you in order to get a solution or
moving forward actually intervention in
the better term in order to have an
intervention you will fix some things in
a mess and they'll create other problems
and then you have to fix those ones
right but it's a choice you have it's a
never ending thing okay so this is one
of the advantages of going so it last
last October I went to purple sock which
was in Austria that I went to plop it
which is a cm in Vancouver in the splash
and this is max Jacobsen this is one of
Alexander's grad students he's now
retired he is one of the co-authors of a
pattern language and I have him on the
audio recording saying pattern language
is not for wicked problems okay so I
have a whole community now called purple
sock which is on social chains using
pattern language for wicked problems
like you guys need to rethink this a
little bit think a little deeper because
if you think that everything that could
be organized like a physical space then
you're you're off and so that was a
really valuable thing for me that to
have one of the authors of a pattern
language saying you're doing is kind of
all wrong we get into complexity what is
complexity and complicatedness let me
give you the example simple example the
list for example an egg is a complex
system
if you beat it so if you have yolk and
you have white it is complicated because
you can take it apart put it back
together once you beat the egg it's a
complex okay that's a simple explanation
for the formal definition in the systems
theory and complexity area a lot of
people start getting into killing
measure complexity that's the wrong
question
complexity is I can you measure how much
the egg is beaten it's like well no the
question is whether is it still egg
white and egg yolk and should you beat
them together and create a complex but
talking about how well it's mixed like I
don't know so we certainly start the
definition for the systems theory that
start kids are tripping us up now one of
the things I've been doing is moving
away from from the idea of systems going
inside to going outside and I believing
a lot on what's called ecological
anthropology ecological psychology and
the ecology doesn't mean what you think
it means so let me let me go through
this definition so the best way of
describing the ecological approach is
that's not what's inside your head but
what your head is inside if you go back
to the period of 1950s this comes in
behavioral psychology and Pavlov's dog
okay you ring the bell the dog salivates
how do you explain that during the dog
you know so you kind of have this thing
going on where you're trying to get
inside the head of the of the dog
understand that there's an alternate
approach which the ecologic approach
James Gibson with studying pilots and
what he's asking is how does a Navy
pilot land aircraft on a carrier okay no
matter how much you get inside this
guy's head it's not really going to help
you got both things moving at the same
time so how is it you do that that is
the ecological approach and to do that
he created the term affordance now I've
been suggesting that we might look at
these and and the way I've been doing
this in service science I've been
suggesting that you might design
affordances and in this way so you could
have a high high building a low ability
person so if you're coming in this
building as an example so there are
steps if there are steps a high ability
person can actually walk up steps it's
not a problem
a low building person in a wheelchair or
on crutches I just had to kill these
tendons on crutches and get all the
stuff up front starts having challenges
so do you design in one system that
handles both the high ability person
with affordances or do you design two
systems either one is valid you go to a
hospital they have an emergency room
specifically for special cases and they
run it differently so that is a
complicated system you run an emergency
separate mental patient but you can also
a complex system where everything comes
in together and you have to deal with
that this has led me into ecological
anthropology Tim in gold and this is
where the research partly comes in so he
Tim in gold was invited to the ifip
meeting at the end of 2017 so I could
work in group 1 2 which is the social
theorists for computer science
and so I went throated through Dublin
and he gave this talk but this is an
interesting paper so what's the
difference when you start looking at
things from the ecological perspective
and he has what he calls humid
correspondents which I prefer to call Co
responding because it's its agents
responding to each other so you need to
understand that that human beings
operate on habit rather than volition so
when you are walking are you walking or
is or as a walking you you get these
sorts of issues because you don't think
of consciously about walking agency
rather than enter the rather agencies
rather than agency and he talks about in
effect they're coordinating between
people and the way that you depict this
is two people going together to the
beach as an example so they're they're
together they're not joined together
necessarily but they work together and
finally attention now they've read the
intentionality and so you actually get a
group together this group is jumping
into the pool their concern is not
whether the pool or not their consumer
they're gonna run into each other and so
they're paying attention to each other
the intention of getting into the pool
is actually secondary to the a tension
this is sort of stuff that happens we
work on the ecological approach now we
have a say Ford thing happening in and
this is Kelly's 2020 15
paper we talked about a cognitive era
because we're moving towards an area
being where it's actually more
technological so when you start talking
about invented reality augmented reality
you need the type of ecological approach
to to keep yourself straight because the
philosophy is changed so what I'm
suggesting is that we're going through
another turn and philosophy it's going
to call the material turn because there
there's a lot of interest now and
research being done on bakers and the
makers make things real and so that's
the term we're looking at I have a
pattern for for service system thinking
I'm not going to go through so much now
but let me give you an idea about it the
pattern label voices on issues you want
to know who is related to the service in
the Alexander patterns everyone is free
to the same Alexander had this idea of
Turkish carpets and there's a carpet on
the left and there's a carpet on the
right which one do people like more and
this is a one that Richard Gabriel
actually does quite often he says I know
everyone agrees that the carpet on the
left is more beautiful the one on the
right it speaks more to them except the
computer science people who like the one
on the right and he says the computer
size people must be wrong and I'm going
not as consistent if it's a service
orientation it's not just about the
carpet is something in the human being
you have to be concerned with the
interaction so we want to get people put
into the pattern language the affording
values you want to know why it's put in
the spatial temporal frames what happens
is that we end up looking at Heidegger
and and interpreting Heidegger so when
Heidegger wrote about place and being
yeah a lot of people interpret that at
being in a single place so in your
building it's kind of like oh this is a
great building I'm experiencing it but
they don't think it Heidegger actually
doesn't exclude looking at the building
over time but with philosophers look at
being they don't necessarily look at
becoming so how does this building age
over time how does it change the field
change over time these sorts of things
that we should take into consideration
of spatial temporal
we have containing systems are slower
and larger and we have contained systems
that are faster and smaller so the
original one where I showed you all the
patterns are all connected we need to
recognize that when we're doing stuff we
need to always have that bigger system
and smaller system at the same time and
I've done this for some examples which
I'm not going to go into so much minding
children in the in the center now Ward
Cunningham and this started to 2011
created federated wiki if anyone's seen
thinner a mcgee this is interesting
technology and the question is what is
wrong with Wikipedia Wikipedia is based
off a single a single inquiring system
the inductive consensual enquiring
system and what that means is if
everyone agrees the world is flat the
world is flat because it also had that
would be PDF I'm actually running down
right now I've been I've been holding
off on one there's on the Gestalt page
someone cites COFF Kafka saying the
whole is is greater than the sum of the
parts actually what he said was the
hummus the whole is different from the
sum of the parts but what's happened is
people are now citing the Wikipedia
definition because that's what they see
and everyone thinks it's correct it's
like no it's actually wrong so what Ward
has done is trying to figure out how is
it that you have multiple perspectives
multiple realities actually baked into a
federated wiki and the idea would be
that you could actually go and have
people update pages and pass back links
so if someone modifies my page I know
they've modified it and he's been doing
it and now I go to node NPM install wiki
that's how easy it is but people aren't
using it because they'll quite
understand it I've been trying to I've
been involved with him and I did some of
the stuff so I did a wiki of federated
wiki with a pattern language stuff in it
and I put some of the stuff in there so
I had some experience with it like to
have discussions about how we might take
this different direction because there's
stuff missing in it in particular the
thing about wiki if we're talking about
Co responding and thinking about those
arcs when you're drawing the
semi-lattice all the circles these are
all the circles where are all the edges
were all the connections between them
they're invisible but on a pattern
language it's act
see what ties everything together and
that was important and we're missing it
because it just buried there they're
invisible what I've been looking at
recently this is the systems biology
graphical notation so these guys looked
at UML they looked at system gone from
the assistant engineering community and
they're saying this is not enough
biology we actually need better modeling
tools and this has been working since
2006 now I haven't actually looked at
this hopefully we'll have an opportunity
to look into this what does this have
that UML doesn't have but tabal ism has
the idea of time built into it so
whether you're looking at living systems
or whether you're looking at software
that's going to evolve learning software
ai learning augmented intelligence stuff
metabolism or time is going to play a
factor
and so cincy people are already done the
work I'm going to try to rest on their
shoulders and the theory is coming this
is a 2014 publication by Tim Allen who
was a speaker at the 2012 meeting he's
forum president the ISS and he also
writes with John Petro marathon petrol
but we're getting to hold on and this is
what I'm reading right now I'd like you
on the airplane I was reading Arthur
Kessler hold on the book kind of try to
get the definitions in the ecology
literature whole lawns have become a
really big deal so hold on is both apart
and a whole at the same time it's like
oh what's that mean how do you model
that so that's sort of so I'm interested
in working discussing work here so on a
different track it's going to wrap up
now this is the book that he published
it's on open innovation learning-dot-com
it is available as a free download
unless you want to pay for Amazon I
think I have a whole dollar now I've
earned a dollar since February because
you can't charge zero on Amazon I try
actually you can charge the lowest price
the best way to get this is actually on
Kobo you go to Kobo and download it and
the PDF versions so thank you for your
time I will be around for a whole week
if there's any ideas that spark and you
want to talk I'll be hanging around
wrapping else you can find

yes
is there any so do you skip a couple of
slides okay so um yeah I'll go back to
this one yeah okay so yeah so this one
so the original pattern that that came
from Alexander essentially the idea was
that you would come into a multi-service
Center and he didn't want a person
behind a hole-in-the-wall desk sort of
formality and so what he wanted was to
have a person of the clipboard and come
and say why are you here today do you
need to see a doctor you need housing oh
oh I see you have children with you why
don't I take your children and put them
over in the play area over there and so
there's this pattern that I've converted
because he's concerned about the
physical space and so he says okay for
the child minding area it should be
visible a 2d walk in the door you want
the client to be able to see oh that's
when my kids go send the kids over there
that supervised if it suits you know
five-year-olds of 12 year olds this sort
of stuff that's the pattern but socially
he doesn't say anything so let's change
that to social what's I mean in a social
sense
so voice is on issue so how do I need
children so for a client what services
are available to me now and on
appointment so I come in and it's like
that's the question that I want to know
that's the answer what I want for a
parent what can I do my kids will I'm
busy
for a child what can I do while my
parent is that the multi service center
so you need to put the actual rules back
into the pattern language because right
now Chris for Alexander it's like the
building is beautiful it's beautiful for
everyone you kind of go I don't know
what the children really care about the
beauty right affording values so leaving
a children a supervised area so the
whereabouts are known availing distracts
our toddlers routines so coming to
parents is less of a chore what is the
value of that service because he doesn't
do value per se spatio-temporal frames
when and where does it matter the
facilities and programs are known both
the children and parents in advance of
appointments they're not even gonna come
into the building if they don't know
that the child care because
if you've got a homeless person with a
child like what I'm good with my kids I
have a doctor's appointment and it's
like whoa no it's all there oh it's
actually there then you have to
advertise or promote in some way or put
on the outside of the building but then
the people have to know the community
have to know oh don't worry about it
just take just go there they handle
everything right the containing systems
for the extended family schools and
community workers what personal
responsibilities inhibit service
engagement
so now it's not just the parent who's
there for the childcare you start
getting into the city well how does the
city relate to this how do how do the
health you know all these other services
and then you get the faster and smaller
for other parents at the multi service
center would you look after my kids
while I look after yours so do you
actually just staff on multi service
center that are acquiring more money and
now you're getting reductive so this is
this is one that's in the paper that I
had written in 2006 just trying to give
an example but if we were to do a
pattern language service systems like
I'm not wedded to this this is my first
stab at trying to say buildings on the
way Christopher Alexander with a pattern
language problem context solution not
enough we need to do that different way
I mean there's so much which is really
interesting
nah not not as recent but computational
yes yeah especially the things like
printing now
has there been any theory in terms of
how architects our architects well the
question I have is our architects using
a pattern language still problem in
theoretical standpoint and if so has
there been any evolution of it in terms
of thinking about it from a
computational design okay so the system
generating systems paper the place
finally got republished is in a
computational system computational
architecture approach so that so they
aren't interested firstly the pattern
language is not widely used in
architecture a lot of people
misunderstand it and in essence the
challenge comes what they understand
systems theory or not because if you
understand what it's doing a why it's
doing it how things put together that's
all kind of makes sense but if you're
coming out from a different point of
view it's like why are you doing this
stuff like you know so the joke
originally and one of the other
countries I have in architecture in the
1960s before Alexander ruled the book
there was a book that came out called
problem seeking and the idea was
architects do architectural programming
and this is you think about what
software architects do but the idea was
that you do problem seeking before you
do problem solving architectural
programming is problem seeking finding
system systems worth fixing right after
you've got that you do the problem
solving and so when we start talking
about the problem seeking all the stuff
kind of ties in with the stuff of
mapping design of talking saying about
why there's a connection between design
thinking and systems thinking and that's
why they have the attraction because
design thinking is focused on the
problem solving not so much on the
problem seeking
yes yes my dear friend what are they
yes Systems Theory yes and that's
language a part that anyone understands
but that's exactly exactly sort of thing
that we're looking at and so in the book
that I wrote yes that the distinction is
actually there and so yes yeah so how do
you come up with these is a use case
probably what they do what Rafaela say
sounds very familiar with the whole
device iki processor just be considerate
of users and takes that perspective and
I never be empathetic to ya so part of
this is is BDD behavior driven design
right and so I see I understand that
because I was a consultant doing ID
strategy at IBM so I'll go all the way
up and down the line but this is
consistent so the idea would be could
you actually create a language that is
more consistent that goes directly into
BDD which goes directly into agile it's
like yes you can but now you're chimp
you're talking to management consultants
and Benham to look look look at our
language doesn't that is so now we're
back into the period of I mean Global
Services method we're like okay we have
the management consultants who are
talking to the implementation people and
we're charging customers five times for
the same work problem yeah yeah and then
how do you think this piece of wool is
gonna be used so
do you think it's a predictive type of
the prescriptive or a predictive type of
usage or it's after the fact that it it
you can use it to describe it analyze
okay there's a difference big difference
yeah yeah so this comes down to the
divide between the hillside group and
the Gang of Four design patterns book
Ralph Johnson one of the co-authors will
actually tell you we sit down with them
that they're coincidental they did not
work together the design patterns book
came out at the same time but the design
patterns book is a catalog it is not a
language per se Christopher Alexander in
the 2012 book when he describes how he
created the high school who's a high
school University combined in Japan he
yeah the reason I like it he actually
goes through and and does a pattern
language for that community so his idea
was that you create a pattern language
every time so every building you go to
there's a new pattern language does that
mean it could be reused yes it could be
reused when you start getting into Nazi
now you're getting into okay totally
circles and arcs how many circles are
there how many arcs are there between
the circles you're in vector I into the
problem I've been Global Services method
how many ways are there to model it and
will customers pay for all the different
ways kind of like now after certain
point say it's all the same so you're to
answer your question it could be used
both prescriptively and descriptively it
depends on how you want to approach it
and it's valid either way like if you
get to client engagements are exactly
the same to service at design same way
it's kinda like yeah but then you start
talking about well how much is it
different and when you say different
this is when I start getting into let's
understand affordances in a deep way and
understand what that language really
means because so teaching in design
classes it's really funny ask you know
how many design students at masters
level how many have heard of the word to
affordance it's like one hand goes up so
it's the same sort of thing I've talked
about pattern language computer fights
people I talk to designers they afford
this is like okay maybe a little more
education on this
can you send more about the difference
between a catalogue and a language okay
so the the the catalog is focused a
little bit too much on the parts because
if you think of it as a system so the
design patterns book is a system it's
meant to use as a whole book if you
start taking pieces out of that book
it's like while you're taking the engine
out of a car or you're taking the lungs
out of a system well is that still valid
well you could try taking any lungs and
putting with your body but it may or may
not work so the idea that alexander had
was no i'm working on specific project
there's actually now one of the better
papers one that jim cochlea like Jim
cope doesn't like the with Chloe's
working there's a pattern
there's idea of a project language and
this came from Alexander late in his
career and Japanese architect he's
working with so in Japan they have
pattern language and project language
where you'd have pattern kind of as the
grandeur or sort of thing like the book
and then you get down to the project and
you work on it and you modify it but
then you ask well you know how does the
project feedback in the pattern you go
yeah that's the interesting question so
it's a mathematician to me is elector
for probably in experienced
practitioners when they do something
it's it's a reference to say oh yeah I'm
missing anything right yeah to make sure
the assistant is complete but to appoint
the mechanisms that mechanisms that well
so so given that I wasn't I be M lucien
architect if this architect I've worked
in that so the IBM reference models are
really great but you need to the
customer teamed up scan the reference
model is a reference it is not the
design right it's a reference and then
you can modify from that so pattern
language could be the same way that we
have the pattern reference and the
project language who could do that
okay I'll be around if you wanna know
where I am
ask Raphael thank you



## Keywords:
