---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bZT-zmcsCSw
---

# Video
Exposing Police Trainingâ€™s Rot | Samantha Simon | TMR
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bZT-zmcsCSw)

## Transcript:
we are back and we are joined Now by
Samantha Simon assistant professor in
the school of sociology and school of
government and public policy at the
University of Arizona author of her
recent book before the badge how Academy
training shapes police violence Samantha
thanks so much for coming on the show
today of course yeah thanks for having
me so uh your research took multiple
years uh you embedded yourself and and
studied uh these four large Municipal
police departments in the South um all
cities right mid to larger cities in the
same state in the South which is pretty
specific I mean can can you explain a
little bit more about your methodology
and why you chose to confine it to just
one state and also to urban areas as
well sure sure so as so my general
research method is ethnographic uh which
means that kind of as you um alluded to
I embed myself as much as possible as
close as possible to the social
phenomena that I'm interested in
studying
um so what that means though is that one
person cannot be everywhere you do have
to make um methodological choices about
what places you're going to study um so
I did limit it to one state some of the
reasons for that um one primary reason
was that um states do have specific
mandated training um for theems in that
state so I did want that to be
consistent um but I did want to
introduce some variation across
theems in important ways so for example
these cities veryy red across
demographic compositions um so the
Departments did as well uh and they
differed um kind of significantly in the
political context um of the you know
individual City so those are a couple
ways that they varied also in size to
some degree um so I was hope I was
hopeful I was curious if I might find
some variation across theseis even in
the same state context um but to my
surprise I did not find um very much
variation in the findings that I
ultimately had
yeah and your findings are very I mean
it it just makes so clear how this bad
apples myth um and I know you address
that directly but like the this is
something repeated by many politicians
including Democratic ones about how
there are just a few bad apples on
police forces and you got to punish them
and weed them out where you know your
work just paints an entirely different
picture of police training can you
explain why that myth is persistent and
why it's not necessarily something that
drives with uh the reporting that you
did here yeah yeah of course um I mean I
I completely understand why bad apple
arguments are sort of an appealing
attractive explanation for many of our
different social problems that we have
in the United States um it's an easier
solution so if there are just individual
sort of egregiously violent egregiously
racist offic officers with you know bad
intentions um for getting into policing
in the first place if we can just simply
detect them um pull them out of the
occupation then problem solved right so
it's a very appealing um explanation for
this really deeply rooted problem um
what I found you know after spending a
year at these police ummies was that
this is a much bigger problem than
simply um you know identifying and
removing individual officers this is not
an individual problem
this is an organizational process that
takes place that selects and then
socializes new officers into um a
worldview and a way of physically moving
throughout the world um that emphasizes
danger threat suspicion and ultimately
really requires the use of violence um
so this is a socialization this is an
organizational problem that would need
to be addressed rather than you know an
individual level issue yeah I mean you
you talk about that constant
reinforcement of the danger in the world
um can you give our audience some
examples of how that was a a significant
through line in all fourmies that you
that you studied yeah yeah definitely so
that that emphasis on violence um that
emphasis on um escalating violence
really like there was a sense that there
was an
intensifying um war on cops that you
know the risk that officers were um
taking on as part of their jobs was
getting worse um this was communicated
in many ways at these acmy so for
example um at all the acmis I you know
spent time at they would often show
really graphic videos um
repeatedly of officers being either you
know brutally beaten or killed U while
on duty and these were real videos of
course um these were real incidents that
had happened these were real people
these were officers who had been killed
um but the takeaway message really like
over and over again in showing these um
videos was that you know at any turn at
any moment this could be their fate as
well if they did not you know maintain
their vigilance and stay constantly
prepared for violence um this was also
really hammered home through um
different sorts of exercises so for
example at one academy uh the cadets um
after having gone through sort of a
tactical exercise or exam where they had
to demonstrate different uh competencies
and and tactics um the Cadets who had
their gun taken away during one of these
exercises by their instructors were then
required to write their own obituary
that night um and bring it back the next
day so these were you know really it was
it was um it showed up in many different
ways throughout the training but was
really emphasized by these trainers that
if these Cadets did not heed their
warnings if they did not um train that
this could you know ultimately be how
they um die it it's not it's not
commensurate with the reality of the
situation I mean I'm just looking at
some of the the fatality injury rates
for different um professions in this
country logging workers uh people that
work on airplanes roofers garbage
collectors delivery drivers Farmers
agricultural workers crane operators
construction Highway Maintenance people
who work on cement I mean uh like these
are all mechanics Small Engine mechanics
these are all professions that have a
higher uh fatality rate that or fatal
injury rate I should say than that of
police officers but that doesn't seem to
uh penetrate there because it seems like
they're purposefully kind of ret
traumatizing themselves to get
into a specific
mentality yeah yeah and and I think it
is true I just want to acknowledge that
um there is sort of a a
um it's it's a different thing to die in
a logging accident than to be killed by
another person right so I do recognize
that there's sort of a difference in
that fear or that experience for
officers um but it is true like
empirically policing has not gotten more
dangerous and I think that's really an
important point to emphasize that
despite this Narrative of there being a
war on Cops there really is no empirical
evidence to support that narrative um
policing has not consist instantly over
time gotten more dangerous there's of
course sometimes a peak year um but over
time it's just not true um and kind of
what you allude to like there are other
risks to police officers that um are
actually you know more relevant like
wearing their seat belts um for example
uh officers often don't wear their seat
bels and um you know will die in car
accidents at higher rates then they are
you know being killed but that's not
really discussed of course as a real or
pressing threat in these Academy
settings it's certainly not in the way
that um you know violence is yeah it it
it returns to that kind of uh
reinforcement of danger there um and and
your point about how policing has not
actually gotten more uh dangerous is an
important one because you also write
about how in these there's often
discussion of how it's never been harder
to be a police officer can you talk a
bit about that and how you know that
fits into the culture around policing
within the context of the black lives
matter protest yeah yeah so this was a
sentiment that I heard you know
throughout these academies throughout
that year that you know policing that
that we were in a political moment that
was so intense that was so divisive um
and that was targeting officers uh so
for example I you know remember one
conversation I had with a Corporal at
one of theems where he was telling me
you know that that it was harder than
ever that it was more dangerous than
ever to be a police officer that he
would never allow his child to be one
though in fact his son was applying to
be um a police officer at that time um
and I sort of asked him you know like
well what what period of time are you
comparing this to um and in terms of you
know resentment towards the police there
have certainly been periods throughout
um you know history in his own life
frankly um where that has been true um
and his sense of this his response was
that you know well in the 60s and 70s
for example that was a movement that was
the Civil Rights Movement now it's not a
movement was his you know perspective on
this but rather it was a targeting of
officers that people were out there
specifically just hateful of officers
and targeting them tracking them down to
Ambush them and kill them so there was
this um idea for him and for other
officers as well that the political
context was different that the black
lives matter movement was in fact not
necessarily a movement um not in the
same way that they perceived the Civil
Rights Movement um you know in hindsight
to to have legitimacy um and really in
general had uh um throughout the The
Academy training uh trainers really just
were quite dismissive of um any of the
arguments made by any kind of activists
frankly it's uh it's something that you
know is persistent I think in in my
profession and in covering these kinds
of things where you see how people are
able to compartmentalize history once
it's settled as opposed to recognizing a
continuation of Dynamics in in the
present and when you're a cop I mean
that's an even uh more of an uphill
battle honestly uh for for that very
reason because it's
it's a challenge to your identity and
and your professionalism in that way to
look inward um what what also struck me
about your book was how it doesn't just
replicate some you know violence and
fear and or police training and racism
but how people who were outside of a
very specific traditionally white
masculine mode of of uh policing or who
they were were kind of um shunned out of
the way and weren't necessarily welcomed
into the fold can you speak a bit about
there was one I think it was Adam who
he's referred to in the book uh one
person who was mocked for not
necessarily being as strong as some of
the other people in the academy and and
how did that kind of shake out yeah yes
so I write about that in the last
chapter of the book just kind of who who
makes it to graduation you know what
kinds of cadetes What kinds of these new
officers are considered a good fit for
this institution and and why um so Adam
is an example that I use um to really
illustrate this point because you know
in many ways Adam would be considered
sort of a traditionally um ideal
conception of what a police officer is
he's kind of tall he's like six feet
tall he's white he's a man um he's from
the south and he was really really
excited to be a police officer he really
wanted to be a police officer um but he
was not particularly strong um he didn't
do particularly well and defensive
tactics or in the physical fitness
training and he also you know got a lot
of laack from his Trainers for using
sort of an expansive
vocabulary um one of his you know uh
trainers complained to me that um you
know he was not an author that he should
be writing the way that the newspaper
reads um so there were a lot of
complaints about this trainers just
really relentlessly mocked him and um a
few other cadetes that were you know
really targeted throughout the academy
um both to his face and you know behind
is back um the other cadetes knew about
it they talked to me about it um it came
up in interviews with other you know
cadetes that there were um definitely
you know uh Cadets in the class that the
trainers would kind of pit against each
other um so yeah he really didn't in in
some ways he fit the mold in other ways
he really didn't um and in particular
just his sort of inability to fight to
physically fight in the way that the um
Academy trainers wanted him to really
put a Target on his back um he made it
pretty far he made it almost almost to
the end um and throughout the academy as
I watched I continually heard trainers
talk about we want to fire him we need
to fire him we're essentially just
creating enough of a paper trail um to
be able to do this and typically what
would happen is um you know the Command
Staff would bring a Cadet into the
office of course I didn't I was not able
to watch this part um but what was told
to me afterwards was that the Kats were
usually given the option to resign um or
be fired and the reason for them usually
choosing to resign is that then they
could at least continue to apply to
other departments in the state um so
while on paper Adam was not technically
fired or terminated he essentially was
um forced to resign and this was
reflected as well in uh people who were
applying to policing if they were women
or people of color or women of color is
that your assessment I mean my
assessment there is that um cadetes who
are not white ma straight white
masculine men um certainly have a
different experience in the academy and
they have a more complicated and tougher
time fitting into the overall Narrative
of the institution which you know really
is one in one where um masculine
straight white men are protecting
vulnerable people from bad guys each of
these gools is deeply gendered and
racialized right the the patri I'm sorry
to about in but that patriarchal notion
I think is really under discussed and
it's great that you highlight it because
it also feeds into some of the racist
tropes that also are prevalent and and
like the coded language speaking about
parts of the city where black and Latino
people lived and the perception that
these white kind of heteronormative cops
have about being the great
protectors it's it's a it's you can see
who they might think they're protecting
people from yeah yeah yeah I mean one
striking example I think about a lot
just in terms of it being quite um
symbolic I suppose is one of the
sergeants at an academy that I I went to
had this small sort of like chachki um
statue maybe you know six inches tall in
his office um of an officer like holding
a
woman while the officer had like wings
on yeah um so really these like hero
complexes are quite prominent and that
what that means for people who are not
you know again straight masculine white
men is that they have trouble fitting
somewhere into this narrative as the
hero as the protector if they're
supposed to either be the bad guy or um
the vulnerable and the innocent and the
weak then they have a lot of trouble
kind of figuring out where they stand uh
within the organization however that
does not mean um that women don't make
it in that they don't succeed that they
don't graduate and same with people of
color um they do and part of my argument
in this book actually is really
challenging demographic diversity reform
efforts as they are as they are
currently conceptualized as sort of a
fix all for policing in that this
process of selection and socialization
means that whoever makes it in and then
makes it through to graduation aligns
themselves you know very heavily very
strongly with the existing institution
and and and that institution replicates
many of the things that we've talked
about but also this uh you talk about
the the socialization of State violence
through something like an us one of the
planks being an US versus them mentality
how did that show itself in your
research yeah so I write about that in
in one of the chapters and um I
originally had titled it US versus thems
because there are a lot of groups um um
that kind of represent um I separate
them out into institutional threats or
physical threats um real or imagined to
you know the the policing organization
or to police officers themselves um so
for example um you would probably be one
of these threats as um a source of media
um particular a dirty hippie
exactly so you know you would present an
Institutional threat to the police
they're quite wary of media general not
all though Fox News was often on in the
break rooms in the back um and you know
the the recruiting officers offices um
so certainly not all media but that was
one um activist groups particularly
leftist activist groups um so it wasn't
they weren't just taking aim for example
um I guess liter literally or
figuratively at um black lives matter
but they also had issues with you know
occupy movements for example um show you
know video footage of that
of officers um you know spraying a crowd
from an occupy um protest or
demonstration with you know OC spray or
some version of that um and one training
officer referenced this as watering the
hippies um during a class so those were
you know two certainly groups that
presented an Institutional threat um to
officers and the trainers would often
tell cadetes to make sure that if
someone if there was an activist trying
to kind of um push them into a reaction
on camera to not give into that um and
that they were simply trying to um you
know P again push officers into a a
reaction to then further their own cause
um they also had um again we talked a
little bit about this but a sense that
there were evil people out there wanting
to and engaging in ambushes of the
police um this does happen sometimes
however not very often it's it's really
rare for an actual ambush of police
officers a fatal Ambush to happen um
when they do happen however they are
very very meaningful for officers um
this occurred when I was at these cies
um I think it was in New Jersey at the
time um which was not the state that I
was in um was quite far from the state
that I was in and that that instance had
a huge effect on um sort of the mental
state of the officers that I was around
in terms of intensifying their um you
know fears and their suspicion of others
um so there were a lot of these groups
and part of this process of being
socialized indstate violence for these
Cadets was learning who are these outg
groups who are these threats how do I
identify them um and then as a result
their world becomes quite small um the
people who they can trust who are
considered in group who are considered
safe um becomes really just First
Responders to be honest um and that
becomes their new you know social world
and position in the broader world it's
just very very distinct from what the
stated purpose of police is which is
protect and serve versus we are warriors
beating back the hordes of leftists and
and black people or Latino people
essentially like I mean that seems very
different from the mindset that is
portrayed that reinforces the bad apples
myth like to to get make it through this
Police Academy you kind of have to buy
in as you
write yeah no I totally think that's
true I think you in order to make it to
graduation you absolutely have to I mean
you have to demonstrate to the officers
there's these you know formal
requirements of course you have to pass
the tests you have to show up right um
You have to follow sort of a Litany of
rules um but you also do have to show
that you're a cultural fit for the
institution that you can move through
the world looking like sounding like
acting like a police officer and what I
argue in the book is that a lot of that
pches on violence um engaging in it
being willing arguably I say eager um to
engage violence particularly when it's
brought to you um so yeah I I would
definitely agree on that well uh the
book is great it's called before the
badge how Academy training shapes police
violence we will put a link to the book
in the description wherever people are
listening to this or watching it and at
majority. FM Samantha thanks so much for
your time today I really appreciate it
of course thank you so
much


## Keywords:
