---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fhn51LDDavY
---

# Video
Exposing Government Cover-Ups With Forensic Architecture | Eyal Weizman talks to Ash Sarkar
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fhn51LDDavY)

## Transcript:
when you grow up in Israel um the entire
education system is priming you to
become part of a national project of
Erasure and
dispossession um there are things that
you simply are not told and you
understand that state ideology requires
a
certain narrative and requires certain
epistemic Erasure meaning like Erasure
of History Erasure of people Erasure of
the truth that you actually see in front
of your
eyes it's an old saying in journalism
all governments lie so how do you prove
a government is lying today on
Downstream I'm joined by I whitesman
director of forensic architecture and
professor of spatial and visual cultures
at Goldsmith's University of London
whether it's Assad's torture prison or
Israel's assault on Gaza forensic
architecture brings together open-source
intelligence civilian video witness
testimony and more to build
evidence-based 3D models of contested
events they're able to reconstruct
events as they happened these
reconstructions are so diligently put
together that they can and have been
used in court I hope you enjoy the
interview when I hear the word
architecture yeah I think about columns
and I think about caner lever and then I
went to the forensic architecture
exhibition in 2016 at the I yeah and I
realized that what I was seeing was a
kind of crime scene investigation except
the
perpetrator was the
government how did this method of
Investigation come out of an art and
design discipline yeah this is a very
good question and I I'm often wondering
myself but one of the origins of
forensic architecture is actually in the
anti-colonial movement in Palestine and
like many things that come out of
Palestine um there are Moments Of
Invention there and I think together
with colleagues um we obviously
understood something that would be
obvious to anyone that that travels
through uh any part of Palestine whether
it's Gaza Palestine of 48 Jerusalem or
the West Bank those uh areas that Israel
actually kind of carves it into in
different administrative zones but in
all of them you see that the the
practice of settler colonization is
architectural that that the domination
of Palestine the violence is um enacted
through the way in which space is
configured that is to say the way that
where roads go and where they don't on
go the settlements the colonies in
relation to indigenous Palestinian
Villages how they uh cut them apart
surround them sometimes being put on
hilltops in order to survey them the
wall of course the checkpoints The
Valleys the hills everything is almost
like a political plastic meaning
political plastic is the way in which
the space is configured is a kind of
diagram of an attack to control and
dominate a population so how would it
look I mean from a bird's eye view how
would you see that imposed on the
landscape well you know like Israel The
Establishment uh of Israel is based on
Erasure of historical Palestine on the
depopulation of Palestinian towns uh and
Villages and the imposing of a new
geography a new Urban system a new
transport system uh new meaning new set
of names new maps uh on top of that area
and that is a huge construction project
and architecture includes both
destruction and construction so what you
see as the acts of the bulldozers when
they carve new routes through the center
of Janine and destroy the refugee camp
in order to make a road so that the area
could be better policed is an act tanks
to go through exactly wide enough for
tanks or vehicles to go through is an
act of architecture when uh you see a
settlement overlooking or surrounding
Janine or any other um city in the
occupied territories or in 48 you know
that these places have been designed on
the drawing boards of Architects that
there have been crimes uh and to my
understanding war crimes committed on
the drawing boards uh and that civilian
Architects have been drafted into a
national project and when the crime is
architectural architectural
understanding allows you to unpack it
because architecture is not only a set
of design techniques is a is a way of
seeing the world as a built reality is a
way to see the relation between culture
and built form between politics power
and um and the way in which matter
physical matter buildings neighborhoods
cities are organized across the terrain
so the project really began with a
certain mapping a very detailed mapping
of the physical reality of Israeli uh
colonization techniques uh initially in
the West Bank but then in in other
places um acts of mappings for which I
personally needed and my colleagues too
the skills that we learned in
architectural schools we need to know we
needed to know how to draw plans so
first how to read the plans that the
Israeli civilian Architects were drawing
in order to dominate and control but
also to make a counter map a certain
counter cartography and I remember it
was the project began very much at the
beginning of the second intifa when
Edward say in a in a in an essay that
kind of changed my life back in in the
in early 2000 sorry in late
2000 U maybe it was in December so few
months after the beginning of the second
intifa he was calling for a counter
cartography of Palestine so what would
counter graphy mean what would go on
this counter map exactly so so you know
if you think of maps as the instrument
of colonialism no I mean if you want to
colonize a place you need to know where
things are you draw a map you plan where
you're going what what land you're going
to take and how you're going to inhabit
it and therefore the history of
cartography is very associated with the
history of Empire and
colonization but what you choose to draw
and what you choose to withdraw from a
map is a political decision so counter
cartography enter into that choice and
rather than uh simply mapping the areas
to be colonize it actually comes to
expose the mechanism of
colonization so in a sense if you if you
think about it like that colonization is
always a double crime it's a crime
against people and territory
and it's a crime against the truth that
a crime has it all taken place so it's a
kind of a mechanism of Erasure physical
Erasure and epistemic Erasure that is it
it actually hides and and and and wipes
the facts of its own wrongdoing I mean
to put it very crudely it would be like
you know the results of the Berlin
Conference or something producing a map
of Africa which says oh sorry like this
actually belongs to us like it's piece
of paper and if you're a native African
go what the yeah yeah many people
you know while they were sitting in
Berlin carving Maps through through
Africa at the invitation of bismar uh th
those people whose land was now renamed
um re
demarcated uh were not consulted they
did not know about it they did not
participate their voice was not heard
and the only thing left for them was to
resist and the resistance is both on the
ground and in the of representation so
indigenous struggle always needed to
have its own set of cartography it
always needed to represent to take over
the means of production right we were
speaking about about Marxism before no I
mean if Marxism is about you know taking
the means of the working classes taking
the means of production we're talking
about taking over the means of evidence
production making sure that we can tell
the story and we can expose the crime
from the the point of view of those that
actually um experience and are violated
by that and therefore a project of of
the cartography of the occupation began
as a Palestinian Israeli International
or you know kind of Coalition of
anti-colonial activists who actually for
the first time in in 2002 we released
this map in for the first time there was
a map that showed every settlement was
where the they plan to expand to and
what is the spatial logic behind it we
were showing something that was called
The Matrix of control how you know you
create a matrix in which each settlement
can
see the next one from one Hilltop to the
next connected in roads between them in
a way that completely bypassed the
Palestinian geography and dominated it
through this Matrix you don't need in
order to occupy space you don't need to
control the entire surface it's enough
to apply Force like an
acupuncturist in important nodal points
an important Nexus or forces in movement
and through those points you paralyze
and control the the uh the territory and
you need to have some kind of
architectural or spatial knowledge or
sensibility at least in order to
understand that because you were born
and raised in Israel so so if you like
you were growing up inside that map yeah
was it the case that studying
architecture allowed you to see the
context that you grew up in or was there
something I don't know intuitive or
something that started a lot earlier
where you were looking around you and
went hang on this this is violent the
situation I'm in is violent yeah yeah so
you know I mean when you're a kid you're
a kid you you you know I wanted study
architecture I didn't know exactly why I
was attracted to it I was attracted to
building I was very tactile as a person
um you know I could sketch so you know I
was attracted to that on the other hand
what I really enjoyed about hia was
unlike many other cities um in Palestine
that you know that turned into Israeli
cities there were remnants of
Palestinian communities that survived
the expulsions of the AK so I wouldn't
say you know sometimes they call them
bational by by no means they're bational
cities no I mean the Palestinian
communities there is really
disenfranchised and on so many levels
including space but there was a pleasure
in proximity no and there was a pleasure
in Discovery and there was an
understanding that the way that hia as a
city was
conceived with the Jewish sort of middle
class neighborhoods where I you you know
grew up we at the top of the hill the
Palestinian were in the valley very C
circumscribed very
contained um where the density there you
know kind of almost exploded because
building permits were not were not given
was almost like the source code of what
I started to understand I'm seeing in
the occupied territories the Israeli
settlements on the hilltop the
Palestinians in a valley circumscribed
and
bypassed and there was a kind of almost
like the genetic code of colonization
was already visible to me in hi so it's
not hi is not you know every city is
different but I think that when you grow
up the Contours the architecture the
characters of the city in which you grow
enter into your conscious and the way
you understand the world so you know
wherever you go it's Hy for me no in a
certain way um so it's it's very much to
that City that I owe my my spatial kind
of imagination that hey what I'm seeing
is not simply benign buildings that
everything that seems benign and
utilitarian a road a bridge uh a
building a neighborhood is actually a
political
act um and also I owe to hia the Insight
that maybe someday
a kind of an equal non
apartheid you know sort of like living
together would be possible and uh so so
I guess with with those two things I
I've you know I've combined that and and
of course you know you know I see the
the bookcase behind you here I guess you
know I could have probably if I would
knew about if I would know about noar
would be there I'd probably ask for an
internship because that's the kind of
stuff I was reading as a you know in the
sort of our you know Marxist kind of
youth movement I mean forensic
architecture itself is a
multidisiplinary research group so
you've got Architects you've got
designers you've got filmmakers software
developers investigative journalists how
did that come together was it like you
know the bit in the Heist movie where
the guy has to go and be like right you
you're the safe cracker and you're the
getaway driver and you're the was it
like that you know every problem in a
world need to create a community of
practice ice to address it because every
problem is unique and some problems need
um a botanist or Gardener in order to
understand the way in which plants in a
particular case register evidence or
participate in a mode of Erasure or
destruction so you bring that person
on and um but that's an analogy because
what we've
realized when very fast is that you know
imagine we started doing that work in
the early 2000 we were doing maps by
drawing lines still on plans and
cartography disappeared on us two years
later you know we're working for more
than a year and it was a risky practice
moving across the occupied territories
between Palestinian Villages and and the
roads and you know we were you know it
was dangerous to to to drive along the
roads you know like the Army was there
and people could mistake you from both
sides we were replacing the cafa on the
on the car with uh taking it on and off
in order for people not to identify us
but almost when the map was finished uh
a new technological kind of you know
provision was was made available and
that satellite images so think about the
world before that now now it's so you
know people of of a different generation
don't even remember what it means not
living with with satellite images but
satellite images did away with
cartography there was no Maps anymore
Maps were not necessary and cartography
turns into photography because a
satellite image is a photograph and
every photograph when you analyze a
photograph you need to ask some question
why is the camera's there what kind of
lens it is um what resolution it is why
is it in a particular place why is it
taking this picture and not that picture
and you can ask those question to
satellite images who are kind of
sometimes gravitating towards War zones
and sometimes with coarse resolution
hide things that are inconvenient for
example Israel has lobbied with the US
to actually regulate satellite images
over Israel and its occupied territories
to be coarse enough so that its
violations would not be seen from above
so in a sense it becomes counter
cartography becomes counter forensic
because the move into um into
photography was important and then few
years later it was a social media
Revolution and all those videos and
photographs were everywhere
online and Analysis of violation had to
start contending with those photographs
and different questions were asked where
is this video taken from by whom what
does it show how does it link to is it
synchronized with another video and then
you realize that when the most important
evidence is photographic or videographic
the people that you need are image
practitioners and who are the image
practitioners curators and photographers
and filmmakers and artists uh and that's
why we insisted on including artists in
our you know in um what we call these
kind of communities of practice the sort
of investigative collectives the
investigative Commons um and and arrange
around an investigation a combination of
practitioners from a curator an artist
filmmaker an architect a
lawyer um a you
know physicist a medical doctor because
the question defines the community you
don't have a certain skill and wait for
things to to come at you in a way that
you can kind of respond or or resolve
them you need to build you need to have
the flexibility to build a
committed um you know kind of very
attuned um Collective around a
particular case so every case is also a
social production and the people that
work in our in in forensic architecture
some of them work in our office but
there's so many collaborators all over
the world because each one of our cases
is about establishing communities that
that build those investigation and
searching those relation with the people
at the Forefront of struggle and this is
why we also we working with Stafford
Scott because the what what what
Stafford could understand very fast by
looking at a video you know even a train
analyst would take weeks to kind of like
um to understand or to unpack and where
does that skill come from for him is it
just the depth of experience or is there
something intuitive you know sort of
like a a natural Goden situated
experience like being there with every
case with every family that has been
bereaved by British policing uh by
living through it again and again and
again and again by being through and
with families in in their legal
struggles or in the political struggles
or advocacy struggles and and gaining
the kind of you know the sort of
understanding situated understanding of
a situation and you know in Palestine
forensic architecture now works we we've
helped establish in alhak uh the first
and biggest Palestinian Human Rights
group uh I think it was founded in
1979 probably the first in the
arab-speaking
world and um now criminally I mean
outrageously they are considered a
terrorist group by the Israeli Ministry
of Defense terrorist of what terrorist
of of truth of of of documentation of
community relation but be that it may
they're considered terrorists but
together with them we have established
the alhak forensic architecture unit
because we understand that our
techniques cannot be and our
investigation cannot be done from London
remotely some things could be done from
London from our studio here in in in at
Goldsmith uh but some of them need the
kind of understanding that only
situatedness can provide the kind of
intelligence the kind of trust the kind
of connection the kind of trained eye
and lived experience that would allow
you to understand something without that
we're just kind of like experts like you
know from from from the BBC or the media
without without those connections right
there uh on the ground and this is why
building those communities is a
political project and we don't only
investigate political incidents we
investigate politically that is to say
the way we investigate need to validate
the kind of things that we are trying to
achieve you know whether it's Palestine
Liberation if we're talking about
Palestine whether we work in Mexico we
have now another office or in bota where
we have an office and we worked with a
with a truth commission or in Turkey
where we build one or in Greece where we
work on on issues of migration or in
France when we work in a ble there
always has to be the investigations have
to be done with people that
know what the live experience of a
certain type of violation is there's an
old saying in journalism which is all
governments lie all governments lie all
the time and for me I came to understand
that when I was in my teens and I first
started participating in political
activism and I realized the police lie
and then the media print the police's
lie and then the government forms policy
on the basis of those media
reports which were police lies and that
was when I kind of got that journalistic
principle embedded in my bones which is
government's lie skepticism when did you
first start mistrusting State narratives
when did that skepticism come in for you
um you know when you grow up in Israel
um the entire education system is
priming you to become part of a national
project of Erasure and
dispossession um there are things that
you simply are not
told uh you all lied to and then you see
the reality in front of
you you're told you're told that oh you
know that bunch of ruins when you drive
out of High far towards the on on on the
main Coastal Highway and you see those
ruins they say these are Byzantine ruins
and you go like did the Byzantine have
mosques um and and who are those people
that lived here and where are they and
uh these kind of questions are not
provided to you and you understand that
state ideology requires a
certain narrative and requires certain
epistemic Erasure meaning like Erasure
of History Erasure of people Erasure of
the truth that you actually see in front
of your eyes and I think that you know
sometimes you
say but I can see the truth it is there
and I hear something else being told
about what it is that I see but I think
that our seeing is very ideologically
conditioned I think that when you hear
enough of the
framing around a particular whether it's
a photograph or it's a bit of landscape
or it's a ruined Palestinian Village um
I think that there are ways to make you
see other things in in that reality and
I think that you know it's true also to
an extent that when when videos are made
public of violations whether it is in
London a Mur in Tottenham or um a police
murder in Tottenham or or uh something
in in Mexico in or in or in
Gaza you I don't think people yet
have the
attention to actually look actually see
the image look at it for what it
shows I think that it feels like the
image is too
obvious and too obviously described
by the caption that you get and you
don't see you just trust what you hear
or what you read about it and a lot of
what we do is developing a very close
attention to things um respecting the
world for what it is and respecting the
fact that the art of seeing is hard it's
not obvious you need to work hard to see
what you see when you need to work hard
to make public what is already public uh
and that is uh a principle of of care uh
of attention of
time and and yeah spending spending time
with with a problem and with the people
that actually ask you for for help about
it I'm going to play devil's advocate
for a second and pretend I'm a BBC
journalist who thinks that there's such
a thing as impartial journalism yeah so
understand your point that what we see
in our interpretation of evidence is
ideologically conditioned yeah and that
can be in the state's interest it can be
in a corporation's interest it can be in
the interest of capitalism more
broadly but if you're working with a
group of ideologically motivated
individuals who have their area of
expertise is there a danger of them
interpreting the evidence in the way
which they want to interpret the
evidence how do you navigate that how do
you always there's there is there is all
let's say there isn't seeing there isn't
even an act of seeing and of noticing
that is not conditioned culturally
conditioned and part of culture is
ideology but not only so um but what
actually make a piece of evidence strong
is when you start
weaving multiple perspectives there a
poly perspectival
construction and this is when
architecture becomes
crucial because if I would only have to
analyze a single video and notice
something in it or not like you remember
this film blow up no when you kind of
antonion no you zoom in you zo you see
the gun or the body no hiding in the
pixels or the grains of the image
enhance that's the bit of the movies
yeah yeah so you kind of zoom in to to
to something and noticing that is a
single track
interpretation but today uh around a
single
incident uh you have at least multiple
and very often dozens if not hundreds of
videos each one from a different angle
each one is taken by a different
individual with their own perspective
some by the victims some by the
witnesses some by the
perpetrators uh of that um some but the
people that resist
violence and um it's the case emerge in
the relation between images so images
for us are like again like like doorways
every photograph has a hinge to another
sometimes the hinge is a sound so you
you you you you look at one
video and you don't see the perpetrator
shooting but you hear a shot in the next
video you see a person shooting in
another one you see an ambulance coming
maybe 30 minutes later in another one
you see people fleeing from a place in
another one you see a helicopter
coming and and each one of those videos
has a hinge to another and you need to
start weaving those relation sometimes
we weave relation amongst 800s of
different videos and each one is a
different perspective the closer The
Weave the the closer to verification
you get and and and by weaving multiple
perspectives in order to weave multiple
perspective what you need is a 3D model
so the model the architectural part the
architecture kernel or forensic
architectures like you build a 3D model
and you start weaving threads through it
and those threads intersect you put all
the videos in it and and only by putting
the videos and the cones of vision
within the model you know what's in the
frame and what's out of the frame what's
very important investigation what is out
of the frame and what's the relation in
this video and that video no they're
looking at completely different
direction or maybe they're
intersecting uh and then you start
bringing testimony and a testimony and
our memory is also spatially conditioned
so when we interview Witnesses we walk
with them either through the space where
something happened or we build 3D
environment we call it situated
testimony and the witness would walk
through a space perhaps the space no
longer exist perhaps it's been bombed
perhaps we don't have access to it
perhaps it's a prison and therefore we
cannot we cannot approach it anymore
this is the work about um Assad's prison
uh miles north of Damascus where you
having to reconstruct the space through
witness memory and the Witnesses were
themselves
blindfolded and being tortured yeah when
they're in the space exactly so how do
you conduct those interviews I mean this
was again one of the most heartbreaking
and difficult investigation we've done
I'd have to say before that we only
undertake investigation when we asked to
do so we never enter the space of other
people's trauma Uninvited so when the
family or bereaved or survivors ask us
to do it would do it and and and five
survivors of Assad's torture uh prison
of Sadaya managed to escape to Turkey
and wanted to reconstruct their
experiences sometimes the experiences
are not available uh even to the people
that experience something the closer you
get so this is something that happens
with memory you can remember what
happened before the incident you can
remember what happened after the closer
you get to the heart of violence the
more memory protects you sometimes you
have
blackouts sometime things get distorted
elongated ated uh sometimes things
appear in repetition so if maybe there
were two doors but in your memory there
have been six doors or eight doors um
between one place and the other and and
the problem of traumatized memory and
the in in affected memor is
disassociated not available to you
haunts survivors so Survivor that want
to do it and understand also the risk of
r traumatization in doing that are
effectively entering into a Rec 3D
reconstruction and they help us
initially build the model as they know
the place so with the prisoners you
start with a tile and sometimes they
know every stone in the tile because
that's what they had to see for days in
days out and then they know that the the
dimensions and then theyve maybe counted
how many tiles in each side between the
window and the door and then we can
estimate the room and where the window
was if there was a window where the door
was how big it was Etc and we start with
very technical we never ask about the
painful things we ask about the small
technical thing how was the handle
looking was it cold when you touch was
it warm was it long was it short was it
was it high was it and memory
erupts in an
unpredictable
way when you come across um uh when you
come across a bit of physical reality
that is associ that the memory is
associated because our memory are
spatial so in one of the cases one of
the witnesses is actually just modeling
with you know we had a Palestinian model
builder she spoke Arabic she spoke to
the um to to the Survivor
and they're trying to size that small
hatch in a door of a solitary
confinement room and they're talking
about the dimension and all of a sudden
the memory emerged and you could see it
in a voice and you can see it in the
pause but it's there and then he
recalled that it was in that hatch that
he was tortured they asked him to push
his head through this hatch and beat it
from the other side so something like
that so horrible um would often not be
available to Witnesses upon simple
questioning upon an interview like we we
do that it's funny to hear you say this
because my mom um worked in child
protection for most of her career yeah
and one of her specialities was working
with child victims of sexual violence
and one of the things that she'd have to
do is
work out whether or not this is
something that happened or whether this
was the result of coaching or whatever
and she said if you try and ask a child
you know what happened where did this
person touch you you're not going to get
an answer and part of that is trauma
right their memory won't let them have
it but if you ask about details like
what color were the curtains yeah or
what was on the duv or what was in the
corner of the room these things would be
absolutely crystal clear and so the way
of working with these child victims of
sexual violence was to put together a
picture of what was in the room yeah
very much avoiding the act of violence
and what the perpetrator looked like or
what they were doing and looking at what
was in the peripheral vision yeah I mean
it's it's um there's a very good
forensic psychology department at gold
smith and we have developed this
technique in close conversation with
them and of course um victims to sexual
different form of sexualized violence uh
we're at the Forefront of our thinking
of how to avoid a graphic description of
things but also how to transfer agency
so when you simply ask an answer
question is one thing but when I you
know you sit together with a model
builder and you build together a home
and maybe you know we've done that also
with survivors of the horrible fire and
uh Grandfield Tower and building those
flats and taking the time and putting
shelf by shelf and object by
object and and then you know slowly the
the witness themsel takes the agency
they it's their
model they're providing that we are
simply technical help in in actually you
know doing the sort of the 3D graphics
for that um and and the the the the
empowerment that comes with it with
control over you know kind of the
situation also empowers and allows um
allows the witnesses sometimes it's it's
never a rule to uh to to arrive at at
Recollections that are so much more
precise and sometimes to bypass the
lacune and and um and you know gaps
within within the recollection so
architecture is not only a kind of like
of forensic AR is not only like a remote
practice of trying to do you know
looking at satellite images from afar
it's a practice of Attunement of working
closely with community members of
working closely with survivors or people
at the Forefront of
struggles um both on the material
investigation and on the memory
reconstruction of things so going back
to the Syrian prison for just a moment
you're working with multiple survivors
and you're reconstructing the space from
their memories their sense of the tile
their memory of of you know where the
door was does that mean you're building
multiple different models based on each
individual's memory or are you trying to
build a model based on where you find
the overlap and corroboration between
different accounts yeah this is this it
depends but um there is different forms
of collect reconstruction that we work
with so here here's one example we're
working with our uh Ukrainian Partners
on the Mario Paul drama theater bombed
on the 16th of March uh we soon at the
uh uh what is it second anniversary or
third second anniversary sorry of that
of that bombing and
um about a dozen
Witnesses each one furnishes the model
of the of the theater where the blank
the chairs the
utensils and we reconstructing a sense
of um together with with our partners
the center for spatial technology in
Kev reconstructing a sense of a
community uh what we call a city in
within a building everything that was in
a city entered into and was folded into
this one building they had participatory
democracy they had schools they had had
care they had hospital they were cooking
together and making Collective decisions
Etc and now we wanted to do a collective
reconstruction of what has happened and
therefore the first witness comes and
gives testimony and places objects
perhaps for the second witness those
objects are the hinge to their
recollection so what you see at the end
is the sum total of all recollection
each person has seen a part of the
building and experienc part of it and
together that formed into uh a kind of
an understanding of what has happened in
Amia when we were asked by over Herrero
in N groups to help uh in a case
demanding reparation for Colonial crimes
for the colonial genocide for the German
Colonial genocide uh of the turn of the
20th
century the Witnesses are no longer
Direct Witnesses because we're talking
120 years later so maybe they are the
grandchildren or great grandchildren and
what they're giving is oral tradition as
as a
testimony and also unlike in kind of
Northern Juris Prudence you know where
you have a single witness need to be
isolated we did those reconstructions
collectively where people were building
from inherited memories from their
ancestors or or you know
grandparents um villages we found
cemeteries um the environment the way it
was because the natural environment has
been completely transformed by in by the
process of colonization so that form so
architecture allowed for a kind of a a
communal form of
reconstruction that in itself offered a
communal voice in that that contest that
kind of cargraphic violence or of uh of
of Empire and colonization thinking
about the Mario Paul theater for a
second every time you access a memory
every time you touch a memory you kind
of run the risk of changing it somehow
of course and so if I'm looking at a
model of a place where I've been and
there have been things placed in it from
other people's memories I might remember
it even if I didn't see it so how how do
you deal with or account for I guess
memory contamination which is someone
shares a memory and something's perhaps
misremembered or jumbled up with
something else someone else interacts
with a model and goes oh yes that was my
memory even if you know yeah the best is
in a weave cross referencing multiple
testimonies allows you to to corroborate
and allows you also to correct and it's
not it's not coming to offend anyone you
say well you know um some body else
suggested it might be here do you do you
maybe um uh want to consider that uh Etc
but there's other more um there's a
process in which we work by which you do
not walk within a fully immersive
reality we create an alienation effect
between the viewer and the model so we
start with very low Tech very low grade
models from you know the 1980s era of
like
computer AED design where they would not
kind of you couldn't mistake them for
the real thing they're simply about
distances in movement and slowly we
would build into it just like you build
a face you'd build a texture and you'd
build the and so so very very slowly you
add the kind of the immersive elements
to it uh only after you've been content
that you're not actually implanting
memories uh in somebody else's uh mind
but of course every
retelling every time you tell a story
you remember the story you remember what
you originally remember and you remember
the telling of the story and the
retelling of the story and the retelling
of the story and the retelling of the
story so this is this is an issue that
is uh structural to to to memory and it
is um you know in in all types of
testimony it applies and therefore what
is important
in general is to say memory or a case is
an act of construction we we are you
know here there's another kind of
architecture di mention to forensic
architecture you take a piece of memory
a trace evidence a bit of material
reality uh another recollection another
video and you start building and you
start seeing where they
intersect however something that is
really really important and you
mentioned error errors are really
important for us because with Witnesses
who are exposed to extreme
trauma the error is what we call
informationally enriched what does it
mean um again inida one of our
Witnesses by that time after cross
referencing the the testimony and
understanding the building we knew that
person was being tortured in a straight
corridor
but that person testified that he
remembered being surrounded being in a
hall in a round
hall now it's probably not possible but
where is the roundness of the hall where
is this architecture come from the
architecture comes from a sense perhaps
of being totally
incarcerated being completely surrounded
and looked at being
claustrophobically being
claustrophobically enclosed
meaning the error confirms the veracity
of trauma so the error confirms
sometimes could confirm the truth more
than a simple cartisian
description so you keep the errors as
precious deposits of Faith uh and you
don't dismiss them because they're
telling you about someone's experience
you yeah exactly the errors is the
errors is is where you connect to
somebody's personality and experience
uh of a particular incident so these are
really precious deposits for us one of
the things that I found Most Fascinating
about the Syrian prison investigation
was the way in which you were having to
work with memory which very often didn't
have a visual component to it so can you
tell me a bit about how your
investigators worked with the memory of
sound so one of our you know really
precious uh
collaborators uh is a audio investigator
called laurren Abu hamdan who was also
you know a student in at our Goldsmith
Center for many years and a very close
friend and now started uh his own
organization called
earshot and Lawrence is
exactly understanding that there's so
much information in sound and to be
tuned to sound listening to sound can
reveal so much more than what we
think and uh effectively
the witnesses that came into the prison
either had to press their hands against
their eyes or were blindfolded or were
forced to keep their head down so most
of their experience of
incarceration was through sound and they
were hearing multiple things through the
the prison they were hearing the muffled
voice of torture that were happening in
other places in the building moving
through the ventilation system they were
listening to doors opening and closing
to footsteps and Lawrence was
reconstructing with them those sounds
Lawrence was playing to them um the
sound of a door opening and they were
adjusting it just like you adjust the
kind of the face or or the models that
we were saying before they said yes
that's the right sound and then through
the sound they you know the kind of the
memory got reconstructed through this
you know the kind of the Rhythm of being
there is the door is the key in the door
and that became kind of like an entry
point into other Recollections or for
example Lawrence was trying to find out
the the dimension of spaces and audio
contains any and you know our voice or
recording of our voice contains the
architecture of that room because the
weight bounces and if you listen it
carefully you will know how big it is
how high it is or maybe you can appro
Pro imated so Lawrence was giving in the
computer different kind of acoustic
properties to rooms in order to
reconstruct what people heard rather
than seen and and a lot of the model
that you see is actually coming from uh
um audio
testimonies um and it's audio
reconstruction of architecture and I
find that you know our commitment to
visuality sometimes blinds us sometimes
does not allow us to see so to see again
you see like I'm I'm kind of trampling
over my own words but to to be
tuned um to audio and uh later we were
working with Lawrence Abu hamdan on the
Israeli targeted killing of Shirin
abak the Palestinian journalist from Al
jazer and it was really through him
listening to the sound of the
shots the sound of a shot have what you
call a crack and a boom the moment in
which the you know the the sound that
comes from the gun itself and the sound
could come from the
supersonic bullet that passes by your by
your uh audio um uh
sensor and the distance between them
would show you how far the shot was
taken sometimes even from which
direction and the Reconstruction the
audio reconstruction that Lawrence and
earshot has done for that in instigation
really kind of added a very crucial
Dimension to what forensic architecture
did in in this act of reconstruction and
and I think that this is probably one of
the ways in which our field could evolve
because when we talk about open- Source
analysis we talk about satellite images
and videos very often investigators
switch the audio off when they look at
videos and that's a mistake because
every video that a witness records of a
battlefield or a crime
scene you know includes something of the
voice people say something people cry
people shout people
pray and they deliver testimony that is
superimposed if you like over the
evidence that you see in the video you
hear their description so it's kind of
testimony without memory if you if you
like and and extremely important some
some investigations which just make this
exercise we say let's just listen to
those dozens of videos let's just listen
very very carefully to what people say
when they record it and build something
else and I think that open- Source
investigation must absolutely learn to
to to be tuned and to be um to have
attention to to sound and so when when
we you know forensic architecture is not
now a single group we are what we call
the investigative Commons investigative
Commons includes earshot it includes
index in Paris it includes all these
other organization around the world and
each one does something slightly
different you know partners of us are
doing kind of like forensics of plans uh
looking at traces of dispossession for
example in the Amazon Paulo Tavares um
one of our you know dearest member is is
is understanding where indigenous
Villages where simply
by seeing the difference in the in the
in the in the secondary growth forest um
you know a place where the village was
it was a clearing so you can actually
see the the the roads the roots and the
and the villages by looking at plants uh
and that is so there's
multiple ways in which the principle of
close attention to say signal um to
voice to testimony to plans to audio can
can actually uh increase our sensitivity
to the world is there
perhaps different rates of degradation
associated with different senses that
you're invoking for memory because I
think sometimes my visual memory can be
quite vulnerable to manipulation so I
can quite easily convince myself that
someone's t-shirt was red when it was
blue or the car was this when it was
that but sound is very difficult to
shift in my memory I can say it sounded
like that and it didn't sound like that
and I can hold that for a long time and
the other one is smell like I was
recently uh you know met someone I gave
them a hug and I breathed in and I was
like oh my God you smell exactly like my
best friend from when I was 9 years old
and the memory came as clear as day um
like when you're when you're working
with with Witnesses do you ever sort of
rank the senses that they're invoking
you go okay well well visual might be a
bit vulnerable here but this other thing
they're talking about that seems really
certain yeah absolutely I think that you
know there are different memory triggers
and obviously sound and smell are very
connected to Memories or to deep
memories and and allow repressed
memories or not repressed simply things
that you haven't thought about to kind
of come to the surface um but I think
that a sense of
space is not exactly visual space a
sense of space includes
audio uh it includes the Acoustics it
may include smell it includes the
temperature so space includes all of
those we tend to think about space as
simply a visual thing but when forensic
architecture build 3D models for memory
reconstruction they definitely include
the audio uh Dimension to them and um it
is clear that to us also that sense of
space of being at a particular
disposition in relation to a particular
room with a door open or closed Etc uh
can function very well as as memory
triggers our memory is very special and
um you know this is why you have things
like memory palaces Etc where you
meander through a preconceived
environment and kind of pick up objects
that that would remind you of things I
think I've got a memory
Shack it's not a palace yeah yeah
exactly I I also I also find that in
those memory
palaces something strange happened in
them that I think was not really
recognized by the people that conceive
this art of memory the in the in the
classic and in the in the Renaissance
period period is that you can't take you
can't absolutely not take the same room
and walk through it several times and
place different objects in it and
because you know this is how they did
they they did it like the great orators
of Rome no they had like the building
and they were putting in one room a
fountain in one a dagger in one a bed in
one a plant and each one each one object
was supposed to remind them of of a
topic that they wanted to speak
about but when you take the plant from a
room and you put inside of this I don't
know wooden horse in there you'd enter
again into this room and the room would
be haunted by the plant sometime the
plant would reappear in the wrong speech
um sometime it would flicker on and off
uh or the the horse and the plant would
kind of like go and do something else
together so so you know memory is so
plastic and meable that that the idea of
a of a static memory is completely um
Legend I mean at the moment forensic
architecture is working kind of in real
time particularly looking at claims
being made by the Israeli government and
the Israeli Army about what it's doing
in Gaza so forensic architecture
recently released an investigation
showing that I think on eight occasions
Israel Mis represented visual data in
its submission to the international
court of justice from the work you're
doing at the moment and your Vantage
Point what if anything is different
about Israel's assault on Gaza after
October the 7th compared to previous
offensives I mean this is really
bringing me
into um yeah what has been the most
difficult I think time for us is
organization and also the most difficult
time for me um
we obviously had uh Partners in
Gaza uh an organization called in
media uh when the Israeli assault began
we were looking for partners contact has
been lost with them people were looking
for them on the ground our friends were
looking for them on the ground we were
looking amongst hundreds sometimes you
know of videos until we were finding
something concerning and um passed it on
then the director of this
organization
um yeah his home was targeted and on the
22nd of October and um he was killed
leaving his um wife and and todler child
do you think he was targeted
deliberately he was um I think his at
least his father father was his father
was the mayor of
Gaza uh and and they were thinking they
were safe there and he was he was
targeted uh I mean the the the strike
was a targeted strike so you could say
he was
murdered
um we we're working very closely with
the alhak forensic architect unit I just
came back from Gala uh spending time
with them looking at the investigation
they're working independently also
Around the Clock incredible work that
they're doing under very very difficult
conditions because I mean you just heard
a couple of days ago the biggest raid of
ramala is happened um the office has
been raided in the past before the is
before October 7th um based on this
spous wrong accusation that they're a
terrorist group uh and they are just you
know afraid of every knock on the door
or staying late at night because the
Israel is raid at night uh those
officers so it's been extremely
difficult um we have also Palestinians
working with us in London who have
families in Gaza who lost dozens of
loved
ones um very
strange I mean I guess for you too
because you know we all living through
this this absolutely
horrible uh living through genocide is
something that is is so difficult and
you know demand of us to be at our best
uh in terms of empathy in terms of
concentration in terms of speed in terms
of accuracy of what we do we do not
maybe have time to package our
investigation in the same way but we
need to respond when we ask we need to
work with our partners we need to check
on our friends um and uh it's difficult
so we have uh and and you know the sense
of being able when I see my colleagues
sometimes speaking on a
phone with their family in Gaza that
sense of of Disconnect is kind of like
closing cuz you know we with with them
uh in that in that way um speaking
almost like picking up a phone and
calling people who are experiencing
genocide uh this is something that is
extremely hard to kind of like
understand but of course anyone that
works on it including yourself you know
it's possible and and it's done I think
for me there's a heightened sense of
unreality because I'm in London and I'm
surrounded by my London friends and a
London
lifestyle
and I wonder if for you guys at forensic
architecture you're working with
Partners in Gaza and you're also looking
at
footage before it gets to be packaged in
any way unlike
me
what in what ways does that change the
work you're doing I mean does the
emotional context you're in change the
work you're doing yeah I mean we we just
know too many people there and sometimes
you're looking at uh at an event of
bombing or shooting of of people that
that that you know and you've spoken to
uh and that's this is um it's always
difficult with anyone with any person
that who on on whose behalf we're
working but that that just makes it um
slightly more and the scale of which and
the amount of Devastation um is just is
just incredible so you know we we
completely reconfigure the way we work
we don't work the way we have um we have
organized ourselves to do two things
really one is is to um deconstruct
Israeli evidence and to show we call it
somehow negative evidence in Shand no so
we we do work that uh in order to
explain to people internationally that
what you see and the claims that you are
being the address of are not are very
often incorrect they're manipulative and
they are um wrong and that there need to
be a level of scrutiny over those thing
particularly when Israel when the
Israeli team is presenting its evidence
in the world Court uh and it's
presenting
um material that is
simply clumsy wrong manipulative and and
and then false claims are being made on
that to
justify the level of atrocities that we
seeing because evidence is not only
something that comes to judge after the
fact evidence is an intervention in an
ongoing genocide in an ongoing conflict
legitimacy is is the tank of gas within
within which Israel can continue its
assault in the way it wants to continue
its assault you need to challenge it
because you need to make sure that it's
that that its actions are seen as
illegitimate and that other parties in
in the world whether they are courts or
whether they other governments in the in
Latin America in
Europe in or the people here saying this
is
illegitimate and um and too often videos
of atrocities or false
representation of the deny atrocities
function as adding just a little bit
more Petrol in the tank of this
genocidal machine and you need to stop
that and this is why we work on what we
call negative evidence disproving
challenging checking very very carefully
the statements that Israel is doing and
you know we could show that you know the
Israeli military spokesperson can point
to an explosion in the air and say this
is um an Islamic Jihad rocket later hit
alali hospital and we say no this is
impossible uh the the the explosion in
the air is an Interceptor and anyway it
wouldn't have you know it couldn't fall
to the ground from 5 kilomet uh in 7
Seconds no so just making sure that that
they cannot say anything because saying
rhetorics is a license to continue that
horrible destruction of Gaza and the
destruction of Gaza is is not even that
you need here at this moment
architectural evidence because
everything is being
destroyed cities are being leveled it's
not about saying oh that building has
been destroyed by this bomb or that bomb
you know we all seeing images of Gaza
the infrastructure is uprooted the
ground the the The Orchards the green
houses the um the buildings the roads
the beaches everything is
upturned um and um so the the kind of
like trying to you find yourself at lost
about where to actually intervene what
it is that you want to show uh in a
situation like that but we felt
that hos Hospital particularly in this
and you ask what is the difference here
in you know the level of Destruction
being one I mean Israel always felt that
Collective punishment of Palestinian
people uh is in its interest it's always
used um designated Target to create
collateral damage but it's there's an
inversion the collateral is the target
this is actually what they they aim to
terrorize the population from um
creating enough fear that they would
lose the wish to resist which I think
that it it never happened before neither
historically with no people definitely
did not happen with Palestinians and
certainly not in Gaza but still there is
that idea that you'd terrorize the
population into
submission um but you have um so the
logic of Destruction is is one but what
what really is different in this in this
attack what m one of the key elements
that make it a genocidal attack is the
attacks on hospitals and
hospitals the attack on those
institutions that need to provide care
and res resilience these institutions
that allow a society allow people to
live you take them away and you destroy
the the capacity of people to live in a
particular place but also in another
thing that is important about hospitals
hospitals are centers of
information whereas if you're in a
building and you can experience what
happened to you in that building you can
know what you hear and what you see out
of the window hospitals are places where
people gather from afar and when people
gather with they wounded or with they
dead they come with their stories so the
hospitals are centers of information the
hospitals are Nexus from which to
understand that the place the Optics
from which you see uh what's happening
around it's likeing out a data center
exactly in some in some way and and to a
certain extent we find that right now
speaking to Palestinians about and and
and soliciting testimonies while the
genocide is happening is going to put
people under risk but there's a lot of
uh medical doctors a lot of surgeons and
other medical practitioners who go in
and sometimes out of Gaza who are
privileged Witnesses not in the sense
that they're privileged people but in
terms of they privileged to information
that other do not have so uh a medical
doctor is both a uh a witness to the
wound they're witness to the story that
comes with it and to what they seeing
around thems and I think that medical
testimony here in this particular in in
this particular case is going to be
absolutely crucial in establishing the
facts because these are the data centers
as you're saying I've got one last
question and it's if there was one
skill that journalists like me could
take from forensic architecture what
would you want it to
be I would say attention attention and
Attunement to
details to looking at things to
listening to finding value in errors in
description in to blur and even in
pixelation um and to understand that
looking and listening is hard work so
there's deep there's deep looking as
there is deep listening and we need to
increase our
sensibilities we need to be ATT tuned to
the world and this is painful because
the signals that we get from the world
are the you know heartbreaking signals
of trauma and and pain and it's painful
to open yourself up to those signals to
make yourself sensitive to them is also
opening yourself to pain but only
through that you're able to notice
things that are otherwise simply
flattened in a two-dimensional
description or in a two-dimensional
reading of a situation I whitesman thank
you so much for joining us thank you
very much I enjoyed that conversation



## Keywords:
