---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a1qZf-s980E
---

# Video
Framework for Modelling (Layers of Players)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a1qZf-s980E)

## Transcript:
so in this video I'm trying to give you
a framework about how blockchain is
going to disrupt economies and in
particular I want to set this up so that
we can eventually use principal agent
models to model block chains and to
model how to make those block chains
work that's where we're going with this
but to think about that we need to think
about the history of economics and the
history of principle agent modeling and
how that changed when the internet came
on the scene how that created some
problems and some analogies to past
problems and then how have luck changed
sort of restructures the rules a little
bit so this is meant to give you a
framework for thinking through your own
blockchain applications and I hope to
build on it in future videos when we
bring in principle agent modeling so
here we go okay so the old model of
economics is looking at governments and
firms and people those are the three big
players that economic theory models and
the government of course has social
welfare functions so that means the
government is optimizing this social
welfare of the people it's really trying
to help the people and of course the
people vote in the government so the
people are a mechanism for
accountability for the government the
government has to come up with the best
social welfare function possible or else
they're going to be voted out of office
now we know that there's complexity is
and that politicians of course have
their own objectives and that this
doesn't work perfectly but in theory
this is what is supposed to happen and
of course when economists model what
should happen in society our
contribution is to really think about
what is the optimal social welfare
function and then how can we get our
systems to work well to optimize the
collective utility of people added up
and of course there's different ways of
constructing social welfare functions do
you weigh everybody's utility equally do
you put the heaviest weight on the
people who are worst off in the society
there's lots of
different ways of construction to
constructing social welfare functions
but in general we become must like to
think of the government as optimizing
social welfare functions that's their
objective function now firms of course
are going to optimize for profit so so
firms are just out there trying to
maximize profit people can invest in
firms and this is going to be the
driving factor behind what firms do and
of course firms are held accountable by
the government so if firms do things
that are very antisocial or that hurt
social welfare in general then the
government can come in and regulate and
that's going to leave this
principal-agent relationship between the
government and firms where the
government determines things that are
exotic to the firm with meaning the firm
has no control over the law and the firm
has to operate assuming the law works
and and so the government is influencing
the firm but the firm ideally does not
have power over the government now of
course firms may come in and they may
hire people to lobby for them that would
be an unfortunate situation but it does
happen but the ideal setup is that the
government is the principle the firm is
the agent and so that's the structure
now firms of course are getting their
money from people so people when they
buy things they take decisions that the
firm's make a zigzag enos so like the
price of a good when you go in to buy
something you have to just take that
price that's generally how things work
so um there's a relationship between
firms and people that's a little bit
principal-agent like we don't always
refer to it that way but but it's going
to be structured well when we set it up
like that so people what do people
optimize if government's optimize social
welfare and firms maximize for profit
then people optimize for utility and
thankfully of course um economics are
now accepting some of the behavioral
economics principles and
this because we know that people's
utility is pretty quirky it's not
rational people are emotional there's a
lot of variance in our mood and our mood
is going to influence what we do in
certain situations we get really upset
at losses so we have loss aversion so
people are quirky but you can still
model their behavior using some kind of
social welfare function we're sorry not
social look for friction utility
function that's a good way of modeling
people you can get as creative as you
want to try to capture the principles
that are at play in people's decisions
but people are utility maximizers people
also hold the government accountable so
this is a general setup and when we're
thinking about how these different
groups work together we're gonna model
each of their problems separately but we
know that there are certain factors that
are going to be in common in these
problems for example decisions that the
government makes are going to influence
firms and of course the government can
also set laws that apply to people so
the government has laws saying people
can and can't do that thing do various
things so the government's choice
variables are going to be the laws that
the government sets into place and those
variables will be relevant to different
firms and people in the economy so those
variables will also appear as exactness
variables in firms problems in people's
problems firms will make decisions they
will PR firms choice variables such as
price will appear as an insatiable
desire oblems are going to be
interconnected and that's just how we
muddle Society now one thing I want to
say because of the leat relevant
practically relevant when we were
talking about watching is um people
don't generally have control over their
government's decisions other than their
vote that's kind of the one time when
you can actually hold the government
accountable but your vote of course is
one very small vote and it's probably
not going to sway the election but when
it comes to local governments people
move away like if you don't if you
really don't like the laws in your local
community and you know that you can
cross the state line and set yourself up
under a different set of laws that
you're more an agreement with or that
you feel are fair to you you can move
you can move to a different state but we
know that that doesn't happen a whole
lot and why doesn't it happen a lot it
doesn't happen a lot because the region
where you live has many things besides
the government laws and there's family
who live there you have roots there you
have friendships there I'm you're
attached to your job there so there's
lots of barriers that stop people from
moving between districts to get access
to different sets of laws so even though
people could theoretically move away
they don't they don't very often at
least and something analogous will come
up when we're thinking about platforms
and block chains so if this is the old
model what is the new model that we need
to use to think about how things have
changed since the internet came on scene
and how that's going to add a little bit
of complexity to our modeling process so
let me set that up okay so ever since
the internet came on the scene we have
the addition in our environment in our
economic environment of platforms so
what is a platform of course we have the
examples these are really the big tech
monopolies so Amazon Facebook Google
Apple that's those are all platforms and
a technical definition of platform is
it's the space where different sides of
a market get matched up friends get
matched up with friends buyers and
sellers get matched up with me on eBay
online dating sites match up men and
women or men and men and so platforms
are going to be these online spaces and
I think that's another way of thinking
about platforms is that this is like
space um when when the internet came on
the scene suddenly we not only had the
real world space we had this virtual
space where a lot of economic activity
started to happen and it
just economic activities social
activities civic activity a lot of stuff
moved online from the real world in
which case platforms ended up being the
spaces with a lot of analogies to
physical spaces like communities it used
to be the small town community had a lot
of features like governance social
structures rules leaders things like
that
that when things moved online the spaces
where people congregated ended up
behaving like physical spaces in the
real world or like communities in the
real world we even used the term
community when we think about online
spaces so platforms are businesses of
course their profit maximizing which is
one of the problems we're running up
against is we have these big tech
monopolies but they're also behaving a
lot like governments they set up the
rules that govern this the social space
and the economic space where people
interact online and that's actually one
of the values they bring to a space like
if we didn't have certain rules that
were curating content on Amazon or rules
that kept bad players bad firms off of
Amazon Amazon wouldn't be as great of a
place to shop so we actually like a lot
of the rules that are set up by these
platforms but we also know that some of
the rules are starting to be bad for us
so um platforms are these things in
between firms and governments where they
are firms the profit maximizing that's
the function they're maximizing which is
the problem but they're also behaving in
ways that governments are one of the big
things they do is set the rules and of
course they they in some ways trying to
maximize social welfare just like the
government dead because maximizing
social welfare will bring in more people
get them more customers which will get
them more profit and they're held
accountable um by people just like
people hold the government accountable
through voting people are held
accountable by people voting with their
feet to go to the platforms
people vote with their feet to go to
firms as well so there is some
accountability regarding the rules and
governance set up in platforms that
people can always go to a different
platform and use a different platform if
they really don't like the rules or they
think the rules are unfair about how
their community is being governed but
just like people don't move between
states because the laws of the
government well don't often move between
platforms because then you'd have to
leave your friends and the people you're
interacting with so there's lots of
forces that sort of stick people
underneath the government's rules of
platforms and so the question really is
given that platforms are behaving like
governor governments of this online
space can we change this so that instead
of the functions being maximized being
social welfare profit maximization
profit maximization utility maximization
can we somehow change this and bring a
more similar accountability to the
voting system that holds the government
accountable such that platforms are
getting closer to maximizing social
welfare than they currently are and
watching will really add it'll sort of
add a different sort of accountability
to platforms that's not just profit
maximization which is voting with your
feet and going to another platform that
doesn't really work it could add
something that may be similar to voting
um but we haven't really figured out
exactly what this will look like what
would governance look like on a
blockchain but blockchain technology
will allow that so that's how to
structure the relationships and of
course the relationships are
interconnected here because we know that
decisions the platform makes their
choice variables are the rules and the
rules are exogenous in the firm's
maximization problem the rules are X and
the people's maximization problem and
that creates that these interconnected
models that we can use to build up
economic models of what's going on now I
will say people often talk about
blockchain as enabling peer-to-peer
interactions and I do think that's a
good
but it's not a perfect technology for
example a lot of firms also help
facilitate peer-to-peer interactions and
I mean even without a blockchain you
think about eBay that's definitely the
platform it's a firm but it's it's
facilitating peer-to-peer interactions
it just has a governance system that
builds a reputation system around
people's ability to participate so that
you trust it more
so what blockchain brings to the
situation is partly a better way of
enabling peer-to-peer interactions where
the contracts that are governing you in
those interactions are not just from a
profit maximizing company there are
contracts that have a different system
of accountability built in now of course
if you're going to build a blockchain
platform for example you need to finance
that and you need a mechanism to finance
that it's going to probably utilize
investors of some sort who are gonna
invest money with a hope of getting paid
back so how do you make that happen
without profit maximization as the main
driving source behind the platform so
let's think about that actually this
video is probably long enough I'll think
about that in other videos that this
just gives you a framework for the
maximization problems we're gonna set up
to model blockchain


## Keywords:
