---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L_80InUow6U
---

# Video
Gabriel Rockhill, "The Imperial Theory Industry & the Compatible Left Intelligentsia"
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L_80InUow6U)

## Transcript:
so uh tonight's talk the Imperial Theory
industry and the compatible left
intelligence here is a really important
one
because uh what the people we have
thought very often or initially being in
the left have changed colors and
become uh what I would not call Marxist
anymore and
uh uh Professor Rock Hill who was very
familiar with French cultural critique
and the Frankfurt School and and various
schools of marxist culture and a
literary critic is uh has done something
very wonderful I think um in the spirit
of someone I much admire Walter Benjamin
because Professor Rock Hill has exposed
to us how variance of boua thought
aestheticize politics and how Communists
politicize
Aesthetics and in doing this professor
Rock has addressed the question of
hegemony in its function of
transformative Consciousness or
transformation of conscious both for the
purpose of expansion of imperialism and
the necessity of developing a resistant
uh politics or culture which does not
put
a uh knife between culture and class in
this regard Prof has conducted and
thoroughly
exposed uh and American imperialism's
Outreach through the medium of cultural
activities and its influence on global
intelligen here particularly through
various outreaches of CIA the US state
department and private corporations into
Academia and broader intellectual
production trying to create a global
environment of anti-communism and this
reminds me of the time when I was a
student in the 60s in Kolkata and
teacher in the
70s that um Congress for cultural
Freedom encounter
group and uh United States information
service were all very active here and
trying to recruit Young people as well
as intelligen share to the cause of
anti-communism uh USS turn to the east
happening much earlier we would G
through of Korea and Vietnam and so on
and uh there was a really given the kind
of left culture in West Bengal at that
time there was really a very big attempt
on the part of people like Edward
Shields and uh and
Broomfield John Broomfield Marin Wayner
and uh Professor diok from Chicago
essentially a lot of people were coming
and going here trying to recruit recruit
people and I think that's very important
because um uh it it drew away some
really interesting and intelligent
people from ver uing
Marxism and uh took them towards United
States and it was backed also by ability
to give um
scholarships and various kinds of trips
to different us
universities University of Iowa being a
very central place at that time and uh
and people going there and it became uh
influence I think partially in setting
up a certain kind of comparative
literature uh in jadur University and
probably in other places as well but
those days are gone now at least here
and the Americans are no longer trying
to act recruit
actively uh because muching has been
done and many are out of the country and
and now they no longer need to recruit
because there is often a spontaneous
departure to the imperialist cor from
our parts of the world so I just wanted
to uh mention this because I
read uh Professor Rock Hill's writings
earlier also with much interest in this
and um and I think that uh what is
happening now uh is uh not only blatant
but also subtle influencing of the world
of marxist thought in a direction that
is exemplified in rethinking
Marxism both mentioning or alluding to
the journal but also in the new left
turns that are constantly happening in
it whereby it's becoming in the name of
Marx and
Marxism uh there's been a a kind of
invention of Mars that is you know
serving the ideological
purpose um and supposed to be helping us
to think deeply about marks but most of
the time what it does is leads you away
from marks towards other ways of
thinking and uh and I think Professor
Rock will talk about much of this
imperialist cultural uh industry so with
that I invite uh Professor Rockhill to
speak and the books that I wanted to
mention and I aced with some his other
work as well have been already mentioned
by ship Muni so Professor Rock Hill
please join
us okay sorry I had a trouble unmuting
myself there uh thank you so much it is
a real pleasure and honor to uh be able
to share some of my research with you
and get feedback uh from you himman
Benner's uh opening comments resonate
very very strongly and I think give a
perfect framing to my work and my
concerns I'm I'd also like to thank all
of the organizers for this conference
and apologies for any mispronunciations
on my part suani um chatu Paya uh surra
banerji sandip Muni and I'm sure a lot
of other people who have gone into
organizing this getting the poster ready
and setting everything up uh I know a
lot of Labor goes into coordinating
these types of things and I greatly
appreciate it what I thought I would do
with the time that I have which is about
30 to 40 minutes is give you a brief
outline of the book that I'm currently
completing for monthly review press and
also give you a few concrete examples so
that you have a sense both of the
overall conceptual architectonic if you
will but then also some of the concrete
details uh that come out in the book so
this book uh the intellectual world war
is the title seeks to contribute to
contemporary Marxist scholarship in a
number of ways including by making two
arguments concerning the development of
the super structure in the Imperial core
marks described the ideological super
structure as composed of two elements
the political legal apparatus on the one
hand and forms of social conscious such
as those operative in religion culture
and philosophy on the other the first
argument in this book has to do with
this first element the political legal
apparatus of the buis state and it
consists in demonstrating that it needs
to be understood itself in terms of two
components particularly in the era of
Monopoly capitalism or imperialism
there's the visible form of legal
government that administers the
spectacle of public
politics but there's also an invisible
government that manages the population
often through illegal means and as Annie
laar has brilliantly explained the
increasing concentration of wealth under
capitalism which takes on Extreme forms
in the Imperial phase of Monopoly
Finance Capital has required greater
recourse on the part of the bis state to
the men and women of the
Shadows I thereby draw on a large body
of marxist research to argue that the
bis State needs to be understood in
terms of a political spectacle and
behindth scenes
manipulation the second argument that
the book advances concerning the super
structure is that it is helpful to
postulate a third element in addition to
the two-faced political legal apparatus
and social Consciousness there is a
centralized apparatus that forges
formats and preserves this Consciousness
which of course marks and Engles already
saw and they wrote quite poignantly on
the kind of industry of philosophy in
particular in the German ideology so in
my own work drawing on figures like
Berto bre I propose to call this system
of cultural production circulation and
consumption the cultural apparatus it
includes all of the cultural religious
and intellectual institutions
that Forge people as thinking beings and
format their Consciousness in this
regard ideology is not only a byproduct
of the material relations of production
it is also forged maintained and
overseen by an ensemble of
institutionalized forces that condition
social Consciousness in the imperialist
era of Monopoly capitalism this cultural
apparatus is so highly industrialized
and centralized that it is that it
arguably EX exercises an awesome degree
of power never before seen in history
the majority of the book then focuses on
this cultural apparatus and even more
specifically on the intellectual
apparatus it does this through a
dialectical analysis of the relationship
between economic base and the
superstructure which I describe in terms
of a political economy of knowledge
production so the political economy of
knowledge production which is integral
to this analysis allows us to track the
impact of economic forces on the types
of knowledge that are produced widely
circulated and consumed it also sheds
light on which forms of knowledge are
excluded from support marginalized and
targeted for widespread discrediting as
we'll see there are multiple forces that
have been at work in the political
economy driving the capitalist
intellectual apparatus universities have
of course been key since they are major
corporations involved in the production
and dissemination of knowledge the same
of course is true of think tanks and
various intellectual organizations and
associations the publishing industry has
been equally Central for its importance
in the distribution and consumption of
knowledge and the mass media has played
a major role as well as culture
Industries the capitalist ruling class
which largely controls and oversees the
institutions just mentioned has also
interceded rather directly by using its
foundations to exercise its dominion
over intellectual production circulation
and consumption the so-called big three
foundations Rockefeller Ford and
Carnegie have played the largest role
but many smaller foundations have also
been mobilized the bis state has been
very involved at multiple different
levels especially through its National
Security State which has played an
extremely important though widely under
theorized role in propaganda and public
relations in 1975 the church Committee
in the United States helped shed light
on the intimate relationship between the
ruling classes foundations and the
invisible government quote the cia's
intrusion into the foundation field in
the 1960s can only be described as
massive excluding grants from the big
three and it's interesting as a side
note that the church committee excluded
The Big Three who actually worked very
intimately with the Central Intelligence
Agency thereby running cover for them
but outside of the big three this is the
rest of the quote of the 700 grants over
10,000 000 given by 164 found uh other
foundations During the period 1963 to
1966 at least 108 involved partial or
complete CIA funding more importantly
CIA funding was involved in nearly half
the grants of the non-big three
foundations made during this period in
the field of international activities in
the same period more than onethird of
the Grants awarded by non-big three in
the physical life and social sciences
also involved CIA funding so you have
the invisible side of the bis State
working hand and glove with the
foundations that are obviously just
extensions of multi of uh the
corporatocracy uh in order to influence
intellectual
production in this regard I think it's
important to see how State forces and
financial forces obviously uh work
together and collaborate on precisely
these types of activities so in order to
understand the analysis that I undertake
in this book it is imperative to
recognize that just as there is a car
industry and a music industry there is a
theory industry intellectual production
is not the result of individuals
thinking on their own or entering into a
free Marketplace of ideas it is a
consequence of the overall social
relations of intellectual production and
thus an entire industry that not only
creates and distributes theoretical
products but also manufacturers the
intellectuals who make them in the first
place this industry has evolved
significantly over time whereas the
commodification of ideas accompanies
capitalism like its shadow there has
been a veritable industrialization of
knowledge production in the Modern Age
although this has been a process devoid
of sharp breaks at least within the
capitalist world the era of imperialism
has brought with it a global
intellectual uh industry whose level of
development far surpasses that of the
19th century in our day and age there is
an extremely powerful IND industry with
global networks for the production
circulation and conception of ideas its
apex is situated in the Imperial core
led by the United States so the Imperial
industry of ideas has produced an
intellectual labor aristocracy meaning a
group of extremely privileged thinkers
in the Imperial Corps who are elevated
socially and economically above those in
society at large as well as those
situated in the
periphery moreover there's a comador
intellectual labor aristocracy that
exists and Garners Val in the periphery
that Garners value from its subservience
to the core's theoretical
nobility um people like uh gatric spec
from uh India I think would be a very
good example of that to become a number
although she was fully integrated into
the intellectual labor aristocracy and
the core of course to become a member of
this labor aristocracy just as in other
Industries you need to spend years even
decades proving your falty to the
intellectual apparatus and being tested
on your ability to perform the highest
echelons of this theoretical aristocracy
are generally occupied by those who like
Samuel Huntington and Francis fukiyama
have made the greatest contributions to
the ideological agenda of those who
control the means of intellectual
production they're the leading thinkers
of of the day because they're the top
producers of ideological products this
is how we need to understand what is
often called the star system the leading
intellectual luminaries of the
capitalist World very much like movie
stars are those who have contributed the
most valuable commodities for the
industry uh it's important to note I'll
be very quick on this that both fukiyama
and Huntington not only work at Prestige
institutions in the United States but
they have deep ties to the US National
Security State as well as to the
corporatocracy and the world of
Foundations meaning that they are
instrumentalized intellectuals on the
part of the capitalist ruling class and
its bis state in the case of Huntington
he spent half a century at Harvard's
Center for international Affairs which
was founded by CIA connected Henry
Kissinger and Robert Bowie who was a
trusted Confidant of John J McLoy and
served as the Director of policy
planning who oversaw the US state
Department's internal Think Tank right
so at Harvard this is basically an
external Think Tank to the US state
department it's what's referred to as a
cutout moreover Huntington became White
House coordinator of security planning
for the National Security Council so he
was a National Security State operative
during the Carter Administration he in
his famous book The Clash of
civilizations which is obviously
profoundly anti-communist and
anti-marxist it was in his own words
quote made possible by the financial
support of the John M Olan foundation
and the Smith Richardson Foundation both
foundations are major funders of neoc
conservativism of the American
Enterprise Institute and so what he's
literally telling us in his book is that
he is an intellectual who has been
bought by the capitalist ruling class
more specifically the arms industry and
the pharmaceutical industry which is
where these two foundations come from
and a National Security State operative
who is producing the ideology that then
becomes the bestseller due to the fact
that there's so much power exercised
over this syst system of distribution
and consumption but I the book itself
does not focus on although I touch on
people like Huntington and fukiyama uh
or an apple Bal or other people like
this the book really focuses on a
specific Niche within the Imperial
intellectual industry by examining the
work of those who have been marketed as
radical theorists even marxists in
various ways some of them even say that
they're Communists or present themselves
as anti- capitalists uh others are
inspired more directly by anarchism or
libertarian socialist traditions and
still others profer a form of radical
critique that refuses to be contained
within any of these labels what they all
share in common however is that they
have been promoted internationally as
the most important leftist intellectuals
of the day they're the leading
luminaries of a sector of the industry
of intellectual production that might
best be described as the radical Theory
industry in the Imperial core this
industry has primarily been developed
during the phase of capitalist
accumulation known as neoliberalism but
with roots going back further it's
therefore impossible to separate it from
the cold war and more specifically from
the intellectual World War on communism
since the bgea cultural apparatus has
been incapable of Simply eliminating
Marxism due to its broad public appeal
its clear explanatory power and its
proven ability to transform Society it
has been faced with the Dilemma of how
best to deal with its
existence as the book attempts to show
its preferred tactic has been to use its
Monopoly control over the theory
industry to inter internationally
promote a commodified version of Marxism
often referred to as Western Marxism or
cultural Marxism as well as forms of
edgy theory that purport to surpass
Marxism in their radicality and
sophistication if we simply if if we
simplify things to the extreme we can
say that the Mantra of the the theory
industry has been if you cannot beat
your competitors the actual marxists
then flood the market with well-
packaged but cheap knockoffs promote
them to no end and try to bury your
competitors as
P this book focuses on the two
foundational reference points for this
contemporary radical Theory industry
German style critical theory coming out
of the Frankfurt School and French
Theory although there's also extensive
engagement with some Italian Theory
British Theory and contemporary angone
uh so-called radical or critical
theory uh there are two chapters that
deal with the Frankfurt School five on
French Theory and then the final two
chapters really look at the radical
Theory industry uh internationally uh
but with a focus on the Imperial core
mainly Western Europe and the United
States although these intellectual
Traditions have marketed themselves as
distinct and each thinker within them
has promoted their own idiosyncratic
brand there's a remarkable level of
ideological consistency that is very
important to see what they all share in
common is their opposition to actually
existing socialism with only the rarest
and absolutely explainable exceptions
they generally reject communist parties
and Anti-Imperialist State building
projects and any political solutions
they put forth for the problems they
diagnose within the capital world are
often at best idealist projections of a
magical Third Way Beyond capitalism and
socialism by situating the radical
Theory industry within the intellectual
apparatus of the dominant capitalist
powers and their political economy of
knowledge production as well as within
the ongoing context of the cold War's
intellectual World War on communism this
book seeks to elucidate the ideological
center of gravity of the left
intelligencia in the Imperial core which
is what is known as the compatible left
or the respectable left this term as I
analyze in the book has been widely used
by the US National Security State to
refer to the type of left that is
acceptable a left that rejects socialism
in the real world and is ultimately
respectable because it is compatible
with capitalism and even
imperialism I should note moreover that
the analysis in the book is Thoroughly
dialectical meaning that it does
acknowledge that the intellectuals
studied have indeed mobilized their
subjective agency they're not just on
puppet strings and doing what their uh
what the uh the string pullers or the
kind of corporate and bgea uh Marinette
players want them to do in certain
instances they've even these
intellectuals formulated critiques of
capitalism neoliberalism consumer
society and the culture industry so part
of my analysis is a variegated analysis
that takes those forms of agency very
seriously because uh in part of the very
incorrect stereotype concerning Marxism
that it is just determinist and doesn't
allow for agency which is of course
absolutely incorrect so far from denying
the agency of the intellectuals involved
in the radical Theory industry I would
merely like to situate this agency
within the objective social World which
entails asking a very simple and
practical question that is rarely raised
Within These AC mic circles if
capitalism is recognized as having
negative effects as a lot of the radical
theorists will recognize what is to be
done about it the deeper ones Minds down
into the lives and work of the theorists
under question sifting through the
deliberate obscurantism of their
discourse the more obvious their
responses become and the easier it is to
understand the primary social function
of their shared intellectual project for
as critical as some of them are of
capitalism they regularly affirm that
there is no real alternative what is
more any criticisms of capitalism pale
in comparison to their uncompromising
condemnation of socialism their brand of
radical Theory ultimately leads it
implicitly or explicitly to a politics
of capitalist accommodation since the
socialism since the social socialism
itself is judged to be far worse than
the extent capitalist order they
therefore profer what we might refer to
as ABS Theory anything but socialism the
theorists examined in this book again
mainly Frankfurt School critical theory
French theorists and then contemporary
theorists like Judith Butler Wendy Brown
Nancy Frasier Shaya benabib Etc who are
inspired directly by this tradition and
come out of it uh so the theorists
examined also exercise their ageny in
dedicating themselves to specific
political and ideological struggles some
of them have worked very EXP explicitly
within the tradition of Fredick nche and
Martin haiger in order to combat Marxism
and a few have actively contributed to
anti-communist uh subversion campaigns
like jacqu dereda in Czechoslovakia and
Michelle Fuko in Poland I'll say more
about this in a moment others have
primarily contributed to ideological and
cultural efforts to discredit Communism
as is clearly visible in the work of
Theodore dorno and Max foron still
others like alamu and slavo xek Antonio
negri and those working more generally
in a kind of radical form of theory that
became very popular in the early 21st
century they've presented themselves as
the only real Communists by advocating
for a mysterious Third Way Beyond both
capitalism and socialism that is
Thoroughly idealist they've positioned
themselves on an idealist Stairway to
Heaven in an attempt to convince their
readership that a magical path
transcends the terrestrial class
struggle between imperialism and
actually existing
socialism finally some of the authors uh
examed in the book have moved between
these positions over time so a
significant portion of this uh book will
examine the objective social forces that
have encouraged and fostered these types
of activities however it's absolutely
essential to recognize and account for
the agency of those involved and much of
the book would is dedicated to tracking
that in great detail in relationship to
the system described uh as the Imperial
Theory industry the intellectuals who
succeed and Advance within it have
mobilized their agency to play to the
system far from acting as simple
automatons they've met the system
halfway a third of the way or some other
ratio in doing so they have received
uplift in return meaning opportunity
opportunities to advance within the
system by climbing the social ladder
advancing their careers securing
prestigious and lucrative academic
appointments publishing and Premier
Outlets gaining a large public following
having their work widely translated
being invited to International junkets
having access to the mainstream media
and ultimately occupying a position in
the pantheon of bis history given the
extensive development of the theory
industry and its Imperial Dominion the
uplift it provides far surpasses simple
career advancement within a particular
field it literally makes individual
theorists into Global Superstars perched
at the very top of the intellectual
labor
aristocracy which is an extremely
lucrative position accompanied by a
truly awesome power of cultural
influence so the principal form of
agency that these thinkers have
mobilized is
opportunism it is not the least bit
surprising in this regard that these
intellectuals have been so widely
supported and promoted within the
capitalist World in its Imperial Theory
industry in order to shore up the
compatible non-communist left over and
against the threat of actually existing
socialism what better tactic than to
Champion Scholars like these as some of
the most important and even most radical
thinkers of the Contemporary world
critical theory and even Marxism can
thereby be redefined as a kind of
anti-communist radical theory that is
not directly connected to class struggle
From Below but rather freely criticizes
all forms of domination including quote
unquote authoritarian socialism and
which ultimately sides with capitalist
control societies over and against the
purported quote unquote fascist horrors
of powerful socialist States that's a
quote from adoro and hor in this regard
the group of theorists promoted by the
Imperial Theory industry have played the
role of radical recuperators under the
guise of radicality they ultimately work
to recuperate potentially Insurgent
forces within the extent system by
denying the existence of a real concrete
alternative their purported radicality
can take on different forms some openly
identify with the radically reactionary
philosophies of N and haiger While
others engage in the communist cosplay
of petty bouis radicalism many of them
combine elements of both extremes and
shift back and forth based on the need
of the needs of the moment so that is at
least some of the overall architecture
of the book what I'd like to do is share
a few concrete examples and then we can
open up for discussion and debate the
first example is looking at the work of
jacqu Dera and Michelle Fuko Dera
cultivated a reputation for ual
sophistication based in part on always
problematizing the terms of debate and
interrogating unquestioned
assumptions in the case of the Cold War
however undecidability completely
disappeared dereda was never on the
fence regarding what side he was on nor
did he seek to bring sophistication and
Nuance to the analysis of his class
enemies quote we must have very definite
political priorities end quote this is
dereda who flatly asserted this at the
sbon in March 1980 leaving no room for
ambiguity and this was a meeting
convened by krine odar to present and
discuss with 50 French philosophers the
anti-communist subversion campaign being
run by Oxford philosophers in
Czechoslovakia rather than expressing
his signature skepticism dereda
unflinchingly supported this binary
campaign as a matter of fact he
co-founded in 1981 a French chapter of
the principal organization used by the
British the Yan hus Educational
Foundation the
jhf serving as its vice president in
France the jhef brought together
conservatives and right-wing
intellectuals and artists who are
opposed to Communism as well as some
anti-communist liberals like dereda
social Democrats and trotskyists the
relevant political distinction was not
the right left dichotomy as it operates
within the imperialist core but the much
more fund Al polarization between
quotequote democracy and quote unquote
totalitarianism meaning the global class
struggle between the capitalist world
and the Socialist World Dara not only
fully accepted this binary but he also
unquestioningly embraced the value
hierarchy that positioned one side of
this opposition above the other as a
matter of fact this value Laden binary
functioned as the transal Horizon of his
theoretical practice I can't go into
this in detail here but I demonstrated
it in the book I probably should have
noted I did my Master's Degree under
jacqu Dera know his work very intimately
and well from the inside so this is not
just a fesal uh dismissal of his work
it's reading through his work but
situating it within the objective social
totality so well dereda was busy
sniffing out the specters of Western
metaphysics within the cannon he was
squarely operating within the parameters
of Western
imperialism so the yanus educational
Foundation that he was involved in Ran
subversive seminars and smuggled books
into Eastern Europe it mobilized press
and media connections to bolster their
cause including radio Oxford the BBC
Radio free Europe and the times all of
which have ties to the British and US
National Security State they also
engaged in an expansive pro-western
cultural campaign in Czechoslovakia and
Western Europe which included specific
programs for music Art Theater
literature film television and religion
to quote plant the seeds of opposition
in the communist countries they also
established support networks for writers
Scholars musicians and artists who were
banned from presenting their work
meaning that they supported the work of
anti- communist dissidents all in all
the activities of the yanus Educational
Foundation for which dareda was the vice
president of the French chapter
resembled in content form and scope many
of the other anti-communist campaigns
run by imperialist powers and their
National Security States during the
cultural Cold War such as uh as what was
alluded to in opening comments the
Congress for cultural Freedom the list
of those intellectuals in and artists
involved in the yanus educational
foundation's destabilization activities
reads like a veritable who's who of the
Imperial intelligencia major figures
from the anglophone world included
Charles Taylor Roger scrutton Tom ster
Donald David EP Thompson and Richard Ry
hmas was involved from Germany as well
as erence tuken hot in France dereda
Jean FR leotar Jean luk N atan balar
were all involved as well as Paul rur
Alan Alan fle Kraut and uh Andre glesman
the probably quintessential
anti-communist and close friend of
Michelle Fuko Roger scrutin was driving
force behind the yanus Educational
Foundation he was one of the people who
prompted dereda to start the French
chapter of the organization and famously
in
1985 uh scrutin published an article in
which he made a passionate plea to
Garner support from the Central
Intelligence Agency for cultural and
intellectual war against communism
claiming that the CIA was a charitable
organization serving a quote Noble and
non-violent purpose and explicitly
denouncing the public outcry over the
ay's funding of the Congress for
cultural Freedom now as far as I know
the yanus Educational Foundation never
received direct financial support from
the CIA however it operated in the exact
same networks that were being funded by
the company and it had the same
objectives uh as these organizations uh
supported moreover it was uh it did
receive funding from the most important
CIA cutout which is the National
Endowment for democracy the person for
helping to draft the legislation
establishing the Ned in 1983 Alan
Weinstein who was also a professor
candidly explained that quote a lot of
what we do today was done covertly 25
years ago by the CIA end quote this
organization of uh anti-communist
destabilization that daral worked very
explicitly for also received funding for
an impressive array of corporate and
governmental sources with a record of
supporting anti-communist subversion
including the Margaret thater Foundation
the open Society fund the Ford
Foundation the US Embassy in Prague and
the United States information agency all
of which have worked uh very very
closely with the US National Security
State in this regard um dareda clearly
was not someone who lacked political
commitment which was one of the things
that you often hear in the more kind of
liberal or even trist critiques of
postmodernism dareda was a
committed uh uh political intellectual
it's just that his commitments were to
anti-communism so much so that he was
famously arrested in Czechoslovakia when
he had smuggled in uh books and uh other
materials to share with the dissident
intellectuals that were part of the
destabilization campaigns that were
being run by the Central Intelligence
Agency at that point in time it's
interesting to note moreover that when
dareda returned to France one of his
after this moment of being arrested in
Czechoslovakia which we could talk more
about if people want he was immediately
met and supported by his old friend
Michelle Fuko with whom he had had a
decades long falling out so
fukko uh and dareda lined up on the most
important political Battle of the time
and that was the battle against
communism in the case of Fuko he was
actually doing more or less the same
thing that dareda was doing in
Czechoslovakia but instead in
Poland uh beginning in the 19 mid 1970s
and with increasing intensity in the
early 1980s The prominent theorist of
power relations and this is according to
one of his leading biographers quote
spared no effort to help the dissidents
from the countries of the East end quote
he signed many prisent petitions
publicly supported Sol solidos on
numerous occasions solidos is a
complicated movement and I go into this
history in the book it began as a kind
of more workers oriented movement but
quickly became more of a petty bgea
destabilization campaign its primary
supporter in the West Was the Central
Intelligence Agency which we know
through Internal Documentation of that
fact at this point in time and Fuko
himself publicly oversaw a uh Comm
solidos which is basically a a fund to
raise finances for anti-communist
destabilization in the East and that
fund almost certainly had Central
Intelligence Agency money
trafficked through it so Fuko spared no
effort to support the cause of
anti-communist dissidents in the East he
accused the Soviet Union of being a
colonial Force he expressed the worry
that Soviet Union was imperialist and
was going to take over and Destroy
Western Europe so he is perfectly in
line not only with the Central
Intelligence agency's position but also
the Reagan Doctrine as I'll explain in a
moment so uh Fuko was not only actively
engaged in supporting dissent politics
in Eastern Europe through fundraising
delivering money and supplies which he
did himself physically media events
publicity campaigns public spectacles
Publications pressure campaigns all
aimed at eliminating socialism and
integrating Eastern Europe into the
Western fold he shared this objective
with Ronald Reagan National Security
decision directive 54 signed by Reagan
in 1982 identifies the exact same
objective quote the primary long-term us
goals in Eastern Europe is to loosen the
Soviet hold on the region and thereby
facilitate its eventual reintegration
into the European community of Nations
end quote uh this is almost identical to
a quote by Fuko that I share in the book
the same document goes on to specify in
perfect line with a position advocated
by the nichan Frenchmen that the US
government will employ commercial
Financial exchange informational and
diplomatic instruments in implementing
its policy toward Eastern Europe and
sd75 signed the following year took
things further according to Richard
pipes by advocating to change the Soviet
system um so external resistance to
Soviet imperialism is the basic line
within the US documents and Fuko
explicitly advocated for all three of
these positions he was clear about the
need for Western governments to exercise
this is a quote from Fuko their means of
pressure on the Soviet Union and on the
Eastern Camp by the voice of theed
United States through political and
econom or economic negotiations end
quote so given fuko's forthright
solidarity with the Reagan Doctrine and
the neoliberal project of
counterrevolutionary revanchism it is
unfortunate that the extensive academic
debates on his relationship to
neoliberalism have remained primarily
theoretical not taking up the
all-important question of his practical
activities as an anti-communist activist
pursuing the Reagan Doctrine I realize
that I haven't shared all of the kind of
concrete details but I'm happy to go
into them further in the discussion but
in the interest of time I just want to
touch in the last five minutes on uh a
question that I often get based on what
I've published in some of my public
talks around this is okay well this was
yesterday year this was in the 60s and
7s or what about today in the 21st
century does this still go on or have
times changed there's a very long
chapter at the end of the book that
basically argues that no times have not
changed in so far as the same basic
forces are still operative although
there have been certain very important
shifts that have occurred one of the
most important is due to institutional
inertia meaning that given the extent to
which the Imperial Theory industry has
been set up and institutionalized a lot
of the forces operative within that have
now basically indoctrinated more than
one generation of intellectuals and so
there's a kind of inertia to the
rightward drift that was being fostered
by the Central Intelligence Agency and
other forces therefore a lot of the
direct intervention isn't as necessary
because so many people are swimming
Downstream so to speak by swimming in
the direction that the imperial Theory
industry wants them to swim I'm just
going to touch on a few examples in the
Contemporary world and leave it at that
I won't be able to get into details but
they're at least important reference
points a great one is uh someone like uh
Yale professor and highly mediatized
public intellectual Timothy
Snider uh Timothy Snider actually was
trained by people who were running
anti-communist subversion campaigns
behind the Iron Curtain and that's part
of the public record those were his
professors he has had a prestigious
appointment at The enan Institute for
strategic strategic studies if you
remember the name of the Olan Institute
this is a foundation that comes out of
the arms industry that supported the
work of Samuel Huntington that I
mentioned at the beginning right and so
he works at the weather head Center for
international Affairs at Harvard
University this is a policy uh this is
focused the
basically uh Harvard's think tank that
he works at on policy relevant security
research and training students for
national security
positions um the John M Olan Foundation
I should have mentioned as well is also
uh on record as having served as a bank
for the Central Intelligence Agency at
least for the period between 1958 and
1966 and it is currently involved along
with the Koch brothers the Richard
melanca uh foundation and other bgea
anti-communist foundations in a dark
money attempt to reorient the political
slant of American higher education to
the right uh helmet Harry Loven brought
my attention to what's called the
Ukrainian history Global initiative that
Timothy Snyder is currently overseeing
that is funded by the pro-western
Ukrainian oligarch Victor uh pinchuk and
Snyder himself has been quite candid
about the Ukrainian gravy train that he
is on quote I can think of few Endeavors
in contemporary Humanities at least
which are on the scale keeping just
under a hundred Scholars active for
around three years if you just do the
math it's a fair amount of money end
quote so depending on how much the
scholars are being paid pinchuk
investment in anti-communist revisionist
history being overseen by Timothy Snyder
is between about 1030 million right so
just as Huntington was doing this work
in the past and continues so is someone
like Timothy Snyder more as a liberal
imperialist than a neoconservative
imperialist but they agree on the
essentials is doing that work today I'm
just going to allude to a few other
examples quickly in 2019 it was revealed
that the British Ministry of Defense
paid the school of Oriental and African
studies in London hundreds of thousands
of pounds for cultural advice on how to
operate in its former in former colonies
among those who received payments was
Professor Gilbert ashar who co-authored
a book with Nome Chomsky and frequently
contributes to Jacobin magazine and
democracy now including after the
revelations that he was a subcontractor
for the British military right he
himself has publicly identified as a
Marxist while vehemently advocating for
the overthrow of independent
postcolonial governments in Libya and
Syria Professor chsky apparently gave uh
I'm sorry uh encouraged ashar at least
that's what he says to provide
educational resources to the British
military claiming that that it's
important to let critical voices be
heard even among the military and
Professor Chomsky uh himself has given
at least one lecture at the US
military's uh West Point in
2006 uh and this also influenced the uh
staff decision to uh on the part of
British military to mobilize British
intellectuals like they did with ashar
and the US military runs a very similar
unit to the British military using quote
unquote leftist intellectual tools to
train their own military uh operatives
chsky I'll just note in passing is of
course a very renowned anti-communist
that's one of the reasons that he's so
famous within the capitalist core I'll
share one quote with you Lenin leninism
is in my view counterrevolutionary and I
can flesh out where Chomsky goes with
this but he's uh rapidly
anti-communist uh the it's important to
note moreover that both Jacobin and
democracy Now function in many ways as
networks of compatible left media very
much like the Frameworks that were
supported in the past by um the US
National Security State and the
corporatocracy the foundation World
continues to do that so democracy Now
receives Ford Foundation money as well
as JM kapan fund money uh both of which
have intimately collaborated with the
CIA and functioned as conduits I'll
mention maybe just two examples really
quickly and then wrap up it was revealed
in
2022 that uh the cele journalist Paul
Mason conspired with intelligence
operatives in planning quote to wage
allout war on Anti-Imperialist and
left-wing academics activists campaign
groups independent journalists and media
sites end quote uh this became a quite a
I think important Revelation because it
demonstrated that Paul Mason who is you
know has published many books and is a
celebrity journalist was working with
British intelligence and with British
academics to try to set up uh but I
think it failed because of the
revelations an anti-communist subversion
Network perfectly modeled on what the
history of the ird and other
organizations within Britain have been
doing uh the last example that I'll
point to and again I could unpack this
further is that uh someone like Judith
Butler who comes directly out of the
tradition of Fuko and derida and the
arch Zionist Emanuel levinos and is
obviously part of the intellectual labor
arist Ry has received uh millions and
millions of dollars from the melon
foundation in order to set up a critical
theory an international Consortium of
critical theory programs and run a whole
series of um intellectual production and
distribution mechanisms including a
journal A Publishing House International
junkets International um a whole series
of international uh conferences and and
so it demonstrates again I'm not getting
into the details but it's important that
a non-marxist
anti-totalitarian which is vocabulary
that Butler uses in her book with lcla
and xek uh radical recuperator because I
think that's what Butler ultimately is
is precisely the type of compatible left
intellectual who's supported by the
capitalist ruling class today many other
examples I could point to but in the
interest of time I'm going to wrap up
there thank you so much for listening I
look forward to the questions comments
maybe some criticisms as well
uh thank you Gabriel that was such an
interesting talk uh it sort of covered a
huge ground gave us something like a
Arad thread to go through this Labyrinth
at the end of which there is always this
monster of anti-communism at work and
those who are players within it it some
I think are deeply aware of what they're
doing and others might as intellectuals
yeah young intellectuals not having any
money for research and project and so on
turn towards it
because there is as you rightly point
out like a celebrity culture and these
areas have all been covered by this
famous you know 20 or 25 five names and
it's very hard for young intellectuals
or older ones to find a space because
part of the problem which I would like
to ask you about is um what where would
one
publish in the west or even in the east
at this moment if one had such a
contrary view to these uh
celebrities that dominate the world of
so-called knowledge
with capital K where would we go what to
look
for yeah sorry just so the host knows I
can't unmute myself I have to be unmuted
by the hosts just uh so feel free to do
that uh the it's a it's an excellent
question and part of there's a book that
I edited and co-author the introduction
to by Dominique sordo called Western
Marxism which will be coming out in
August and in the introduction to that
book we outlined some of these issues
because it's important to know that in
the west the form of quote unquote
Marxist discourse that can be published
and is widely distributed is compatiable
left Marxism usually going under the
banner of a Libertarian socialist uh
position that traffics easily within
anarchism Verso books is a great example
thereof Verso has done some good books
uh Hey Market as well well but within
that that framework the fundamental
orientation has also been one of not
allowing certain voices to be widely
distributed and within the the uh
Western World I think there are some
exceptions to that and it be an
opportunity to announce as well this
hasn't been publicly uh proclaimed yet
but with iscra books which I think is
one of the better Publishers within the
Western world uh the critical theory
Workshop is collaborating along with br
and we're launching a new book series
called Anti-Imperialist Marxism in order
to deal with the problem that there's a
dir of platforms to do this type of work
and have it published and widely
circulated there are some other examples
mainly of activist presses uh and then a
lot of the more non-compatible left
discourses if you will tend to be
published by major corporate Publishers
like Springer or palgrave McMillan that
only only have books that are available
to research institutions because they
cost
$100 and so there are different levels
at which this operates but what it
basically means is it is quite difficult
to get access to get access to
Affordable books that take different
positions than the dominant positions
and that of course is has always been
one of the goals of controlling the uh
apparatus of of knowledge production so
it's very important as well that we try
to build as much institutional power as
we can through forums like this through
research centers think tanks publication
platforms uh journals Etc the world
Marxist review was just launched and I'm
involved with that with a number of
other people uh which is an important
Endeavor to have an international
Journal that has the credentials of
being peer-reviewed and serious but is
not hostile to those who think that it
is worth taking seriously socialism in
the real world and not just socialism in
the mindscape of Western
intellectuals and so we have to also
push on that front in order to develop
more
infrastructure that's but I'll turn it
back to you for other questions or
comments yeah so so am I
unmuted yes can you hear me yes um I
just want to uh say that uh
to are the people w Wai in in the wing
to ask griel questions and uh should I
would imagine he would like to hear what
questions those are we have a question
from hinduli hindol I'm unmuting you you
can ask your
question yeah actually I had a question
about a very specific article I came
across in rapael Samuel's Anthology it's
about it's a socialist pering to
socialist Anthology it's a Stuart Hall's
article called deconstructing the
popular it is considered as a very
seminal article Vis the cultural studies
the entire academic apparatus of
cultural studies and I came across a a
phrase which all say it's displace class
conflict which he pertains to those
communities or these the mes and the
people who are down the the social
political ladder and who Express
themselves via spes of Hope if if I'm
using David har ter terminology in the
sense that the festivals and rituals
Hall is saying has a displace class
conflict in it inherent in it and all is
pertaining to uh its readers urging its
readers to look for a potential
socialist politics or socialist
potential in these uh festivals or
rituals uh there is exactly my question
put to this discussion that was
happening the entire discussion what is
your professor uh what is your entire
idea about all the sprs and the entire
theorization that is done this was my
question thank
you it's it's an interesting question
I'm obviously familiar with Stuart
Hall's work I don't have this particular
essay fresh in my mind I would say that
I think if you situate hall within the
kind of objective history of the history
of the Imperial Theory industry Paul
represents a kind of new left
orientation that comes out of of aler
and
poststructuralism and aler I think made
some important contributions but also
functions as a kind of pivot within the
history of the French intelligencia
rooted in a certain version of the
Communist party but also then oriented
toward
as operating within the kind of new left
turn of the radical Theory industry
which is not to say as I mentioned in my
opening comments that we shouldn't
engage with variegated analysis and look
at whether or not there are elements
within the work for instance of aler or
Hall that we might find helpful but I
wouldn't look to them for a systematic
uh and coherent apprehension of
contemporary imperialism for instance
which I think is the most important
thing to understand in the case of the
idea of displaced class conflict as you
mentioned it does make sense to me that
there are ways in which the Contemporary
cultural Industries within the Imperial
core attempt to take class struggle and
displace it and to aestheticize in
various ways you see this in the case of
the United States through the sports
complex where the easiest way to
mobilize the masses within the United
States is to have a sporting event
because then people will be really
polarized really excited and you can get
out tens if not hundreds of thousands of
people people and that displacement
though operates in such a way that
instead of people rooting for their team
being the working class they're rooting
for a regionally
inscribed uh you know team that itself
is just training people in regionalist
and nationalist thinking and culturalism
ultimately as opposed to class analysis
so those forms of aestheticized
displaced class conflict can be very
dangerous and I think that's one of the
reasons that they work in that way is to
depoliticize people uh but what you
allude to as well is the possibility of
using that displac class conflict as a
kind of site of organizing if I
understood the question
correctly that I mean it would be
interesting to think about how you can
connect with people where they're at and
Infuse that type of displaced class
conflict with more of a socialist
orientation I think we'd have to talk
through then and figure out what would
be the tactics that could potentially be
mobilized in those contexts in order to
move something from basically a a size
displacement of class struggle to an
actual serious class struggle or at
least an education in class struggle and
the the example that comes to mind is I
do think that there are great artists
and cultural producers who are using
this kind of mechanisms of displaced
class struggle to bring forth a message
that is quite different than what you
get in kind of common fodder within the
capitalist industry someone like boots
Riley his musical groups like The Coup
is advocating for uh basically an
overthrow of capitalism and doing it
very explicitly with his lyrics with his
organizing with his movies with his TV
show Etc and so I think uh one of the
most interesting at least tactics that
I've seen is trying to use the extan
industry against itself in a kind of
Trojan Horse tactic where you introduce
into the system a message that usually
the system excludes but you smuggle it
in because you make the message look
somewhat palatable to those who control
the means of cultural and intellectual
production so I I'll leave it at that
and turn it back over to the
moderator wonderful uh okay so anyone
else that want to jump in and there is
another question written in the chat box
by uh indru Roy Reay uh indru asks that
thank you Professor roil for the deeply
thought-provoking talk would you
classify the so-called culture War as
stouted by the American Media and their
political apparatus involving the same
convenient left with their new icons in
the likes of Ibrahim X kendi for example
as the new age super structure to keep
the imperialist hegemony intact by
distracting the public with easy hob
goblins in the form of anti-racism and
transgenderism thank you
it's an interesting question I'm not
familiar with Ibrahim X kendi apologies
for my ignorance I mean I do think that
the culture war that the United States
has been waging right this is often
affiliated with the kind of Rise of the
neoconservative movement within the US
context and displacing political
conversations right to cultural
conversations but I think that that's
part of a much
larger bgea ideological
assault on historical and dialectical
materialism which consists in
trafficking in race-based thinking and
culturalism and identitarian thinking
instead of undertaking a materialist
analysis of class and class struggle and
so these uh aspects of kind of
contemporary woke politics are actually
just the latest iteration of earlier
versions of politics and vulgar
multiculturalism that go back to a kind
of new left anti-communist politics that
was prevalent in certain sectors
obviously not all of them are 60s and
70s that goes back as well to the kind
of social chauvinism that was diagnosed
by lennin in the inter War period
because what they all share is the kind
of bgea ideology of cultural
essentialism of identitarianism over and
against a kind of a a class analysis and
that one thing that is imperative for us
to do is to recognize the chameleonic
nature of ideology ideology to be
successful does have to change form
because people see through it because
reality is quite a powerful force and
Marxist analysis is the most powerful
force for elucidating that reality and
allowing people to apprehend it in a
more objective Manner and so the most
recent woke iterations I think are just
a continuation thereof I didn't fully
understand the the references to
anti-racism and transgenderism but I
will say one thing that I hope will
respond to that and that is that one of
the ways in which the Marxist Heritage
has been mischaracterized particularly
within the Imperial core because there's
an entire industry that's been
fabricated around this is presenting
Marxism as only focused on class in some
very reductivist economic sense of that
term and not having taken seriously the
woman question the national question or
what people today in the emperial core
would call racism and uh questions of
race or for that matter sexuality which
is a little bit more of a complicated
scenario but just on the question of the
woman question and the national question
what this reveals is a deep and profound
institutionalized ignorance concerning
actual Marxist theory and actual Marxist
practice and if you do study that
history it becomes very very clear that
INF fits and starts with setbacks with
contradictions with ongoing class
struggles marxists have taken very very
seriously the need for National
Liberation and racial Liberation and
that is integral to Anti-Imperialist
Marxism from start to finish and it's
centered the woman question in so far as
you know someone like Lennon said you
know Engles already said the first form
of class struggle was class struggle
between man and woman and that you can
judge a degree of emancipation in a
society by looking at the relationship
between man and women and looking at how
emancipated women are uh on the racial
or national question you know someone
like lenon was crystal clear about this
as well as the woman question he said we
can't win a revolution without women we
need women on board because they're not
only exploited they're super exploited
through domestic slavery and they're
oppressed by the structures of uh the
way in which gender relations have
tended to be structured under capitalism
and therefore we need both racial and
National Liberation and women's
Liberation as integral to an anti
Anti-Imperialist Marxist orientation
what this means then is that I think
what we need in the Contemporary moment
is not more woke culturalist
identitarian politics but really a
mining down into the history of class
struggles in the plural right which
include racial struggles and struggles
for women's Liberation and struggles for
sexual Liberation to demonstrate the
extent to which the best parts of the
Marxist tradition have always been
invested not only in theory but in
practice in Chang in the extent system
not just addressing these problems at a
personal level at an individual level or
for a class stratum because ultimately
identity politics and woke politics it's
a class politics of the professional
managerial class stratum within the
Imperial core and so hopefully that I
don't know if it fully addresses your
question but at least will flesh out
what my positions are in relationship to
some of the issues that you
raised so is there anyone else yes we
have the another question from Jesse
Jesse I'm unmuting you you can ask your
question okay uhh thanks shund so uh uh
this was an excellent lecture and uh I
just have two simple but unrelated
questions one is uh does structural
adjustment come up in your work it seems
that one of the most important vectors
that elevate these Western intellectuals
is the fact that academic institutions
outside of the West were completely
gutted in the
1980s uh and whole schools of thought
become marginalized you think of on the
African continent the DAR Dar Salam
School of political economy and history
the ibadan school which wasn't Marxist
but you don't hear about it anymore
because of structural adjustment I know
the uh comparative literature Department
that nugi Tango founded has been gutted
very recently so that's one question and
then the other is I don't know if you do
much with uh
history but does the what does the anal
school and particularly Fernand brodell
come up in your work because he had a
very powerful position within the French
Academy very influential but he also
came up with a materialist conception of
history that was explicitly non-marxist
and was widely disseminated so I'm just
wondering if that pops up in uh your
research
great questions I don't deal explicitly
with structural uh adjustment but what
you highlight is is very important and
if you have resources you want to share
with me I'm an active learner and always
uh interested in new material what you
highlight though does at least
correspond to some of the concerns in
the book and that is the relationship
between the extremely powerful Imperial
Theory apparatus within the core and the
destruction of uh modes of intellectual
production within the periphery and so
what I decided to do in this particular
book and actually this also responds a
little bit to an earlier question this
book I actually wrote already years ago
in French for a French publisher and
then when the French publisher saw the
contents of the book they withdrew in
horror because that publisher was making
a lot of money off of some of the
thinkers that was being critical of and
so they revealed the kind of principal
orientation of the publishing house was
more in the interests of their own
financial gain than in spreading radical
theory that might even be critical of
some of the values that have been profer
by that um by that particular Publishing
House the reason that I uh highlight
that is also to resonate with the
earlier question of like where can you
do this type of Anti-Imperialist work
but it's also because what was within
that book was a whole series of analyses
of the way in which the hegemonic
apparatus that I'm analyzing in this
book goes hand inand with the repressive
apparatus and that you need to
understand both of them together however
in rewriting the entire book in English
over the last few years and changing the
sum of it I decided to do two books
instead of one so basically this book is
focusing on the kind of hegemonic
apparatus and all of the material from
that earlier book manuscript that was
focusing on the repressive apparatus
I've integrated into another future Book
Project I'm not looking at what I have
on that book Now isn't looking
specifically at structural Readjustment
but it is looking very specifically at
the various ways in which the mighty
whiter which is the propaganda apparatus
set up by the Central Intelligence
Agency kind of international Juke Box by
which they control International media
and the publication networks goes hand
inhand with an international repressive
mechanism that takes many many different
forms some of them are directly military
and they just consist in destroying
countries other consist in targeted
assassinations against various
intellectuals and political leaders
others consist in you know torture
repression of various sorts and it's
interesting and I'm taking this as a
provocation I should definitely
integrate within that book project some
of the ways in which particular forms of
collective institutionalized
intellectual production have also been
targeted for um either destruction or
being sidelined underfunded other things
like that because you're absolutely
right that that's part of the overall
equation regarding that and it's not
unrelated the anal school does come up
quite a bit in the book in part because
of brell's position within all of this
which is rather complex in so far as as
you say broell put forth a kind of
materialist
interdisciplinary historiography graphy
that was in dialogue with certain
Marxist
Traditions however at the same time he
was doing two things one above board
which was the work that he was doing as
you pointed out correctly is uh not
really Marxist and differs in important
ways with the history of marxist
historical scholarship and on the other
hand more behind the scenes brodell was
a major academic operator who occupied a
whole position at
the which is the
ehess a famous School in France that was
came out of an earlier institution but
was eventually institutionalized in
1975 and happened to receive extensive
funding from the Ford and Rockefeller
foundations I didn't mention this but
Ford and Rockefeller works so closely
historically with the Central
Intelligence Agency that they have
directly asons to the agency and the
presidents of Ford and Rockefeller often
just work also either simultaneously or
intermittently with the US National
Security State so these are corporate
cutouts of the bis State they work hand
and glove and they're interlocked so we
can't get confused in fact the Congress
for cultural Freedom when it was
revealed in '
6667 that it was funded by the CIA it
had been funded by the Ford foundation
and what they decided to do is try to
run cover for themselves by just
switching all of the funding to Ford
Foundation right and the Ford Foundation
about the CIA Foundation because they
were meeting with them all the time and
talking about their propaganda efforts
so the fact that the uh school where
brodell was teaching was funded by
Rockefeller and Ford uh shouldn't
confuse us about the relationships
between those corporations and the US
Imperial Elite and the bis State
moreover brodell was the point person
for developing and recruiting forms of
what would later kind of become area
studies which is basically a
intellectual product of the National
Security State of the United States
because they wanted people trained so
they could become case officers and have
specialized knowledge concerning certain
areas of the world and uh they needed
knowledge that was interdisciplinary
brodell himself and this has been quite
well documented at this point in time
oversaw then meetings with the Ford and
Rockefeller foundations about the forms
of recruitment who they would hire and
who would get funding within the Osos
this institution that I was refilling to
that I was talking about which was very
explicitly identified as an
anti-communist Bastion for us American
style social sciences and history right
and the people who worked there for the
most part were the structuralists uh
Bart was there dered was there um uh
Borio taught there um and many others
within that camp structuralism within
the French scene uh prior to the US
influence was uh basically of a part
with poststructuralism that distinction
didn't really exist early on within uh
the French Academy so that's why I refer
to someone like dared as a structuralist
and the anal school was the other main
Bastion within the uh OS USS and brodell
very explicitly explained to the his
funders that they could operate in such
a way that there were a few Communists
members of the French Communist Party
who were at this institution and that
brodell would personally guarantee that
any funding coming in from these
corporations wouldn't fall into
communist hands and that he could
oversee that from behind the scenes
right so he was directly involved in
guaranteeing that the US corporatocracy
that works handin glove with the US
National Security State on
anti-communist intellectual
propaganda would operate in such a way
that the funding got to the real sources
of the anti-communist intellectuals the
structuralist and the anal school and
kept the Communists
isolated that is I think a very
important part of this history the final
thing that I'll note on this is there is
a
1985 CIA report that is now part of the
public record and was released and in
that report on the role of the French
intelligencia the CIA operatives who
wrote this identified two great allies
they said this is not an exact quote but
a paraphrase the anile school of
historiography and structuralism have
made important and Lasting
contributions to the struggle to develop
an anti-marxist form of social science
right so the CIA was on the exact same
page as the corporatocracy they
identified these people as assets who
they wanted to and did support so I'll
leave it at
that well
um if there isn't anyone else right now
I have a question that I'd like to ask
ask
Gabriel is there anyone else yes there
is one uh question asked by uh unu bosu
uh he is asking that uh I would like to
know your specific views on two
theoretical turns in the last few
decades uh uh within brackets there are
so many and you mentioned quite a few of
them one the utopian and Messianic
Marxism of the West best exemplified by
Jon agamben hard and negri and drawn
from the Frankfurt School that of course
overturns angles distinction between
scientific and utopian socialism two the
tendency of to read marks together with
Spinosa aler balber heart and Ne
thanks well I guess griel wants to
respond to
that yeah those are those are great
questions and there's a chapter in the
book that deals very explicitly with
this the title of the chapter is uh
radical theories infantile disorder
drawing of course on Lennon's important
criticisms of the anarchist and kind of
utopian elements within the libertarian
socialist camp and uh regarding the very
first question I I think it's important
to situate the context in which this
more radical version of theory became
prominent and that is the early 21st
century because in the 80s and 90s at
least within the Imperial core a lot of
the discussions were about
poststructuralism and how it could be
political ethical Etc and you have all
of that kind of unfolding while uh these
forms of French poststructuralism are
providing intellectual veneer to
Identity politics and vulgar
multiculturalism in short and so it's
all about proliferating differences
respecting differences and abandoning
class analysis dared do famously said I
can't use the word class I don't know
what it means of course not asking
whether or not maybe someone else could
use the word class to describe the
position of a petty boua intellectual
who FS not to know what class is Right
which would be dered da himself by the
time we get to the early 21st century
you have the dismantling of the Soviet
style socialism neoliberalism going into
overdrive and the US Imperial machine
going into overdrive in the wake of
September 11 2001 in particular with the
kind of New American Century project and
within that very specific context of the
early 21st century you have a real New
Market Niche that emerges and that is a
kind of radical theory that purports to
be and often presents itself as against
postmodernism against the philosophy of
difference Etc so you have xek becoming
a major uh commodity you have beu you
have roncier you have Hart and uh negri
this whole kind of complex you have a
gambin of course as well
Jameson had been around prior to that
point in time Jameson also generally
avoids making really explicit political
statements so he was on board to a
certain extent with that project but
wasn't promoted in exactly the same way
if you know the three volumes of the
book the idea of Communism would be a
great example of this idealist version
of uh Marxism and so they all presented
themselves as a as a return to Marx what
you get actually in these books and in
their writing in general and I can't sum
all of this chapter as as we speak is a
really
really I think horrific
misrepresentation of the history of
Marxism a turn away from historical
materialism a complete abandonment of
dialectical
materialism and a utopian version of
Messianic Marxism that says very
explicitly that what they're invested in
is the idea of Communism and they are
explicit idealists ATN bbar is a good
example of it an explicit
idealist and in that regard what they
say is that actually existing socialism
is a complete and absolute nightmare a
horror of Horrors the worst thing that
has ever occurred in the history of
humanity that's what GJ says beu
basically says as much in important
interviews on British TV Hart and negri
uh say that well the the vision the
distinction between capitalism and
socialism is no longer operative because
that's a modern concept and we have this
new postmodern way of thinking in which
these categories are no longer operative
and so we're going to talk about Empire
instead of imperialism we're going to
talk about the multitude which is not
the working class it's not the
proletarian right so they introduced
this very idiosyncratic vocabulary to
basically reinvent the old forms of
utopian Marxism and engage in the basic
crass forms of you know
paleoconservative anti-communism but
under the guise of being radicals uh in
that guard I think they really need to
be called out for what they are they're
radical recuperators they present
themselves as radical and their
fundamental social function is to
recuperate Insurgent forces around the
world within the pro capitalist
pro-imperialist field proof thereof is
the fact that the third volume of the
idea of uh communism was presented where
in a US military controlled neoc colony
of South Korea and it's explicitly
proclaimed that they could not utter
these ideas in China or in North Korea
because these are totalitarian societies
to be condemned like all totalitarian
societies Etc so they explicitly in
their practice as well line up on and
the other two conferences took place in
or three of them I think they were
Berlin London and New York right so the
you know centers of Imperial capitalism
this is where these people operate this
is where they're supported this is where
uh they're promoted and so Scientific
Socialism is out out the window for
these people they don't do materialist
analysis and quite honestly when you
compare their research socalled to the
historical and social scientific
research of real Marxist it's a joke
it's really embarrassing that people
would take these books seriously as I
did because I was trained to take them
seriously but then I learned a lot
better and I think a lot of other people
should and hopefully they will and I'll
make a contribution to that regarding
the red spinos this turn this is also as
I mentioned very early uh very briefly
early on the orientation coming out of
alus is using Spinosa over and against
you know other figures within the
Marxist tradition and it's imbuing a
kind of metaphysics into socialism
meaning that then socialism becomes
about these kind of forces and it it
becomes detached from a concrete
materialist analysis of class struggle
balibar early on remained in alera but
then he went hardcore derian and very
opposed to Cuba and any form of actually
existing uh socialism he supports
lifting the blockade right which is an
absolute minimum because it's illegal in
any case but refers to Cuba as an
authoritarian dictatorship which I think
is absurd to the extreme I haven't given
examples in my talk of you know what my
positions are on actually existing
socialism where I take them from Etc
some of the debates within them but I
take at a minimum that socialism in the
real world is worthy of like arod and
scholarly engagement not genu flection
to the dominant ideology where you
simply say the same thing as the US
state department and these thinkers this
these group of thinkers if you work
through it at the end of the day their
ideological positions are almost a cut
and paste job from the US state
department regarding their enemies right
they will say certain things about
capitalism being bad and horrific most
of that is based on a kind of subjective
phenomenological orientation that
consists in criticizing consumer societ
society and things like this some of
them have taken slightly different
positions like beu wasn't supportive of
the NATO intervention in Libya uh where
Jean was you know um setting the bar
pretty low when you finally have
somebody like taking a relatively
principled position on imperialism and
then a lot of other people not doing
that so anyway there's more that could
be said about that I think there's a
follow-up question about the views on
the role of anti-st structuralist
movement in theory which cropped in you
of criticism of aler yes yes um I don't
know if somebody wants to flesh that
question out but I'll stop
there so we have a comment from on who
asked the previous question making marks
a panthe via
Spinosa making marks a uh pane
by exactly
exactly yeah yeah it's a
spiritualization of material relations I
mean it's literally I mean bedu is is
and and and and gek as well I mean they
defend basically Christian positions
they're they they're Believers in a a
spirit world and they very explicitly
say the idea of Communism is so
important because it transcends
socialism and socialism is this
terrestrial form that's to be condemned
uh xek was involved in anti-communist
destabilization efforts very explicitly
against Yugoslavia which was socialist
at the time uh so bedu is probably the
furthest left of all these figures just
because he is a self- declared maoist
but what he means by that is this
Western cultural form of maoism in which
he fetishizes this very specific time
period within the history of the
cultural revolution and says okay there
was this great moment that we should
return to but everything else is to be
condemned uh which is a classic kind of
idealist fetishization of the great
moment in the past which needs to be
reborn today without a materialist
analysis of contemporary China or for
that matter of other uh contemporary
projects that are
Anti-Imperialist so ship are we done yes
yes we are done with the questions we
don't have any more questions so I have
not a question but I would like to uh
reflect a little bit if it's possible
for a few
minutes yes yes yes please go ahead go
ahead I I can
neither I can't see Gabriel
anymore can you can you hear us
Professor
banery but I can't see and not hear very
clearly
either uh we can we can see you and we
can hear you you can ask your question
or your remarks
U well um I would really like to sort of
mention this because it's not a
theoretical issue but ever since for
last 50 years that I've lived in North
America well my habitats has been
generally Canada but uh there's a kind
of vol what should I say voluntaristic
character to any kind of left
thinking I mean Marxist Corrections on
Marxism
uh new
Marxism anti-marxism but there's really
nothing that is activist political
long-term project uh that stays helps
people to stay the course uh neither in
us nor in Canada really do we have a
left political party so I've gone there
for 50 years ago learned about many very
valuable thing on feminism anti-racism
and various other question on but at the
same time I didn't see anything but a
kind
of uh now we do it now we don't do it
kind of approach or attitude how
academics say something how they don't
or even general or you know
intellectuals in the left um I just
think that there would be a
really a practical
necessity for having a left political
party and communist identified that can
do some kind of uh or offer a little
road map to where we want to go
politically Because unless these social
movements have something to bind with
and unless groups that call themselves
class oriented Ed thinkers or working
class sort of supporters have some the
something to bind with the social
movements with the way of looking at
classes only an economic formation will
probably remain there as a kind of a
major uh obstacle because when they do
culture they don't do class when people
do class they don't do anything with
cult culture which is why I started with
Gabriel's talking about his work as
somebody that politicizes Aesthetics and
unlike those who aestheticize politics
so I just wondered Gabriel's opinion
because after all after
1968 which seems to be the always the
date that people go back to when they
signal to some crisis in communism in
Europe uh how much crisis was really
there or how much communism was really
there and uh what happened
afterwards I don't know if I've been
able to reach to you some basic ideas to
you yeah there really really important
points that you highlight and the
intellectuals that I'm critical of in
the book basically share an anti-arty
ideology and an anti-state ideology
right so getting organized in the party
form is bad because it's hierarchical
and vertical and has led to atrocities
and states are just totalitarian forces
it's a classic Anarchist argument that
they try to put forth under Marxist
clothing uh which with apparently being
ignorant or ignoring all the
long-standing Marxist critiques of
anarchism and so I couldn't agree more
that the party form is necessary for
getting people really organized
educating them and being able to fight
and win as opposed to the social
movement model or a more horizontalist
model which uh can play certain roles
for bring people in educating them
connecting networks etc etc but has not
proven itself in material history to be
able to fight and win on the contrary a
lot of social movements are ones that
are very easy to infiltrate destroy uh
misdirect Etc as the history of
countries in the Imperial core
demonstrate and the history of those
parties is a complex one right uh and we
could do a whole session talking about
the history of the cpusa which in the
case of the United States and you know
in the 1930s and 1940s they or at least
1930s they were really doing a lot of
this very important anti-racist work and
uh work with unemployment work with uh
labor in general it was Anti-Imperialist
Etc the orientation that that party has
taken over time has shifted like a lot
of the communist or socialist parties
within the Imperial core because they've
become more oriented towards an agenda
of working within the kind of
parliamentary system and are more kind
of reformist in some of their
orientation that said you know some of
these parties continue to do some
important work in certain sectors and I
think it's important to be able to both
recognize that and work with them the
other major impact has been so many of
the trist offshoots from these parties
that tend to create sectarianism
splintering on the left and then they
lay claim to being the only true party
the real Communists the ones who really
know how it's to be done Etc sometimes
creating really topheavy hierarchical
organizations that actually do fall into
some of the things that the anarchists
are critical of and I think that we
should be critical of because they're
not workingclass workingclass driven
organizations um so that everything that
you outlin I couldn't agree more with
and hopefully we'll have follow-up
exchanges about this because it's one of
the most important things for us to do
at this moment in time regarding your
reference to 68 I think that 68 at least
within the kind of euroamerican context
ends up being an important Watershed in
part because of the ways in which the
most important elements within the
Imperial core France I'll take as an
example because I happen to know it well
was the workingclass movement it was the
largest strike in the history of Europe
that was organized in 1968 and it was
led by Communists and so that was a very
important part of that struggle and
workers made real substantive gains at
that point in time well at the same time
they did not consider it to be a
revolutionary situation and that's where
they differed with the students and a
lot of the petty bgea kind of radical
elements that were anti-communist and
largely Anarchist and utopian socialists
who claimed it was a revolutionary
situation but we don't need a party to
do this we can just do it through
occupations mass mobilizations and
through the movement if you will but it
wasn't clear how that was going to
happen and so uh people like Michelle
kusar and other important French
marxists have criticized it for being a
magical Third Way politics where we're
going to revolutionize the S the system
but we don't have a coherent plan we
don't have tactics we don't have
strategies we're not organized Etc and
so a lot of what came out of 68 was this
kind of new left utopianism that really
was headed nowhere and in the wake of 68
the French State and it was similar in
other context undertook an absolutely
repressive approach that was Draconian
it was they were rounding up people for
Distributing literature that was leftist
they were shutting down publishing
houses it was illegal to show films
about 1968 I mean post 68 French
government went really really
authoritarian and had a massive
Crackdown on the left but at the same
time it allowed for a lot of that
Insurgent Anarchist kind of approach to
then become Incorporated within the
intelligencia and a lot of the French
thinkers then got on that bandwagon and
renamed themselves as 68 thinkers when
they were all opposed to the workers
movement many of them were skeptical of
68 in general questioning the student
movement in various ways sometimes in
legitimate ways but in general it's from
the point of view is of petty bis
professors who had institutionalized
positions of power and so another effect
of 68 is that then what you have is a
kind of symbolic radicality that becomes
a hot commodity in the wake of 68
because everybody wanted to identify
with the movement so just as people
around the world would you know buy CH
gavara t-shirts buying up fuko's books
or laon's books within a very specific
class segment of the professional
managerial class and those who aspire to
it students and youth Etc uh that's what
becomes very fashionable and it's part
of the radical marketing if you will of
French Theory when in fact what was
going on in the ground was was uh was
counterrevolutionary it was against the
strong kind of workingclass movement
that was overseen by parties and strong
unions and so it's part of the kind of
drift to the right and so if we want to
reignite the spirit of the 60s I think
that we have to do it in such a way that
it's not about reigniting this Anarchist
utopian Spirit but reuniting reigniting
the elements of the 60s that themselves
were reigniting within the Imperial core
the very important struggles of the kind
of inter War period in the 30s when it
was about anti- iism and a form of
class-based uh emancipation from
colonialism from women's uh oppression
and exploitation and from racial uh
oppression and exploitation and so I
guess that's how I I would kind of frame
that and the last thing that I'd say is
that in order to do that we can't do
that on our own as individuals we have
to do that collectively and we need to
build institutional power through having
our own intellectual apparatus that we
control and that we you know own you
know as as much as possible and that we
also need to do it in such a way that
we're working with unions organizations
associations political parties in order
to build real power instead of just
trafficking in this kind of social
movement politics that is way too easy
to to shut down in that regard I shared
in the chat uh one of the Endeavors I'm
involved in is the critical theory
Workshop which is co-hosting or
co-sponsoring this event which is an
educational nonprofit that we use as a
kind of platform for forms of Education
that are quite difficult to do within
the Imperial University so if anybody's
interested in it check out the uh call
for uh applications and we do a lot of
other activities as well so check out
the website if you're if you're
interested um the goal in sharing that
is not self-promotion as much as it is
demonstrating the importance of like we
need to do institution building we need
to do it to together we need to do it
collectively in a non sectarian fashion
because that's the real way of building
power so I'll leave it at
that sounds great we could go on for a
month or two about each one of these
topics they're very important and thank
you Gabriel for such a wonderful talk
Rich we could take each piece and
discuss later on thank you and uh ship
it's yours thanks a lot thanks a lot
professor banery and thanks a lot
Professor Gabriel roil uh as uh
Professor roil mentioned that this uh
talk today is co-sponsored by critical
theory Workshop uh we have uh the app
call for application for the summer
school organized by critical theory
Workshop in the chat box and we will
circulate the call for application
through email uh to everyone who joined
this talk today and more um but I would
like to ask Professor sujit Chad from
Center for marxian studies jadur
University who is co-p sponsoring this
event uh for uh any concluding comments
if she
has Gabriel thank you very much actually
what you said reminded me of a of a
thriller written by per Valu called
Murder on the 31st floor and I think all
of us should read it again after we read
Gabriel's book so I look forward to
reading Gabriel's book and then
returning to Mur on the 34 first floor
again I mean given the state of the late
buo Academia the attack on public
education uh the kind of fascist attacks
we face every day I think this kind of
talk should be organized by us in the
future and we should all build a
solidarity um not a network not not that
that word from the corporate Academia
but
real solidarity so that our words
resonate in future thank you again thank
you himashi and thank you Gabriel and
ship thank you so
much thank you so much it was a great it
was a great honor and pleasure and I
hope that we'll be able to collaborate
in the future and continue pushing
things in the right direction uh I look
forward to remaining in contact and
finding other opportunities to
collaborate certainly we will keep in
touch with you thank you thank you you


## Keywords:
