---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jMx3ovNmqmw
---

# Video
Gabriel Rockhill - How The Left Should Analyze the Rise of a Multipolar World, China, Russia & BRICS
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jMx3ovNmqmw)

## Transcript:

today is October 7 2023 and we have a
very special guest on the show today
Gabriel rockel Gabriel rockel is a
philosopher cultural critic and activist
who publishes in French and English his
work is dedicated to a materialist
analysis of the social totality and it
has thus far focused primarily on three
intertwining themes of History politics
and cultural culture Dr Rock Hill is
currently professor of philosophy at
Villanova University and is the founder
and executive director of the critical
theory Workshop Dr Rock Hill is the
author of several books a few of which
include counter history of the present
untimely interrogations into
globalization technology and democracy
which was also published in
French interventions in contemporary
thought history politics Aesthetics
radical history and the politics of art
Dr uh Rock Hill also co-authored and
co-edited politics of culture and the
spirit of critique dialogues which was
also published in French and Spanish Dr
Rock Hill also published numerous book
chapters and scholarly articles and
various academic journals in addition to
his scholar scholarly work he has been
actively engaged in the art and activist
worlds as well as a regular contributor
to uh public cultural and political
debate his writings have appeared in
Outlets such as the New York Times
Liberation the LA Review of Books
counter punch Black Agenda Report media
part common dreams truth out and many
more uh his um he's also been
interviewed on numerous media Outlets
including breakthrough news on Con on
contact with Chris Hedges clearing the
fog the real News Network Moment of
clarity with Lee Camp Against the Grain
on KP fa France 24 and many others Dr
Rock Hill thank you so much for coming
on the show it's an honor to have you on
the show and welcome to the show thank
you so much for having me on and thanks
for the excellent work that you've been
doing thank you thank you um well today
we wanted to talk to you about the rise
of a multi-polar world um it seems like
we at one of those Epic moments in
history where there's a significant
change in the global correlation of
forces um so starting off with a kind of
really broad question how should our
friends on the left be perceiving and
analyzing the rise of a multi-polar
world I think in order to understand
what's currently going on you need a
deeper historical perspective so that
the conflict between the imperialist
world and the emergent socialist world
can be correctly framed and so I would
say very briefly that if you look back a
hundred years what was going on in the
early 20th century was an
inter-imperialist rivalry between the
major capitalist countries and that
World War I was a consequence of that
and it had a kind of um backlash that
was precisely the type of backlash that
wanted to be avoided by many of the
powers in the capitalist world and that
is that It ultimately gave birth to the
first successful socialist revolution in
what became the Soviet Union in
1917 and that inter imperialis rivalry
though continued through what Dominique
Lort refers to as the 30 Years War
because World War I and World War II
were largely in continuity and fought
between you know in the highest at the
highest level of abstraction it was a
war fought between the United States and
Germany for uh Imperial leadership over
the capitalist world and the second
world war of course was primarily fought
on the Eastern front as an attempt on
the part of the Nazi war machine to
destroy actually existing socialism in
the East and just as World War I had um
failed in so far as it backfired by you
know sparking the emergence of the first
uh socialist republic World War II
backfired in many ways because the Nazi
war machine didn't defeat uh the Red
Army on the contrary the Red Army
defeated the Nazi war machine and
proceeded to then liberate Eastern
Europe from Fascism and from the
authoritarian regimes uh that had
preceded fascism in at least most of the
Eastern European countries as well as
routing fascism in the East and
liberating Korea um leading then to a
kind of wave of anti-colonial Liberation
struggles in the wake of World War II in
which the Socialist world not only you
know expanded right after the war but
then continued to expand in many ways up
to about the late 1970s you know with uh
the Vietnam War uh was a situation in
which the Vietnamese successfully routed
the US imperialist Army and established
a socialist country in 1975 and it took
20 years to do so or 30 actually almost
um and so uh the same with the Korean
Peninsula socialism moves revolutionary
socialism moves to the Western
Hemisphere with Cuba in 1959 and so this
deeper historical context I think is
very important because what it allows us
to see is that the inter-imperialist
Rivalry of Monopoly capitalism was
resolved in two senses one is that
imperialism as Lenin had predicted was
the staging ground for the emergence of
socialism it prepared the world it
ripened the world for socialism and that
was indeed the case right but secondly
it's important to recognize that that
inter imperialist rivalry has been
transformed into a leading imperialist
power with a series of Junior
imperialist power uh Partners so by the
end of World War II you have the United
States emerging as the leader in the
imperialist world and the European
powers the former imperialist Powers
Hadar largely been destroyed by the war
and therefore were then reintegrated
through the Marshall Plan and other
mechanisms into a NATO for that matter
into the Western World along with
Australia can Canada Japan Etc and so
what you see in the wake of World War II
is really a uh a war for the former
colonies that is fought between the
leading imperialist power and its Junior
Partners on the one hand and the
Socialists and the emergent socialist
World on the other
that tide begins to shift in by the time
you get to the late 70s early 80s with
the emergence of neoliberalism as a form
of counterrevolutionary revanchism on
the part of the imperialist powers a lot
goes into what happened with the kind of
phase of neoliberalism but one key
aspect of it was an attempt to dismantle
the Soviet Union and the Eastern sphere
through a whole series of much more
aggressive uh destabilization campaigns
color Revolution utions and things like
this and as well after the dismantling
of the Soviet Union the rolling back of
the social welfare state in the west
which was a class compromise which was
maintained due to the fact that the
Soviet Union uh was and for that matter
Eastern uh socialism in general was a
reference point for the West in so far
as it made them look very bad if they
didn't care at a minimal level for their
citizens and provide some semblance of
you know healthare and housing and
education and things like that and with
the Eastern example of the Soviet Union
no longer there neoliberalism could go
on the Rampage and just completely
dissolve that social welfare now which
is a big part of the neoliberal project
as well as the attempt at kind of
structural Readjustment uh and the
targeting of the third world for ongoing
processes of
neocolonialism in that regard what we're
living through finally to come to the
multipolar kind of phase in these
developments is the exhaust of the
neoliberal phase of capitalist
accumulation that is due to a number of
different factors one of them is simply
50 years of us-led neoliberal
imperialism that has developed a whole
series of contradictions but also
demonstrated very clearly to the world
what it means to uh be in a world in
which the United States exercises its
principal leadership uh there's been a
massive rolling back of democracy under
neoliberalism uh both internationally
and for that matter domestically in a
country like the United States there has
also been an attempt to um control the
emergence of any countries that want to
follow alternative paths to development
and so in that regard the exhaustion of
the neoliberal project has LED and of
course these are processes they don't
start one day and finish the next uh the
process of neoliberalization goes back
quite deep and for that matter the
process of developing a multipolar world
goes back quite far because the US
ultimately was never able to exercise
unipolar hegemony the us became the
leading imperialist power in a world in
which socialism was expanding and
there's too much I think defeatism on
the left that doesn't recognize as very
fundamental history uh the US was
literally on its heels uh due to the
expansion of socialism and its inability
to defeat you know communist peasants in
Vietnam or to completely take over the
Korean Peninsula and in that regard the
US position although it attempted to
exercise unipolar hegemony never
succeeded in doing so fully the
neoliberal phase LED it as close as it
possibly came to that but what we're
currently living through is the attempt
on the part of Nations that historically
have been subjected to imperialism to
put together an alternative development
project that pushes back against
imperialism and I think I think a final
thing I'll say on that in that regard
because we might dig into this a little
bit deeper is it's important to
recognize that uh in the history of
Liberation struggles from imperialism it
was often necessary for or proved itself
to be necessary for socialists to Ally
with national bises that were
unsatisfied with imperialism in order to
undertake anti-colonial revolutions it's
what some people refer to as the kind of
two stages of Revolution you saw this in
China you saw it in Vietnam and there
are other cases thereof were first the
Communist allied with the national bisi
in order to expel the imperialist powers
that had invaded them but then the
second stage of the Revolution was then
uh uh de um well overthrowing the
national bisi in order to establish
socialism and so the emergent
multi-polar world isn't you know a
socialist revolutionary project in the
same way that for instance the third
international was or the common turn in
various ways it is a project of
tactical uh allegiances between National
Bourgeois developmental projects on the
one hand and socialist developmental
projects on the other these are not
necessarily strategic Partners in the
sense of the strategy of the overall
kind of objective but the way in which
China as the leading socialist power in
the Contemporary world is playing things
is quite different than the way in which
the Soviet Union went to about these uh
Endeavors of you know struggling in a
against the the capitalist and
imperialist powers and that is that uh
China clearly is aiming for a process of
peaceful development and peaceful
cohabitation in which socialism is
recognized as being Superior for its
Superior developmental model right and I
think there's a lot that could be
unpacked regarding its belt and Road
initiative its rolling bricks and other
things and just what it's been able to
demonstrate at its own level of
development but I presume we might
return to some of this in the rest of
the
conversation thank you um for that
answer that was very very detailed and
there's so much to dig into um that I
don't know where to start but I think
just start with the next question that
we're getting a lot from um our friends
on the left and that which overlaps with
what you've been talking about is how
does Lenin's theory of imperialism
applied to what we were discussing the
rise of a multi-polar world the winning
of us hamani we have heard many on the
left in the US um say things like the
rise of a multipolar world is not a step
forward for workers or oppressed people
because this is just as you were
discussing this term before an inter
imperialist rivalry um how should we
apply Lenin's the imperialism to what
we're seeing today with a rise of a
multipolar world I think it's important
in discussing Lenin's work that we
approach uh both his work and the
methodology of his work in a kind of
dialectical fashion meaning that lenon
of course always insisted on the need
for a concrete analysis of concrete
situations there's not some blueprint or
some magical recipe that we can find and
then we just apply it indiscriminately
all over the world and I have seen
within certain figure you know certain
debates within Western left
intelligencia an attempt to read you
know the basic definition of imperialism
that Lenin gave you know a little bit
over a hundred years ago and then just
apply it to today that's not a
dialectical analysis what you need to do
is understand what Lenin was doing
understand the way in which he framed
that particular historical moment and
draw on the methodological rigor and
power of his analysis not just do a kind
of cutand paste job if you will and so
in the case of Lenin of course he
defined imperialism most succinctly as
the Monopoly stage of capitalism right
when free market capitalism transitions
into a form of capitalism in which
there's Monopoly control on the part of
the major corporations that uh get rid
of a lot of aspects of free competition
precisely because they can control
everything from the top down set prices
uh Etc and in unpacking that definition
you know Lenin himself said in his book
on imperialism there is no you know
quick and easy definition of imperialism
and any definition that we give has to
be attentive to the scale of analysis
right and you can talk about imperialism
very abstractly or you can zoom in if
you will and as he Zooms in he
highlights five features the prevalence
of monopolies which I just mentioned the
merging of Bank Capital with industrial
Capital the export of capital on the
part of imperialist countries instead of
the uh export of Commodities the
formation of international capitalist
monopolies which of course are still
very much with us and the territorial
division of the whole world meaning that
for Lenin the phase of imperialism was a
phase in which the colonial booty had
already been divided up amongst the
capitalist powers and therefore it was a
moment which they began fighting over
access to the colonies which goes a long
way to explaining World War I and uh
also World War II in certain
regards if we then have this
methodological approach in mind and
avoid a simple cut and paste job I think
that what we need to do in looking at
the history that we have since Lenin
himself was writing is that as I was
mentioning a moment ago this 30 Years
War of inter-imperialist rivalry leads
to a moment in which the United States
due to the fact that it entered both
Wars late and was also playing a very
clear pragmatic game in fact Truman the
president of the United States at the
time World War II is on record is saying
well if the Russians are uh winning or
the Nazis are winning that should
dictate the way in which we intercede in
the war meaning we could be on the Nazi
side we could be on the Russian side
let's wait and see who's winning and
that will dictate what our precise
policy is and of course there's a deep
history of collusion on the part of the
US government and the corporate ruling
class with the Nazi uh regime and for
that matter with the fascists in Italy
and so
the um the situation in the wake of
World War II was one in which the US
emerged as the dominant Imperial power
and the Rivalry between imperialist
Powers became somewhat secondary to what
became the primary contradiction in
global politics and that was the
contradiction between and the conflict
between socialism on the one hand that
hadn't been abolished by the Nazi war
machine and capitalism on the other in
that regard I think it makes sense for
us to recognize that in the Contemporary
World we're still in a phase of imperi
imperialism but a phase of imperialism
that has played out much along the lines
of what Lenin himself had already
theorized and that is that it was the
staging ground for the emergence of
socialism this struggle between
socialism and capitalism has been in
fits and starts and has been quite
complicated as I very briefly sketched
out with a kind of neoliberal phase of
expansionist uh imperialism that I
mentioned just a moment ago now
regarding the kind of specificity of
some of this debate on the left of
course so much of it focuses on Russia
and China we might dig into this a
little bit deeper but I'll just say
rather quickly that in the case of
Russia what you had of course is a
country that emerged From the Ashes of
actually existing socialism and to
understand contemporary Russia you have
to understand what happened in the
demolition of the Soviet Union which was
the most cataclysmic peacetime economic
collapse of an industrial country in the
history of the world right this was a
collapse that uh some theorists refer to
not as perista but catasta it was
absolutely catastrophic to the
population I'll just give a few quick
examples of this there was mass
popularization and unemployment extremes
of inequality rampant crime uh combined
as well with legalized gangsterism and a
precipitous looing of public assets so
by the late 1990s national income had
fallen in the uh in Russia by more than
50% investment by 80% and real wages by
half the numbers living below the
poverty line in the former Soviet
republics had risen from 14 million in
1989 to 147 million before the 1998
financial crash and so the market
experiment had produced more orphans in
um more orphans in Russia than Russia's
20 million plus wartime casualties you
saw epidemics of chera and typhus which
are basically unknown in the developed
unindustrialized World reemerge millions
of children suffered from malnutrition
widespread sex trafficking um the life
expectancy plummeted it was absolutely
catastrophic for the population which
explains one of the reasons why in the
at the turn of the 20th 1st century and
there's many different polls that one
could look at because these stats are
pretty consistent throughout uh recent
history 85% % of Russians regretted the
dissolution of the Soviet Union and of
course in I believe it was 1991 there
was the referendum regarding the
dissolution of the Soviet Union and the
overwhelming majority of citizens said
that they didn't want the Soviet Union
dissolved in that regard what we have in
contemporary Russia is not the
continuation of the Soviet Union
obviously it is the consequence of what
someone like Michael parenti calls the
third world isation of former socialist
countries they're literally put back at
the level of the third world so that all
of their um assets can be looted by the
imperialist countries but there has been
a shift in uh the relatively recent
leadership in Russia and that shift has
been away from being the Running Dog of
the imperialist powers who had looted
the country and had a played a very
direct role in dismantling the Soviet
Union uh the book Victory goes into some
of the details of the Central
Intelligence agencies and involvement in
this destabilization campaign there's
lots of other good documented work on
what the US did to uh contribute to the
dismantling of the Soviet Union but with
uh the Putin regime and the other uh
developments within contemporary Russian
politics it's very clear that there is a
process of national restoration an
attempt to take Russia out of this phase
of just catastrophic destruction on the
part of the Imperial Powers reestablish
some sense of just stability within the
country politically economically
socially and also firm up Russia's
position within the world and we see
this quite clearly beginning with Syria
and continuing up to today when Russia
is not willing to follow the Washington
line in that regard within Russia Bruno
Dy and some other people have done
excellent work on this front it's not a
capitalist country but it has a very
very power powerful communist movement
and the Communist Party of Russia is of
course the second leading political
party and so part of the project of
political
restoration plays to one audience of the
Russian populace and that is this
left-wing Progressive audience that has
positive memories of or knows positive
things about the history of actually
existing socialism but there's another
constituency that's also very important
within Russia and that is a constituency
that's also invested in National
restoration but a national restoration
of a different sort a more nationalist
uh restoration with even Roots going
back to zaris and kind of the pre uh
pre- Soviet Union and so in that regard
Putin plays to both a kind of a very
strong left-wing con uh constituency but
also right-wing elements in trying to
consolidate a project of national
renewal um there's more that could be
said about this but I'll just touch
briefly on on China and we might dig
into this uh more deeply I think that
it's becoming more widely recognized
even within the Western world that China
is a socialist country it's not a
capitalist country but it's a socialist
country as it says itself with Chinese
characteristics and so it's taken on
very specific form since uh well since
its Inception but also with the reform
and opening up over D under Deng xao
Pang and the uh opening up of China to
global capitalism and to uh foreign
investment and at the same time the
Chinese model of development has been
one in which there is an attempt
to
uh I would say and this is drawing on
the work of changen Fu and others who
have written quite poignantly on this to
develop socialism as a dialectical
process in which you can't leap from the
capitalist extent world into a perfect
world of Communism overnight it needs to
be a dialectical process in which the
strategy is always clear and the
strategy is a more egalitarian more
ecological sustainable World in which we
no longer have wars and mass poverty and
all of the horrible things that
capitalism brings with it colonialism
Etc that's the strategy but the tactics
have been such that it's been recognized
not unlike Lenin with the NEP back at in
the day allowing capitalist investment
it's that if you want to develop your
country and you're in a world in which
the capitalist countries not only are
the most powerful economically
militarily but they also have uh
technological advancements that surpass
your own and they have capital and the
possibility of capital investment then
socialism needs to be part of a
dialectical process in which it
tactically works with the capitalist
World in various ways not in order to
strategically Ally itself with the
capitalist world but in order to be able
to Leap Frog over the capitalist World
in a developmental project that
strategically is aiming for the
expansion of the Socialist world and so
in the case of china you have seen very
great gains on the part of the uh you
know what China has done for its own
population perhaps first and foremost
but also its role uh geost strategically
because when China China uh when China
became communist in or socialist in 1949
life expectancy was in its 30s you know
now it surpasses life expectancy in the
United States the population was largely
illiterate at the time and it had
suffered from A Century of humiliation
so it had been subjected to uh various
forms of colonialism and neocolonialism
didn't exercise sovereignty and so in
that regard in relationship to the kind
of General debate that's being had on
the left over imperialis
Anti-Imperialist rivalries and things
like this I think that the clear
conclusion from a historical materialist
analysis is that in the case of Russia
you have a developmental project uh of
the national bis that is a project of
national Rejuvenation that does have
some rootedness within the communist
movement within Russia and the Russian
Communist Party supports the uh current
uh de the the military intervention in
the
Ukraine and you have uh China which is a
socialist government that is uh intent
on trying to develop alternative
International infrastructure for
development and neither of these
countries are invested in an imperialist
project as we St understand what that
means historically and so in that regard
the emergence of the multi-polar world
that we were talking about just a moment
ago is you know uh the working together
of socialist countries with countries
that are focused more on National
development and that those projects I
think can most clearly be understood as
Anti-Imperialist in so far as what
they're rejecting is the Imperial order
in which the United States would lead
with its Junior Partners in to a world
order overseen by of course NATO and the
military apparatus all of the Economic
Institutions that it generally controls
IMF World Bank Etc and all of the uh the
kind of international organizations uh
like the UN and uh other such uh forms
of governance and that world is a world
in which the rest of the world has
largely been subjected to a status of
programmed
underdevelopment and and or what some
theorists call the development of
underdevelopment and that is the world
that the Washington consensus is trying
to maintain right that the countries in
the periphery remain in the periphery
and are used by the imperialist powers
in many many different ways for economic
profit and what Russia and China are
doing with different
strategies is saying no to the
imperialist world and many many other
countries are saying the exact same
thing because they have lived through
and experienced at a very visceral level
meaning people are dying from these
experiences the consequences of
neoliberal capitalism and US leadership
in in the world
today again again thank you so much for
that very detailed comprehensive answer
and my next question again may be
overlapping repetitive but I think it's
important to continue to like dig in and
follow up on these questions um
how should the left be analyzing not
just the conflict in Ukraine but the
US's broader conflict with China and
what many are referring to not just as
Cold War II but World War III um and as
we also hear a lot from our friends on
the left um that we can't support China
because they aren't real marxists and
you sort of addressed that a little bit
um or not a little bit quite a bit um or
that Russia is just a right-wing racist
and anti-lgbt btq dictatorship that
attacked Ukraine for its Imperial
Ambitions again you addressed that some
um how should the the left be analyzing
these conflicts and I apologize if this
is a repetitive question no not at all
it's uh a capacious question so with the
conflict in the Ukraine this of course
began in uh 2014 if not slightly earlier
than that with the us-backed
uh
known as the uh maidan Uprising in which
a government came to power backed by
very powerful fascist militias like the
aoff Battalion but then others as well
there's many many uh extreme right-wing
uh militias within the Ukraine and so
the Ukraine has been a site for us
destabilization efforts against Russia
going back to you know the original Cold
War if you will
and the current intervention on the part
of Russia was you know there's there's a
lot that we could unpack here but I'll
just say very quickly in the dunas
region in eastern Ukraine there was a
ongoing war on the Russian separatist
movement since 2014 so the conflict
didn't begin with the Russian speci
special military operation it began in
2014 and if my memory serves me right I
think there's some 14,000 people uh who
have been killed by the ukrainians
during that time while the Ukrainian
government has gone full-on totalitarian
meaning that they have banned opposition
parties locked up Communists they've
taken control of the press they have a
Draconian control that they're
exercising over uh the country and
they've been used in many ways some of
them complicit like obviously zalinsky
and uh many of the Ukrainian oligarchs
who work with him and support him uh
they uh have been used though
nonetheless by the United States in its
proxy war against Russia but of course
in this proxy war the ultimate goal is
China because what China represents is
the greatest threat to the imperialist
powers because it's not simply a project
of national development within a
capitalist framework it's a socialist
country that has demonstrated a form of
socialist development internally and
internationally that is the most
threatening thing to the imperialists
because it demonstrates that you can if
you have control of the state and of the
pillars of the economy as China does as
the the Communist Party of China does
then you can oversee forms of
development that are not simply founded
on the maximization of profit at all
costs and we've seen the successful
consequences of that one one of the
clearest examples of is the elimination
of extreme poverty within China 850
million people were elevated out of
extreme poverty in a long uh
anti-poverty campaign that was waged by
the Communist Party of China in that uh
campaign just to contextualize that that
means that more than the entire
population of Latin America which is
around 720 million people were elevated
out of extreme poverty that fact alone I
think but there's many many others puts
the lie to the idea that China is
somehow not Marxist or not socialist why
would a country spend so much of its
time and resources helping the helpless
at such an incredible scale it's the
largest poverty alleviation program in
the history of humanity why would they
do that if they were just you know
another capitalist power another
imperialist power or the other things
that you hear and it's also you know
it's really unfortunate because it
really traffics in a very base form of
racism that tends to be very acceptable
within the Western World and that is
racism against Asians and Chinese in
particular there are you know almost a
100 million members of the Chinese
Communist party and all of the
leadership who say that what they're
doing is is socialism and it's quite uh
how to put it lacking in humility on the
part of certain leftist intellectuals or
activists who know little to nothing
about China usually haven't been there
usually don't speak the language to
Simply say from the outside oh no it's
just capitalists because there's a
billionaire class or not even you know
it's kind of a class stratum that
they're actually cracking down on in
various ways or that there is capitalism
or that it uh uses money or you know
other things like this which are
basically kind of ultral leftist
misunderstandings of what socialism is
socialism isn't communism in some pure
State socialism is the difficult
dialectical project of developing a
process of human Liberation that is more
egalitarian out of the confines of a
very violent and destructive system
which is global capitalism um there's
more that I could say definitely about
uh China in that regard but concerning
Russia there are some right-wing
elements within Russia particularly
within the kind of military industrial
complex and the uh the kind of Orthodox
uh networks uh does that mean that
Russia itself is just this extreme
right-wing Force I think that that is a
very naive way of reading Russia and
that you also have to do a level of
dialectical analysis that looks at some
of the details so what I was alluding to
earlier is the primary polarization
within Russia is two different models of
national Rejuvenation one is not simply
returning to the Soviet Union or
communism but it's drawing on the
resources of the history of the Soviet
Union in order to look towards a
socialist future and the other is a more
right-wing con constituency but within
the geopolitical sphere if you look at
what Russia's doing even at the national
level if there is this kind of
contradiction if you will and there are
right-wing and leftwing forces
internationally the role that Russia is
currently playing is it is the kind of
one of the leading forces in struggling
very directly against us imperialism so
on the world stage Russia is playing
partly a progressive role doesn't mean
that I justify the special military
operation I support everything about
what Putin does and says and all of this
right but I think that world
historically the fact that Russia is
saying no to the agenda that is pushed
by the imperialist powers is extremely
important and it's one of the reasons
that they work and have worked so
closely as of late with China and often
operate in such a way that their own
Endeavors are ones that also coales with
the Chinese orientation with the
exception actually of the intervention
in the Ukraine because the Chinese have
always maintained that they want to
respect National sovereignty and
therefore have not um uh have not taken
a kind of uh explicitly supportive role
in that regard concerning the the
military campaign
I guess maybe the last thing that I
would say uh returning to the kind of
larger Stakes of your question is that
given what I said earlier about how
World War I and World War II were
largely kind of ongoing
inter-imperialist rivalry that led to
this backlash of an expanding socialist
world what we're seeing now is that the
era of neoliberal triumphalism is behind
us socialism didn't disappear democracy
didn't reign supreme Wars didn't
disappear the ecological catastrophe
didn't magically evaporate like the
world is actually much worse than it was
due to decades and Decades of neoliberal
imperialism and the current world though
does have an emergent alternative model
of development the strongest and most
visible one in that regard is the
Socialist model of development within
China CH but of course there are
socialist you know projects elsewhere
Cuba and Vietnam and Lao and Korea and
and other such places Venezuela as well
as very strong socialist movements or at
least left leaning and Progressive
governments in in various ways and so
the left hasn't disappeared socialism
hasn't disappeared and on the contrary
what has been demonstrated by uh China
is a form of development let see if I
have
um some of the statistics here because
they're quite uh impressive um because
part of the developmental model in China
has been to demonstrate the superiority
of socialist development over uh over
capitalist development and I wasn't able
to find the stats right here but if you
look at the the recent history of oh no
here some of them are right so um John
Ross has aggregated data from the World
Bank couldn't be accused of being a
pro-communist organization
right it's the largest data set that we
currently have and he argues based on
these data sets that quote China's rate
of increase of life expectancy in the
three decades after
1949 was the fastest ever recorded in a
major country in human history and he
Marshals the same type of evidence to
demonstrate that in seven decades
China's economy will have gone from
being only one six of the size of the US
economy to overtaking it the war on
China is a war on the Socialist
developmental project that demonstrates
to the world that we don't have to go
down the capitalist path that has to be
stopped that being said I think that the
US Administration and the corporatocracy
given the ways in which they're always
interested in short-term gain they're
always focused on profit at all costs
they were not prepared and I think made
enormous mistakes regarding the way in
which the Chinese socialist project has
played the long game and in playing the
long game in many ways I think they've
outplayed what has gone on in the west
because the productive base of the
economy was outsourced and moved abroad
through the ne neoliberal phase gutted
from the United States so we produce you
know basically weapons of mass
destruction is one of the primary things
that we produce as well as uh systematic
indust industrialized forms of ignorance
through the culture Industries but other
than that most of the productive sector
of the economy has been offshor and
China has developed an incredibly
powerfully uh powerful and productive
economy the US economy has been largely
financialized and so the neoliberal BET
really has led to very dire consequences
and I think that a lot of the US
Administration and the capitalist ruling
see the writing on the wall and that is
that in the long game we are losing out
against an alternative developmental
project that not only continues to
advance but in spite of all of the
things that we try to do to destabilize
it and overthrow it and to slander it
Etc it continues to make very very
significant progress and so that's what
the new cold war is is it's the old Cold
War it is the world historical struggle
between two socioeconomic systems one is
capitalism that feeds off of imperialism
and Colonial relationships and the other
is a form of development in which the
value produced by human beings is
redistributed to those human beings in
the form of healthare and education and
housing and the development of full
cultural beings right and so that
requires uh on the part of the the US
and the Western powers and attempt both
ideologically and now we're seeing of
course we have seen this for a while
militarily and through mechanisms like
the US National Security State and
attempt to get rid of the Socialist
alternative by any means necessary and
this is going to be I think the defining
aspects of the world that we're living
in in the coming decades the rise of
fascism particularly within the
imperialist core the prominence of China
and hence the risks of World War III
against China which is a Peaceable
country that wants Peaceable
relationship ship with all of its
neighbors and thirdly the major third
major catastrophe that we're all facing
is ecological collapse and China has
undertaken what they refer to as the
development of an environmental
civilization in which they are now the
global leaders at so many different
levels in in uh renewable energies and
in a kind of transformation of the
developmental model such that it becomes
much more uh sustainable which is
perfectly in line with uh socialist
socialist
principles again thank you so much for
that very comprehensive and thorough
answer the um you had discussed early on
U bricks or sort of mentioned bricks and
so I wanted to dig in there um and ask a
followup again this might be repetitive
uh question but I think it's important
to go over how how should the left be
analyzing the rise of bricks I know it
overlaps a lot with the rise of China um
but from a Marxist leninist perspective
how should the left be analyzed and
Bricks well I think that uh I have seen
certain people on the left either claim
that bricks or bricks plus changes
everything and it's a watershed moment
and we're in a new era and I've heard
others on the left also say things like
this makes no difference it actually
doesn't really have any oomph doesn't
have any power to it the bank isn't
actually fully functioning in the way
that it could at higher levels and my uh
analysis of what going on with brics is
largely based on a dialectical approach
brics is a
process that has attempted to develop a
very different modality of
international uh development than the
dominant imperialist model right is
there more uh room for work and
Improvement on this front yes absolutely
is it completely insignificant no not at
all uh it is part of an ongoing process
by which countries that have been
historically underdeveloped by
imperialism are attempting to develop
Global infrastructure for an alternative
developmental model and so bricks also
we have to think of along with the belon
road initiative that has some 150
countries more than that now that are
involved in it uh with Shanghai
cooperation agreement like there's a lot
of different forms of international
infrastructure that are being being
developed in relationship to what I was
saying earlier about the kind of
two-stage theory of revolution in
anti-colonial struggles that first the
Socialists Ally with the bisi in order
to expel the imperialists and then they
consolidate their forces and expel the
capitalists in order to establish
socialism I think one has to ask in
relationship to Bricks whether or not
something somewhat similar is going on
and that is that it's a developmental
project in which clearly social ists are
working with projects of bgeo national
development that are Anti-Imperialist in
the sense of the dominant form of
imperialism that is the us-led
imperialism and that this phase of the
struggle is incredibly important for
being able to break the chains or at
least loosen the chains of global
imperialism so I think it's important to
support bricks and these other endeavors
in so far as they're providing a model
that's different than IMF World Bank and
the kind of uh neoliberal uh model that
was so prevalent I think it's also um
it's also important that the brics is
developing a kind of multi-polar
infrastructure that is bringing together
at least three kind of different
elements one is financial reform so
there's access to capitalist development
with bricks Bank Etc and I'm sorry
there's access to um capital for
development projects and also the whole
process of dollarization which is so
significant within what is currently
going on in the kind of emergent
multipolar world but there's also a
clear development agenda right that a
lot of what's going on within brics and
these other developmental projects is
well how can we build up Global
infrastructure Global technological
exchanges uh Global networks of
connectivity so that countries across
the global South can work together and
collaborate on autonomous developmental
projects that aren't mediated by the
imperialist corps and hence within which
they would play a subordinate role and
the third very important element I think
is just multi-polar regionalism right
breaking down the idea that there would
be just kind of one dominant Center and
China in spite of the fact that of
course it's one of the leading forces
within bricks is very clear that they do
not want to simply be the leader in a
kind of new third International like uh
the Soviet Union was during the era of
the third international they want to
collaborate with other countries and
have Peaceable modalities of development
which is quite interesting because one
of the things that the Chinese I think
have well I know have done very
studiously is examine the history of the
Soviet Union what worked and what didn't
work and the relationship that the
Soviet Union took to other socialist
countries within certain of its
International framewor work tended to be
or at least was accused of being on the
part of the Chinese uh one in which
there was a kind of national chauvinism
right like the Soviets are going to lead
the world and all the others are
supposed to follow in toe Chinese have
learned that lesson and been very very
clear that's not the relationship that
they want to maintain they want a
collaborative relationship in which
everybody benefits there's Mutual
beneficial development if you will and
so uh that's an important aspect I think
as well of bricks and maybe one of the
last things that I would say is just the
significance of of brics plus and the
most recent expansion of brics plus
because what this demonstrates as well
is a uh a kind of energy Powerhouse that
brics plus now is uh with you know
Russia China India um there's uh Saudi
Arabia with UAE there is now uh a level
of control over global energy that is
very different than the era of the US
driven kind of Petro dollar and the
close proximity between Saudi Arabia and
the United States and the uh way in
which uh brics plus is is developing
makes it such that it is now a global
Powerhouse right so some of the stats
are that uh brics plus controls 39% of
global oil exports
45.9% of proven reserves and
47.6% of all oil produced globally right
this is an enormous enormous shift in
relationship to access to one of the
most important sources of uh energy in
the world as it currently exists
obviously there's an attempt to phase uh
out fossil fuel uh their dependence on
fossil fuel production uh but you have
to do this in a dialectical fashion if
you want to actually develop your
society and so China and the other
countries involved
with bricks obviously uh understand that
there's more that could be said about
this but maybe I'll just leave it at
that for now thank you very much and and
I also think that the you know with with
their
consolidating um energy it also will
leads to the rise of dollarization yeah
and an alternative currency which is
also a positive development and already
there are countries that are trading in
their own currencies right which is
significantly changing the dynamic and
so the uh hegemonic role that the dollar
has played on International markets is
obviously it's not completely changed
you know this is a process that is
gradual but there have been very
significant shifts as of late which is
an exciting development for breaking the
chains of uh uh Imperial Dominion at the
level of the uh Financial uh processes
and financial markets right right yeah
sanctions have have are essenti a form
of War oh
yeah well those are all questions uh we
have for you for today is there anything
else you want to discuss or add before
we
close I guess I would just say given the
types of things that we've discussed
that I do think it's really important
that people within the Western World who
are part of progressive networks uh take
very seriously the need to critically
reflect on the limits of their own uh
how to how to put it to critically
reflect on the ways in which the history
of imperialism has produced conditions
by which the Western left actually tends
to have a lot of difficulty seeing and
understanding what's going on globally
and the two principal reasons for that
are the labor aristocracy the fact that
in the Imperial core workers have across
different strata historically benefited
from colonialism and that means that
it's in their financial interest to
perpetuate colonialism and support
imperialism and there's a lot of people
within the Western world including
progressives who will support
imperialism based on this kind of Base
Drive uh economically but the other
thing that has been so integral to the
formatting of the western left has been
the awesome control exercised by the
culture Industries and the fact that 90%
of what all us Americans see and hear is
produced by five Mega corporations and
so there's an industrialized form of
ignorance that is incredible L powerful
and what you see then is if it be at the
level of the economic base or at the
level of the ideological superstructure
the Western left has a lot that it needs
to struggle against and so the work that
you're doing other kind of journalists
activists and intellectuals are doing in
order to open up the ideological
confines of the western left so that we
can basically identify what I take to be
at least the single most important
orientation and that is anti-imperialism
first and foremost but then secondarily
and in conjunction with that the support
for an alternative socioeconomic model
that is aimed at avoiding the three
fundamental uh kind of crises the
deepest crises at least that I see
operative other than the crisis of
capitalism that undergirds all of them
and is the crisis that just keeps on
giving and that is the crisis of uh the
possibility of nuclear apocal apocalypse
the crisis of uh f fascism and Rising
fascism across the capitalist core in
particular but also more uh generally
around the world and then uh also just
the ecological degradation and so we
need to be serious about the necessity
of supporting the struggle against
imperialism and the struggle to build a
more egalitarian world if we want to
avoid the cataclysmic writing on the
wall so to
speak thank you for saying that and for
adding that um and thank you again for
coming on the show it's been honor
having you on the show and we hope to
have you back again soon great well
thank you so much for having me on it
was a pleasure to discuss these things
with

you


## Keywords:
