---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vnn_bWDmizw
---

# Video
Gabriel Rockhill, "Are Fascism and Liberalism Partners in Capitalist Crime?"
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vnn_bWDmizw)

## Transcript:
welcome to Sunday mornings at the
Marxist Library a quick note before we
start this session is being recorded and
will be posted on YouTube with the link
on our website icss mark.org within the
next few
days also our session today is
co-sponsored by the critical theory
Workshop welcome everyone to Sunday
mornings at the Marxist library for
close to a decade and a half our
sessions were held at the neble proctor
Marxist library located in Oakland
California we are now hosting our
sessions on zoom and have speakers and
attendees from throughout the United
States and throughout the world
my name is Alan Miller and I will be
hosting this meeting I'm a member of the
program committee that organizes Sunday
mornings at the Marxist library and I
would like to start off by saying that
we always welcome input feedback
suggestions for topics and speakers you
can contact us through our website
atsm marks.
org before we start we wish to remind
everyone that this is a comradely for
for political discourse and debate as
such we ask that you show respect for
our participants and the moderator of
today's
sessions please note that the opinions
that are expressed here are those of the
speaker and participants they do not
necessarily represent those of the ICS
or the Marxist
Library however we are united in our
respect for the work of Carl Marx and we
believe that his work remains relevant
today our motto is taken from Carl
Marx's 11 thesis on farbach quote the
philosophers have only interpreted the
world in various ways the point however
is to change it our session today is
titled our Fascism and liberalism
Partners in capitalist crime we have a
very special speaker our speaker today
is Gabriel Rock Hill political theorist
journalist activist and noted Marxist
intellectual Gabriel is the founding
director of the critical theory Workshop
a professor of philosophy at Villanova
University and the
author or editor of nine books as well
as numerous scholarly and general public
articles so with that I'd like to turn
this over to Gabriel welcome and thank
you very much for uh speaking today
thank you for having me on it's a
pleasure I will just share in the chat
uh right now the critical theory
Workshop is an educational nonprofit
that I've been running since about 2008
and among our various activities we run
a summer school next summer we're going
to do the summer school online due to
the fact that the Olympic games are
taking place in France where we usually
do the in-person program but we've taken
advantage of the fact that we have to
shift online to really focus the summer
school on uh Global Marxism and Marxism
from the global South more specifically
so a lot of the speakers are people who
wouldn't be able to make it to the
global North anyway so check it out if
you're interested don't hesitate to
circulate it the talk that I'm going to
share with you today is a kind of
overview of a book that I've been
working on for a number of years now
which has given birth to a few spin-off
articles so if you're familiar with some
of the things that I've published on
fascism it might overlap with some of
the things that I present in the talk
the title of the book is fascism and the
Socialist solution and I just kind of
like to walk you through some of the
basic arguments and then towards the end
I will share uh some of the ways in
which this framing of fascism and its
historical development can provide us
with tools for understanding the
Contemporary moment and in particular
the situation in places like Ukraine and
Palestine so the first kind of
conceptual intervention on in this book
is a critique of what I refer to as the
ideology of fascist exceptionalism the
Holocaust industry has played no small
part in the process of presenting
fascism as an absolutely single single
singular phenomenon that appeared
perhaps only once or twice in history
was ultimately defeated by the Western
democracies and therefore fascism is not
something that is systemic to capitalism
but an exception to it this moreover is
presented as the kind of dominant
ideology or at least the liberal
ideology concerning fascism in a world
in which uh there's only one country
that has been responsible for
overthrowing more than 50 foreign
governments since World War II or at
least attempting to overthrow them been
involved in innumerable assassination
attempts against the leaders of uh
various governments and in a minimum has
its intelligence service that killed six
million people between 1947 and 1987 all
the while propping up dictatorships and
running death death squads around the
world and so this logic of fascist
exceptionalism of course runs cover for
the greatest Imperial power in the world
today and that is the United States so a
lot of my work in engages with fascism
as a very important site of what I would
call conceptual class struggle meaning
that the very concept of fascism is an
important reference point for the
struggles between different and rival
ideologies and in that regard I don't
think it makes sense to assume that
fascism has some type of Eternal Essence
that's been baked into it that we could
Define for all time instead it is a site
both of conceptual and practical
struggle and that for my research in the
book the most coherent approach to
Fascism is a dialectical approach I mean
a number of things by that that will
come out through the course of my
presentation but one of them is that as
Lenin famously claimed the world is so
complex that its processes surpass human
comprehension and that any of the
concepts that we establish in order to
try to latch onto those con those uh
complex processes are of necessity
Limited in their scope therefore with
the concept of fascism I think that it
is very helpful with this dialectical
approach to distinguish between at least
three different levels of analysis in
what we can call a kind of multiscalar
dialectical analysis the first level of
analysis is the most common within bis
approaches to Fascism it is the
conjunctural level of analysis the
conjunctural level looks at a specific
place and a particular time such as
Italy and Germany in the interwar
period uh in that regard it is important
to highlight and I'll get on to the
other two levels in a second that
fascism did not emerge within this
conjuncture as a coherent ideology or a
fixed set of ideas musolini himself said
quote fascism was not the nursling of a
Doctrine previously drafted at a desk it
was born of the need of action and was
action it was not a party but in the
first two years an anti-party and a
movement right so fascism as a concept
became kind of Consolidated within the
Italian context but it emerged out of an
anti-working class movement that was
quite in coate and didn't have a
Consolidated ideology in a rigorous
sense of the term a few important
aspects of that conjunctural emergence
of fascism is of course the threat of
the Socialist alternative which appeared
on the world stage in 1917 with the
Russian Revolution and then was seconded
by the fact that the capitalist world
had been rocked by or uh was soon
thereafter in the 1930s rocked by the
Great Depression and so the conjunctural
fascism that we see in places like Italy
and Germany as well as in Japan in the
East is in part an attempt on the part
of the bis state to develop a more
radical form of authoritarian governance
that could mobilize at least certain
segments of the masses in the era of
mass administered
democracies in that regard these fascist
Endeavors relied extensively on mass
communication and propaganda to Target
those sectors of Civil Society like the
petty bisi as well as certain elements
of the lumon proletariat and the
proletariat but with the backing of the
industrial
capitalists and I'll I'll touch on this
a little bit more in a moment but the
capitalist backing of these fascist
movements is integral to understand them
and that backing was uh then further
supported by a kind of Nationalist and
Colonial ideology of radical
transformation in order to crush the
workers movement and launch Wars of
Conquest so at this conjunctural level
of analysis I think one of the best
definition
at least operative definitions of
fascism is that put forth by Michael
penti in his work black shirts and reds
he said uh that fascism is nothing more
than a final solution to the class
struggle the totalistic submergence and
exploitation of democratic forces for
the benefit and profit of higher
Financial circles fascism is a false
revolution right it promises a radical
transformation of society but what it
delivers is actually an ongoing war on
working people the second level of
analysis that is important is a
structural level of analysis and this
you often don't find within the bgea
theories of fascism a structural
analysis doesn't simply look at
particular spaces and time such as
Germany and Italy but it instead
examines specific phases of capitalist
accumulation and if you look at this
level meaning a structural analysis of
capitalist countries in the interwar
period one thing that you find and
Martin kitchen has pointed I'm sorry
published uh pointedly on precisely this
topic is that in every single capitalist
country in the wake of the Great
Depression you had major fascist
movements right and so the connection
between Fascism and capitalism therefore
becomes much more Apparent at this
structural level and it cannot simply be
attributed as the bgea concept of
fascism often does to the cultural
particularities of Germany or of Italy
because one thing that the bgea concept
of fascism does is it largely describes
fascism as a cultural phenomenon as a
super structural phenomenon and it
doesn't mine down into the economic base
people like Jason Stanley or the other
most famous theorists of fascism in the
Contemporary bouis world of course
traffic precisely in these modalities of
thinking
the third level that I think is
important is a systemic level of
analysis so the historical materialist
approach to this kind of a multiscalar
uh analysis looks at the social totality
and examines the ways in which the
conjunctural developments of fascism in
Italy Germany and Japan are nested
within a larger structural development
of the fascist movement in a moment of
capitalist decline in socialist
Resurgence but but all of that has to be
situated within the larger historical
social totality of the systemic
development of the capitalist World
system in this regard uh in the work of
Marx and angles there was already an
identification of the ways in which
capitalism in order to accumulate relies
on extremely repressive forms of parate
and state violence in order to uh
basically Prime the capitalist pump if
you will in what Marx referred to as
so-called primitive accumulation of
course a term that he borrows from bua
political economy so Marx wrote that
Capital came into this world dripping
from head to toe from every poor with
blood and dirt it came into the world
through acts of brutal genocidal
colonialism through the enslavement of
major swas of the population the
indigenous population the African
population and that this colonial
Heritage needs to be understood as the
uh the forms of violent imposition of a
capitalist system that predated the
conceptual identification of fascism per
se but that resonate very strongly with
some of the fundamental impulses that
are integral to understanding what
fascism is and the systemic level of
analysis that connects fascism to
colonialism and the Deep of colonialism
also allows us to see the ways in which
the real struggle against fascism needs
to be a struggle against colonialism and
it foregrounds the extent to which all
three of the major uh fascist countries
that are identified as the main forces
in World War II Italy Germany and Japan
were invested uh absolutely and totally
in colonial Endeavors and so the
colonialism that predated you know that
predates fascism as a concept needs to
also be understood as one of the driving
mechanisms behind uh fascism even in its
conjunctural sense as I'm sure a lot of
the viewers and listeners know the Nazi
Rampage in the East against the Soviet
Union was actually modeled on the US
Colonial Rampage in the west and the
Western frontier and just as the US
settlers were genocid eliminating the
indigenous population in order to have
living room to the West so were the
Nazis planning on genocid eliminating
the peoples to the east in order to open
up their lab realm or living realm in
the East and this is a very very
explicit connection right and Germany
was simply one of the countries like
Italy and Japan is a little bit of a
different case for various reasons
mainly contextual within uh within Asia
but they were the late comers to the
Colonial feast and they wanted to catch
up with the Great Western imperialist
powers and even surpass them in their uh
and they certainly surpass them in the
colonial appetite even though they
didn't fully succeed in this regard this
multiscalar analysis of fascism allows
us to overcome the bgea concept of
fascism and the ideology of fascist
exceptionalism that I alluded to briefly
before I think that many people who are
familiar with Marxist analysis are very
a attuned to the ways in which which bis
ideology often passes a particular off
for a universal so that when the
founding fathers of the United States
claim that all men are created equal
what they did not mean was that all
people were actually created equal what
they meant is a particular group of
white property owning males were created
equal so they take the particular and
they talk in the name of the universal
right as if that was all people what's
interesting in the ideology of fascist
exceptionalism is that rather than
universalizing the particular this
ideological operation transforms the
systemic into the sporadic the
structural into the singular the
conjunctural into the idiosyncratic so
it's the same basic ideological move but
in the opposite
direction uh it is the natural outgrowth
of this boua approach to fascism that
conceptualizes germano Italian fascism
as absolutely unique and defines it in
terms of its epiphenomenal and
superficial characteristics and never
Minds down into the capitalist Roots
thereby obfuscating the structural
parallels with other forms of repressive
governance around the world and also in
deep history moreover this ideology of
fascist exceptionalism more or less
excludes materialist analyses and the
use of the term fascism in certain other
cases by trying to you know maintain the
idea that fascism was something that was
just integral to particular cultures at
specific
times this approach I think is
problematic because it reduces the
extent to which fascism is a product of
the capitalist system and that the way
in which it historically emerged is not
simply in opposition to modalities of
bouis parliament parliamentarian rule
but often hand and glove with them and
so let me say at the outset before
getting into the second section of my
talk I'm G to uh go till uh for about 45
minutes to an hour or so and then we'll
have plenty of time for discussion after
this I should have mentioned that at the
beginning but it's often claimed within
the bgea concept of fascism that the way
that you fight fascism is that you
defend liberal democracy and at a
certain level I think it's it's very
important from a Marxist vantage point
to defend the gains of liberal
democracies in so far as they at least
purportedly maintain some zone for the
rule of law for a certain respect of
human rights for voter rights and things
like this and that we should not only
maintain any that they have but we
should Marshall all of our power to
expand them as much as possible so the
argument that I'm making is not a kind
of ultr argument in which you just say
well liberalism and fascism are the same
thing and we should just burn them both
to the ground no they're not the same
thing but very importantly and this is
where my argument is headed I think it's
essential to recognize that liberalism
and fascism are both modes of capitalist
governance and that if we seriously
understand the material history of
liberalism we have to recognize the ways
in which it has often worked handin
glove with fascists empowered them and
allowed them to operate precisely
because they often function as the bad
cop of capitalism to liberalism's good
cop and so to refer back to what I just
mentioned about pushing back against any
kind of ultral leftist confusion I think
that it's very good to have a good cop
as opposed to a bad cop if we're talking
about who's in control of state power
but at the same time the whole goal of
the good cop bad cop interrogation
routine is to confuse those being
interrogated
and make them believe that salvation
lies with the good cop of capitalism not
with the abolition of the entire system
of the good cop and bad cop or the kind
of hegemonic rule and repressive rule by
overthrowing capitalism in the name of
socialism in that
regard uh if we look at the history of
liberal governance one thing that we
need to recognize is that it has often
collaborated with the rise of fascism
and we see this within the conjunctural
form that fascism took in the inter War
period in October of 192020 uh
1922 it was magnates in the
confederation of industry and major Bank
leaders that provided musolini with the
millions of dollars necessary for the
march on Rome in a kind of spectacular
show of force but musolini did not seize
power instead and Danielle Gan has uh
highlighted this quite poignantly in his
book Fascism and big business that I
recommend melini was summoned by the
King on October 29th of that year and
was according to parliamentary Norms
entrusted with forming a new cabinet the
capitalist State thereby turned itself
over without a fight but musolini was
intent on forming an absolute majority
in Parliament with the help of the
liberals so it was the liberals who
supported his new electoral law in July
1923 and then they made a joint slate
with the fascists for the election on
April 6th
1924 the fascists who had only had 35
seats in Parliament gained 286 seats
thanks to the help of the Liberals the
case of Hitler is somewhat similar uh he
would in two case in two aspects one is
that they both received capitalist
banking both from national capital and
from International Capital particularly
US capital and it was the liberals who
aided and embedded his rise so Hitler
claimed in a famous speech on October
19th
1935 that he had the material resources
necessary for supporting 1,000 Nazi
orators with their own cars who could
make some 100,000 public meetings in the
course of a year and all of this was due
to his financial backers uh the Ford uh
family in the United States and other
Financial backers here but also uh
industrial capital capital in Germany
prior to the election in uh Germany in
the 30s the Communist Party candidate
Ernst Thalman had argued that a vote for
the conservative Field Marshal Fon
Hindenberg amounted to a vote for Hitler
and for war and of course after
Hindenberg was elected he invited Hitler
to become Chancellor so fascism in both
of these cases came to power through
bgea parliamentary democracy and they
were bankrolled by big capital and the
candidates did the bidding of big
Capital while also creating a populist
spectacle a false revolution that
marshaled or suggested some Mass Appeal
um of course there were also activities
that both the Italians and Germans were
involved in that were extra
parliamentary that were illegal Etc
right so it's not as if they only abided
by the Norms but they did follow those
Norms within the kind of public
spectacle of gaining power after the
gained power and Consolidated it this
was quicker in the Nazi case than in the
Italian case they then did go much more
fullon authoritarian they became engaged
in crushing organized labor eradicating
opposition parties destroying
independent Publications putting a halt
to elections scapegoating and
eliminating the racialized underclasses
privatizing public assets launching
projects of colonial expansion and
investing heavily in a war economy
beneficial to the industrial supporters
so it established a direct dictatorship
of big Capital an important aspect of
this analysis of course a lot of the
bgea approaches to Fascism are rather
rather flat-footed and they don't track
out how fascism actually changed quite a
bit in both Italy and Germany through
the course of time so much so that even
the more left-wing elements within both
Italy and Germany's fascist movements
were cut off in order to consolidate
this more authoritarian right-wing as
things evolved it's also important
within this larger context of course
that the other purported liberal
democracies of the West were not
fighting fascism right the capitalist
States refused to form an anti-fascist
Coalition with the Soviet Union a
country that 14 of them had invaded and
occupied between 1918 and
1920 uh and during the Spanish Civil War
Western liberal democracies did not
officially support left-leaning
government that had been elected
moreover in 1934 the United Kingdom
France and Italy signed the Munich
agreement in which they agreed to allow
Hitler to invade and colonize the Sudan
land in Czechoslovakia so they gave him
a a green light to Colonial Fascism and
indeed it was the fear of being left to
confront Hitler alone which eventually
drove Stalin since 1934 the unswerving
champion of an alliance with the West uh
against Hitler into the Stalin ribbon
trop pact of August 39 which he hoped to
keep the USSR out of war and buy him
time for developing the productive
forces as much as possible to defeat the
Nazi war machine which he of course and
the other Soviets knew was
coming uh this didn't in my reading on
this particular uh agreement was that
the pact was not a pact of uh somehow
solidarity between the fascists and the
Communists on the contrary they were not
allies this was a very tactical decision
because the uh the leadership had been
backed into a corner and they just
needed to buy themselves time in order
to build up their military and their
defense uh
capabilities in this regard the overall
kind of depiction of conjunctural
fascism needs to be written and
fortunately there's great work on this
front in terms of a capitalist backing
and strong liberal eating and a betting
I would like to point to the fact that
the US backers of capitalism also
include included the uh big Capital
within the United States as well as some
of the important forces that were
operative within the US National
Security State so Ford General Motors
Standard Oil of New Jersey and Dupont
had all become deeply involved and
invested in Germans weapons production
in the inter War period and in fact
American Investment in Germany had
sharply increased after Hitler came to
power uh according to Christopher
Simpson's excellent work on this front
Commerce Department reports show that
the US investment in Germany increased
some
48.5% between 1929 and 1940 while
declining sharply everywhere else in
Continental Europe right so in this
regard uh fascism in Europe was
astroturfed right not it wasn't simply a
Grassroots movement and fascism as far
as I've been able to see in my research
I've not found examples of FC fism that
is purely Grassroots I've always found
instances of astroturfing astroturfing
of course means that instead of a
Grassroots movement coming from below
there are capitalist ruling class
elements that plant the seeds by funding
fascist movements and trying to Foster
them as much as possible one of the
important uh legal firms involved in
foreign direct investment in Hitler's
Germany was solivan and Cromwell which
of course was overseen by or or part of
the leadership of solivan and Cromwell
was the Dulles brothers who would go on
to become the uh the head of the um uh
US State uh department on the one hand
and the head of the Central Intelligence
Agency on the other and they would make
sure in the wake of World War II that
these financial investments were
protected uh I'll just touch on this
briefly in passing but we should all
know of course that fascism wasn't
defeated by Western liberal democracies
it was defeated by the Colossal
sacrifice of approximately 27 million
Soviets and approximately 20 million
Chinese the war against fascism was
fought and won in the East only some
400,000 us Americans gave their lives to
the war fighting uh against fascism of
course this pales in comparison to what
the Red Army did and the overwhelming
bulk of the uh Nazi war machine was run
in the
uh run in the east in that regard if we
just stay for the time being on this
conjunctural level of analysis and then
attach it to the more structural level
of analysis I think that anyone who's
educated within the Imperial core
generally Affiliates fascism with Nazism
and fascism perhaps in Italy but they
don't think about fascism within the US
context and so I'd like to just briefly
outline some of my research on precisely
that topic because as I mentioned
earlier there were very important
fascist movements in every capitalist
country as of the late 20s early 30s and
in the case of the United States we came
very close to a fascist kudeta and in
1934 the McCormack dickstein Committee
of the US House of Representatives after
weeks of Investigation concluded that
quote certain persons had made an
attempt to establish a fascist
organization in this country end quote
the plot did eventually uh fail but it
was a plot to overthrow FDR's government
the New Deal government and then to to
set up a dictatorship that would be
fascist and that would be controlled by
the capitalist ruling class of this
country I'll get into the specifics in a
moment this emerged out of an
organization called the American Liberty
league demitro if you're familiar with
his excellent analyses of fascism claim
claimed that in contradiction to German
fascism which acts under
anti-constitutional slogans American
fascism tries to portray itself as the
custodian of the Constitution and
American democracy right so we have
American exceptionalism the freedom
discourse and all of this that's baked
into the very name American Liberty
League uh there were a lot of other
fascist movements in the states at the
time the CLX Clan the Sentinels of the
Republic the Crusaders the silver Legion
of America America the German American
boond friends of New Germany the list
goes on these are the historical
predecessors to the oathkeepers the
proud boys the three centers and the
fascist organizations that we have
operative today many of them also uh
emerg directly out of uh military uh the
military establishment in various ways a
lot of impoverished veterans who became
members of these uh
organizations in the case of the plot in
the United States which is referred to
as the business plot it's the Morgan
interests Dupont Rockefeller Pew and
melon that were the principal back
rollers behind this planned fascist coup
dat of course some of the most famous
robber barons in the history of the
world and they worked with high proile
political figures in the Democratic
party not the Republican Party the
Democratic Party The Party of slavery
that party uh the party of mass
incarceration the party of genocide in
Gaza that were opposed to the New Deal
and wanted to roll back the New Deal in
that regard they made the plan to hire a
man by the name of Gerald G Maguire who
went on a 4month research tour of Europe
to visit four different fascist
countries and study which version of
fascism would be the best one to
implement in the United States and he
supported drawing on Francis quad
movement which is a fascist organization
that was composed of some 500,000
commissioned and non-commissioned
officers and so it was drawing on the
military and using veterans in order to
then Implement their plan was to
implement Hitler's unemployment plan in
the United States of course that
unemployment plan was so successful
because it involed D forced slave
labor uh Maguire then considered General
Smedley Butler to be the ideal leader of
the movement although they were also
considering Douglas MacArthur Theodore
Roosevelt Jr uh and other commanders
within the military they were going to
use the pretext of the president's ill
health this is uh
FDR uh so that then the leader Smedley
Butler who they' chosen would become a
kind of figurehead like
I'm sorry the president would become a
figure head like the king of uh Italy
and then the fascist leader could take
control of the government they were
going to Honeypot veterans into doing
this and they had arms via Remington
Arms secured by the DuPont interest
because Dupont had a controlling Shar
interest in Remington Arms and they were
going to pay the veterans a bonus from
World War I that they were owned owed by
the US government but the US government
kept refusing to pay and so they're
going to Honeypot the veterans into
marching on Washington they had planned
to only pay them one year so it was
obvious that they were just going to use
them they weren't going to pay the full
bonus they were going to use them until
they got their fascist in office and
then uh shift the government out of
parliamentary elections and go full-on
fascist this was not the only conspiracy
that was revealed um there were others
also that involved uh various
conspirators but it's the most
well-known one it's thanks to John El SP
who was a uh communist journalist at the
time that he actually was able to get a
hold of the full transcripts of the
mccormic dickstein committee that
weren't released to the public and
weren't shared with journalists and so
we now we have all of the internal
investigations that proved that this
wasn't a you know conspiracy that people
were thinking about it was a conspiracy
they were acting on very very concretely
the other element in this uh kind of
counter history of fascism that I've
been developing that I think is
important
is that the bgea idea of fascist
exceptionalism often claims that fascism
was defeated in World War II I've done a
long and detailed article on this if
anybody's interested I'm just going to
touch on a few of the highlights called
uh the US did not defeat fascism in
World War II it discreetly
internationalized it right and we know
from the history of the US Empire that
it's always been opposed to socialism
and particularly uh hostile to Soviet
style socialism and they were involved
in trying to overthrow the USSR in from
1918 to 1920 and then were involved in
the blockade against it Etc but it was
not even the wake of World War II it was
during World War II that the US National
Security state began working very
closely with Nazis and Italian fascists
and later it would do the same with
Japanese fascists in order to integrate
them into the US National Security State
and into intelligent services around the
world in order to establish a veritable
fascist International in order to keep
doing the important work of Hitler and
musolini and that was fighting the
workers
movement uh I'll just highlight a few
aspects of this Reinhardt galin of
course was the head of the intelligence
Services of the Nazis he was a general
in the Third Reich against the Soviet
Union in the wake of World War II
instead of being put in prison as a a as
a war criminal he was brought to the
United States taken to a Yankees game
met with all of the major architects of
the US National Security State and then
put back in charge of the new Democratic
intelligence Services of West
Germany and he proceeded to then hire
thousands of the Nazis with whom he had
been working in order to continue doing
the uh purportedly important work at
least from the point of view of the
National Security State of the United
States in fighting communism in Germany
and in the East more generally Eric lick
blow has estimated that some 4,000 Nazi
agents were brought to the to the United
States um operation Sunrise was run in
Italy doing the same thing with uh
members of the Italian fascist Network
including very high commanders like uh
Valerio bores known as the black prince
often ident identified as being the
leader of the Neo fascist movement in
the wake of World War II was protected
by James Angleton and the uh OSS that
became then the Central Intelligence
Agency um oh actually I'm sorry the
numbers that I said about Eric Blick
blauer in collect his estimates for how
many were brought to the United States
were
10,000 4,000 was the number that he
estimated of nais integrated into German
intelligence Services right um we
probably all familiar with Operation
Paperclip that brought
1,600 Nazi scientists Hitler's doctors
of death to the United States provide
them provided them often with research
funds Promises of American citizenship
hooked them up with us universities
there were some 14 of some of the most
prestigious universities in the country
including Cornell MIT and Yale that
participated in Operation Paperclip they
were also brought over with their
families and I'll also reference
operation gladio in which the CIA and
MI6 the more or less CIA equivalent in
Great Britain set up secret stay behind
armies in every country in western
Europe including neutral countries that
they proceeded to stock with Nazis and
fascists in order to continue fighting a
war of subversion against the East and
to be purportedly ready for a Soviet
invasion of the West and then they would
run subversion campaigns against the
Communists but they were mobilized in
the strategy of tension uh particularly
in Italy Germany and Belgium in order to
commit acts of terrorism against the
civilian population that were blamed on
Communists and socialists so that they
could be targeted for uh being rounded
up and thrown in prison this has all
been extremely well documented at this
point in time there's uh through the
Italian courts that that found that this
was this conspiratorial organization
that was not beholden to the liberal
democracies of these countries uh that
was established in the early 1990s the
European Parliament has a resolution on
it and I would greatly recommend the
documentary work of Alan uh frankovich
both his film on company business on the
Central Intelligence Agency and his film
gladio on the stay behind armies
actually has a lot of firsthand accounts
of those involved in these Enterprises
talking about it rather candidly in that
regard then we have to understand that
the bis state in the Imperial age does
not simply function according to what
the spectacle of politics dictates to
the masses and Via its corporate media
reach it also functions importantly
driven by what Annie Laris refers to is
the men and women of the Shadows meaning
that the invisible government the some
people call it the Deep State the
intelligence Services the National
Security State or the more nefarious and
hidden aspects of the National Security
State often have done the opposite of
what the spectacle of politics claims
that it is doing and one of the reasons
for the US National Security State
hiring so many fascists from Italy and
Germany and the same is true in the case
of Japan is precisely so that they could
contribute to an international fascist
Network that they could use to fight
against uh workers movements around the
world
um yeah so I'll leave that section uh as
it is I'm happy to return to uh any of
this in in the final discussion but just
jumping ahead a little bit I think that
if we look at the Contemporary moment
then one way of approaching Uh current
fascism is by breaking with the one
state one government Paradigm which is
so widespread within liberal debates
it's the assumption that either a
country is a democracy or it's a fascist
it's fascist and that there's no room
for an analysis that would be a
variegated analysis of degrees for
instance or a dialectical analysis of
different levels and forms or modes of
governance within particular countries
what the one state one government
Paradigm tends to Foster then is the
idea that well uh fascism is only a real
threat if it takes over the government
and if it doesn't then we don't have to
be as concerned about it or it's simply
as a threat or something that Creeps in
or other things like that not a reality
that actually affects people's lives
right now against that I think that a
dialectical approach to Fascism has to
embrace a multiple modes of governance
model meaning to take seriously the ways
in which the capitalist ruling class
manages the general population through
different means at different points in
time and that part of that management is
through the hegemonic work of the
visible government and of the forces
that are operative within the kind of
spectacle of politics but in the phase
of imperialist capitalism in which there
is an increasing discrepancy between the
very tiny ruling class and the amount of
wealth that they own and control and the
masses of workers globally there's an
increasing Reliance on other forms of
governance that are often parate forms
of governance so parallel to the state
and often engage in and work with
criminal elements from society in order
to mobilize forms of repressive
governance that often contradict the
hegemonic modes of rule and the rule of
law and in fact uh traffic in illegal
practices in that regard uh it's
important to note that when fascism rose
up in Italy there's a lot of really
interesting uh journalistic work that
was being done in the United States that
said that well what the black shirts are
to Italy the KKK is to the United States
it's just their version of the KKK and
so the United States we should recognize
has a long-standing history of using
parate forms of governance to Target the
racialized working class in order to
repress them by any means
necessary and that those forms of
governance need to be understood as part
of the overall structures of of
capitalist
governance the multiple modes of
governance model then allows us to
better understand why it is that
liberals would be so tolerant of
fascists why it is that they insist that
there's an absolute principle of free
speech that needs to be preserved in the
case of fascists but can often be thrown
under the bus when it comes to
socialists or Communists because these
are the people who are beyond the the
pale uh we also know that with the
January 6th hearings the US government
has treated the fascist organizations
that were involved in this as well as
the leaders with kid gloves right
instead of being immediately thrown in
prison as they would have been if they
were members of the racialized working
class in this country or if they were
trying to storm the government in order
to set up a socialist form of government
they have been treated with the utmost
form of liberal tolerance which then
begs the question of the extent to which
and I alluded to this earlier but I'll
just sum this part of the talk up very
quickly I think that if we see Fascism
and liberalism as two modes of
governance within capitalism the liberal
mode of governance tends to be used as a
kind of good cop for those sectors of
the population that can be ruled
hegemonically because they are willing
to acques so the basic deal is if you
stay in your lane don't get too
organized don't try to overthrow the
system don't try to over educate people
then you can vote for a capitalist
candidate that we choose for you you can
have certain minimal rights as
established by the Bill of Rights
because we'll keep basic kind of
structures of legality in place that
form of hegemonic rule mainly targets
the middle and upper middle classes the
professional managerial class stratum
and uh
that is how it tends to operate another
mode of governance though has been
operative throughout the history of the
United States and other capitalist
countries and that is a mode of
governance that is used against the
colonized populations the neoc colonized
populations the racialized populations
The Immigrant populations Etc that mode
of governance tends to be the bad cop of
capitalism in which the rule of law is
out the window respect for fundamental
rights disappears there is no right to
to vote or other such things instead it
is reliance on repressive violence that
often takes two different forms it's
either the direct repressive violence of
the state through ice and through the
police and the FBI and things like this
or the various vigilante organizations
that the buwa state works very very
closely with these can be the clan these
can be the 3centers and the other
organizations that I was alluding to
earlier but they work hand in glove with
one another in order to exercise this
mode of fascist or fascistic governance
whatever term you prefer in order to
keep that population down right now
there is a difference between a bis form
of rule that has liberal governance for
the middle and upper middle classes and
fascist governance for the more
Insurgent forms of the racialized
underclass that said this is quite
different than if the hegemonic mode of
governance goes fullon authoritarian and
fullon fascist right so I think think
that we need to have different levels of
analysis and as I mentioned earlier not
just go down a kind of ultra ultral
leftist position that says well
liberalism and fascism are the same
thing no we should fight for the rule of
law the more rule of law that we can
have the better it is for building power
organizing keep our keeping our people
safe Etc so my final comments five to 10
minutes here is that there are uh at
least two or three elements I want to
touch on and this is more kind of Acts
of provocation for the discussion if you
will so start formulating your question
or writing them in the chat or doing
whatever you need to do uh I I'll touch
on three of them very quickly one is and
I've detailed this in a very long
article that I wrote for counterpunch I
think that the January 6th event needs
to be understood as a inside Affair that
was overseen by elements of the US
government the military and the US
National Security State and that this
was not a Grassroots movement from below
it was astroturfed from above by members
of the capital ruling class in
particular someone like Anna
masuga who dedicated some uh I think it
was 4.3 million dollars to the January
6th organizers and other elements of the
extreme right-wing capitalist backers of
these movements and the of course Donald
Trump was uh very much played a very
strong role in this and what's
remarkable is if you look through the
history of the organizations who were
involved in the January 6 uh storming of
the capital they have very very strong
ties to the military and to the bgea
state in various ways if I can find it
I'm just scrolling through some of my
notes there's a really interesting uh
set of analyses put forth by a former
FBI agent I'm not finding it right now
but uh I can find it if somebody wants
it who basically says you know the the
leaders of these movements these
fascists we know them because we've been
working with them for years right this
is a member of the FBI I think his name
is Mike German who's who's saying this
and so it's not just that this was these
were kind of fascist Outsiders they were
fascists who were astroturfed in back by
the capitalist ruling class the most
reactionary elements of it and certain
elements of the bis state that opened up
the gates to power and let them in and I
think we have to see all of that
together the other two examples again
I'll touch on as a kind of form of
provocation for the discussion is the
case of Ukraine and the case of
Palestine in the case of Ukraine if you
have a bis concept of fascism and you
reduce fascism to a culturalist
undertaking then you can easily collapse
it into something like cultural
anti-Semitism and fall into the Trap of
saying well zalinski has Jewish Heritage
therefore Ukraine couldn't be fascist or
is Israel as a procla self-proclaimed
Jewish State couldn't somehow be fascist
because Fascism and anti-Semitism
somehow go together because fascism is
understood in a culturalist form as
hating or targeting just one specific
group of people as I mentioned earlier I
think this is an incorrect approach to
Fascism fascism needs to be understood
in terms of the economic base and what's
driving it and the ideologies that it
mobilizes will differ varying or based
on the target populations and so in the
case of Ukraine it seems very uh uh
the overall framework of what's going on
in Ukraine is that you had a Russian
separatist movement in the East which
had historically been the Bastion for
the industrial working class and the
Communists that since 2014 when there
was a us-backed fascist koua in Ukraine
against a democratically elected leader
that region said we don't want to be
under a fascist under fascist rule we
want independence and some I believe
14,000 people approximately were killed
between uh 2014 and the onset of the
special military operation on the part
of the Russians and the way that Ukraine
was fighting a lot of these separatist
movements in the East was by the aav
Battalion Adar Battalion other
battalions that are extreme right-wing
fascist battalions who are backed by the
capitalist ruling class in Ukraine in
particular kosi who happens to be I
think he was the last time I checked
he's the third richest oligarch in
Ukraine backed not only azof but other
battalions that were later integrated
into asof was integrated into the
Ukrainian National Guard he also was one
of the principal supporters for
zelinsky's presidential run and he was
invested in the television platform that
ran the show where zalinski was as an
actor
playing the future president of or the
the president of Ukraine that he would
later become so much so that many people
now see that TV show is basically a long
advertisement campaign for his run for
office so you have the same capitalist
power interested in funding fascist
militias and funding uh the government
that granted zin's you know political
platform isn't explicitly fascist in the
sense of the extreme right-wing parties
that also are operative within Ukraine
and the control of the parliament of
those parties is is minimal but if you
look at what has happened in Ukraine
since the special military uh
intervention in the East what you have
is a totalitarian state that has shut
down alternative media uh canceled and
banned uh Al opposition parties thrown
socialist and communist leaders into
prison and is involved in a kind of
direct aonian police state that has now
punted elections and so elections are
you know being pushed back further and
further and in that regard I think that
we have to be able to see that yes there
are very strong cultural fascist
elements and militias that have been
integrated into the National Guard
operative within Ukraine and undertake a
dialectical variegated analysis in which
you look at the different fascistic
elements and there are some semblance of
elements of a kind of parliamentary
democracy if you will but there's no
longer any elections there aren't
opposition Partners parties there's not
opposition there's no opposition press
so it's been completely
gutted uh moreover Ukraine has been
become one of the centers of uh
International organizing of fascists and
it has been that for quite some time the
CIA has been working for 70 years in
Ukraine running assets first against the
Soviet Union now against Russia of of
course and so I think all of that has to
be factored in to understanding what's
going on in that case I'll just say very
briefly regarding the
situation in Palestine that if you have
a culturalist bgea understanding of
fascism then it prohibits you from being
able to see a fascism that would be
mobilized by a self- declared Jewish
State however if you bracket that and
you instead take a historical
materialist and dialectical analysis
looking at the economic base and the
Deep history of Israel then you have to
recognize that what we're dealing with
according to the zionists themselves is
a colonial project backed by the major
imperialist Western powers of course
Britain taking an important role early
on the US taking that over a bit
later in uh and one of the principal
goals of that long-standing Colonial
settler Colonial imperialist project
is to take over land natural resources
proletarianized the extent population of
these regions and also have a beach head
in an area of the world known of course
for its extremely important natural
resources uh you know oil and gas being
the the first and foremost among them
and So within that much larger context
then Israel can be recognized for what
it is and that is an imperialist backed
settler colony that is quite clear about
what it is that it's doing its political
leaders have said it time and time again
we now have the most recent icj uh uh
ruling that doesn't quite yet go all the
way but at least says that there's ample
evidence to investigate Israel for
undertaking uh genocide with imperialist
backing but the target of that genocide
is the Palestinian people and they are
the ones who are being racialized and
targeted for elimination and we're now
at a level that far surpasses the knba
of of 1948 and of course the knba is
been ongoing it's been an endless
catastrophe but if you just look at the
numbers in 1948 and you compare them to
the numbers today they're double or
triple that uh depending on what sources
you look at Etc so in that regard I
think that the historical materialist
and dialectical approach to Fascism is
absolutely essential for understanding
the Contemporary world because then we
can see that fascism also operates these
would be my final words and we can open
it up for discussion as The Cutting Edge
of imperialism when you need to
dispossess people beat back alternative
threats and make sure you impose
capitalist relations by any means
necessary right there at that Cutting
Edge of imperialism where NATO is
pushing to the east in the case of
Ukraine where the Israeli Army is
dispossessing and pushing out the
Palestinians in order to take over all
of Gaza at least that's certainly what
it's looking like now and make it into
just incorporate it into Israel and the
same similar things are going on in the
West Bank then what you have are two
imperialist Endeavors that can and I
think should be conceptually framed in
terms of the history of how fascistic
modes of violence are operative within
the history of capitalist driven
colonialism so that'll be my final word
and we can open it up for discussion
debate questions and
comments wow thank you than you very
much boy we have a lot to talk about um
in a moment we're going to go to the
question and answer part of today's
session um in doing so what I'd ask
people to do is to go to the reactions
button and raise your hand uh if you
have questions or comments we'll come
back to it in a moment uh but uh get
ready I think this will be a great
discussion before we do I just have a
couple of quick
announcements um first of all for future
programs we have an incredible lineup of
programs uh coming up in the next month
um the first one next week will be on
criminalizing Palestinian solidarity uh
three British comrades indicted under
the anti-terrorism law very very special
program we put this up uh very quickly I
I don't know how much people are
following what's going on in the UK but
um uh
three uh
comrades at a uh Pro Palestine
demonstration were arrested for
Distributing uh hate
literature uh and then other comrades
have been targeted using the 2000 UK
anti-terrorism law facing some very
serious charges for basically
organizing uh resistance to the uh us
British imperialist uh war on Gaza this
really repres presents a world
historic um uh development that we
should be very concerned about here in
the US we're going to have Dr Ranjit BR
one of the people who was arrested for
on the hate crimes uh um uh arrest and
he'll be speaking about what's going on
for the cases for all the comrades I'd
also call your attention to the fact
that the Oakland School District and the
San Francisco School District are under
federal investigation on the basis of
for promoting quote unquote violations
of civil rights and hate uh for
sponsoring teachin on um this I believe
the teachers union sponsored some
teachin on um Palestine very very
important uh uh next week that's why I'm
giving a little bit of extra time to
encourage people to attend the following
week on Fe on February 11th we have
harpel bra from the Communist Party of
Great Britain Marxist leninist uh he is
going to be speaking on his book
socialism with Chinese characteristics
uh very interesting book I've read it
very informative and some very
provocative ideas about what's going on
in China today um our next speaker on
February 18th this is going to be a talk
that is um uh corresponds to the
two-year anniversary of the Russian
intervention special military operation
in Ukraine we're going to have a
Ukrainian
Marxist based in the US woman Slava
speaking out against Ukraine's regime
and NATO on the second anniversary of
the special military operation this is
going to be a really interesting session
a lot of uh
personal um
information uh she's from Western
Ukraine so she's not from the East a
Russian ethnic but talking about at the
ground level and also after two years
kind of looking back historically what
uh uh you know what's actually happened
what we can say today and what we've
learned uh about what's what's happened
in Ukraine and the significance of
it uh the following week on uh February
25th we have another very special
speaker from London we have Andrew Fein
Ste uh author of Shadow World Andrew was
born in South Africa uh Jewish Family
who was active in the anti-apartheid
movement and he will be speaking on
South Africa's case at the icj he's
going to be talking about aparte in
South Africa what are some of the
lessons that that were learned from the
fight against apartheid and how they can
be applied to the fight against
apartheid in Palestine and the war in
Palestine very important uh talk um
other stuff coming up after that the
best way for you
to uh find out about our sessions is to
go to our website
icss marks. org when you come online to
the website a small box pops up a signup
box enter your name and your email
address and you will receive email
notices every week with up programs also
on our website are uh a way of
contacting us and many of our past
programs going back many years that are
um actually um up uh for uh as videos so
we have a tremendous uh
um set of upcoming programs and we
really want to encourage people to join
and sign up
Etc okay so I'm looking at the uh at the
stack everybody please be patient with
us because we have a lot of people I
want to ask everybody today in
particular we had we've had over 50
people on this is one of our larger uh
sessions I'm going to ask people to
please try to keep your questions or
comments to about two minutes I'm gonna
kind of watch that a little bit more
closely ask one question at a
time maybe two but one question try and
keep it in the in the interest of Time
come back your welcome to come back and
ask questions and also please respect
I'm going to try and take people in a
certain order um please respect the fact
that I'm really trying to uh uh run this
thing smoothly so let's start off with
the um the first person who uh who will
be speaking will be um let's see let's
have uh mem name sounds familiar uh
followed by
um uh
Sharon so let me go ahead and um allow
the participants to unmute yourself so
mem if you would unmute yourself and ask
your question go right ahead thank you
Alan and uh also I'd like to uh thank
the uh speaker it was an excellent
presentation uh very impressive uh I
would like to uh first of all mention
that there is a confusion in the left on
what is fascism and what is not and it
is a real question because unfortunately
we have been given only the models of
Italy Germany maybe Franco you know
those uh models and so unfortunately
people have not been able to go beyond
that as
imperialism uh developed as capitalism
developed to today's stage and so there
is a confusion on whether you know we we
have fascism here or there or not so the
confusion comes to uh identifying
fascism as you know being a mass
movement which you have gone in there
thank you that was very impressive that
we don't have to have a massive movement
to have fascism it could come top down
you mentioned that very well and that
top down starts with the state the
capitalist State and the reasons why the
F they would need fascism is mostly in
the state of Crisis but we have to
understand in this stage of capitalism
in this stage of imperialism both
capitalism and imperialism are in
crisis but which means that then we will
be shifting more towards fascism in many
countries as we have been seeing but
more than that the neoc colonial countes
that are dependent on imperialism have
been in crisis all along they all came
to being after the second world war in
the stage of imperialism in Monopoly
capitalism and they were born into a
crisis and the crisis that the neoc
colonial countries face are constant
there's no way that they have good days
and bad days good years and bad years so
what it means is that the crisis is
consistent the crisis is constant which
means the uh when you have the lack of
democracy as a tool to rule the people
especially in the new Colonial countries
it means that fascism the way of
expressing the people does become the
mode everyday mode and the confusion
that I mentioned about is that you know
people ask well there's there is there's
you know democracy there there are
unions the workers you there are
associations there are uh you know the
parliaments election doesn't matter they
are show they are show and the real rule
becomes the rule of the capitalists the
rule of the uh Financial uh uh Monopoly
uh that is tied to imperialis and I
really thank you for bringing up the
ties to imperialism in the age of
Imperialism especially in the ne
Colonials is it even possible to have a
Bourgeois democracy if not then what do
we call it if not fascism thank you very
much very impressive
presentation okay Gabriel usually what
we do we take one question at a time
you're welcome to make comments uh try
to keep it keep things rolling but why
don't you go ahead Gabriel and then
we'll take the next question uh after
Gabriel from Sharon followed by Mike Hoy
so Gabriel please go ahead yeah I mean I
think it was more of a comment but I
really agree with it and appreciate the
the nature of the comment but I I will
say that if we understand fascism as the
mobilization of usually State and parate
violence that's backed by the capitalist
ruling class and allowed to act by the
bis state that these forms of violence
do tend to intensify in moments of
Crisis and those crises can because
there's an external threat like the
threat of a socialist alternative but it
can also be internal threat socialism
internally or capitalism's own inability
to solve the contradictions that it
produces in the first place and that if
you look in the Contemporary
International context there are many
many political economists who have
pointed out that neoliberalism is
running out of speed out of steam uh the
rolling back of the social welfare state
only goes so far and then there's
nothing more to roll back and you just
really start destroying people's lives
at a more rapid pace and depending on
where people are situated in
relationship to the kind of contemporary
struggle between imperialism and the
Socialist alternative I am of the camp
that identifies socialism with Chinese
characteristics as a reality not as
something that the Chinese aren't doing
and so I do see the Chinese
experiment if you will because all of
these are ongoing experiments as
attempting to do a certain form of
Socialism that differs from Soviet
socialism and differs from Vietnam it
differs from Cuba etc for very specific
historical reasons and that the rising
prominence of China and its growth rates
which have been truly truly incredible
uh over basically since 1949 but if you
take out a few years of the kind of
cultural revolution it's almost been at
10% per year and they're only now
starting to slow that down in the name
of developing a more environmental
civilization which they are global
leaders in then the Contemporary crisis
is not only that neoliberalism is
running out of steam it's that there's a
country regardless of where you're
positioned on this it's a country that
calls itself socialist at the
preliminary stage of socialist that is
uh now surpasses the United States in
purchasing power parity if you look at
it in those terms it's the strongest
economy in the world and it is uniting
with countries around the world in an
alternative development project if if
it's bricks if it's a belon road if it's
you know there a whole series of
different networked modes of development
that again we wouldn't want to describe
them as socialist developmental projects
but I do think it's coherent to say that
they're not the imperialist model of
development that's been shoved down
people's throats through imperialism and
so in that specific context of a very
powerful socialist country and an
alternative model of International
Development that isn't the imperialist
model of the West regardless of how you
end up defining and describing in it
means that the crisis is that much more
intensified and I think it's precisely
for that reason uh that those two
reasons of capitalist crisis internally
and an alternative externally that we
have seen more fascism Rising within the
capitalist countries and we're going to
see a lot more of that in the coming
future it's one of the reasons that we
not only have to understand it but we
also have to study and develop very
important tactics for fighting against
it and be cleared about what the
principal strategy for fighting against
fascism is and that's the establishment
of socialism there's not fascism within
socialist countries there's fascism
within capitalist countries that are
under threat in crisis trying to do
anything that they can in order to
remain in power so I'll leave it at that
and let us go on to the next question
yeah just a quick reminder on February
11th we will have harul BR talking about
his book which is very relevant to what
you were just talking about next up is
Sharon followed by Mike followed by
Roger so uh Sharon please go
ahead unmute yourself can you call on me
later because it my question is okay uh
let's go ahead
Mike yeah I have a couple historical
questions one is dealing with the role
of the world league for freedom and
democracy I think it was started in 52
by ten Kai Sheek originally called world
anti-communist league and I'm wondering
if they were just kind of a paper tiger
or if they actually played a a part in
what was going on in the 50s and 60s and
the second thing is about Unit
731 how many of the scientists from 731
were actually employed by the us or
Japanese State and was it a lot similar
to Germany or was it just kind of like a
minor
thing great uh wonderful questions I'm
not really familiar with the history of
the the world league for freedom and
democracy i' have to look into it maybe
other people know more on the call so
apologies for my ignorance on that front
I am familiar with Unit 731 and it's
heinous experiments on human subjects
using mainly communist prisoners of War
to do the most horrific things
imaginable to human beings or at least
the worst ones that I've ever read about
freezing people alive and then chopping
off their limbs and seeing if they could
be sewn onto another body doing uh live
autopsy so somebody was alive and they
would just you know no anesthesia or
anything just dissect them uh on the
table and the his name is escaping me
right now perhaps you know it but I
believe it was the head of Unit 731 very
famous Japanese scientist who oversaw a
lot of these heinous experiments was
hired immediately by the Central
Intelligence Agency in order to share
all of his uh knowledge and also
expertise in the heinous things that he
was doing with the West I also know
there's I I actually haven't read it yet
but I just came across recently there's
a whole book on unit 7331 that I wasn't
familiar with and I'm going to read it
very soon um so I'm sure I'll find out
more there hopefully there'll be more
information there but that's all that I
have on that on that front I don't know
the exact number of people who are
integrated but in Japan you know they
basically took the leadership of fascist
Imperial Japan and with a few tiny
exceptions they put them back in power
and they used the liberal party you know
that that's the name of the party in
Japan as basically a Bastion for
fascists so much so that the individual
who signed the Declaration of war
against the United States was run
through the CIA CLE cleansing machine
you know brought up to speed on what his
new job was and then put right back in
power um and so in the case of Japan
it's it's it's not only very similar to
Germany and Italy it actually in many
ways surpasses Germany and Italy because
in Germany and Italy they you know they
use adow and they basically used uh
liberal aers and ab betters that could
allow them to continue doing what they
wanted to do SUB Rosa that is the United
States wanted to do in Italy and Germany
in the case of Japan it was the visible
government that itself was just in deep
continuity with the imperialist fascists
so and the last thing I'll say is I
think it's really important so many of
the bgea approaches to fascist are
absolutely Imperial Centric and they
only talk about Europe Japan's role in
all of this is quintessentially
important and as I mentioned earlier
World War II was really fought in the
East and that we need to understand
because it was a war between Imperial
Fascism and uh socialism in the case of
uh China Korea Vietnam uh Soviet Union
at least there were struggles already
that were going on that were pushing in
that direction in those Eastern
countries so I'll leave it at that and
go on to the next
question okay next up is Roger followed
by Janet so Roger please go ahead and
unmute yourself yes okay thank thank
thank you Gabriel very good very helpful
um some of the highlights I think for me
was the criticism of the one state one
government Paradigm and the suggestion
of having a multi modal um model of
governance that was very useful of
course your comments about Ukraine were
very um right on targets um the whole
multiscale level of fascism um really
helped me conceptualize U th those those
issues and such um I'd like to hear more
about
the taking this this framework this
intellectual framework and applying it
to contemporary us politics um uh
particularly you made a um very valid
criticism of the ultra left criticism of
um Bush Bo democracy where you don't
want throw the baby out with the B bath
water use the uh he use the analogy of
the good cop bad cop there's a danger
there that that that that can slide into
um lesser eism and how you avoid that
but um I think I'm gonna keep that
question in a bance maybe if I get a
second chance to another bite of the
Apple I'll ask La I want to ask a much
more practical area of questions and and
that that is um about your your own um
development of thought in the critical
theory Workshop if if you could could
you probably try to characterize for us
what um the critical theory workshop and
and your own work um what what are the
essential elements of that that
distinguishes it as an element within
Marx's thought so that would be the
first part of that question um and so
how how would you characterize that that
tendency second would be what allies are
there right now developing with within
International um Marxism um what similar
Tendencies are there right now that you
would call allies or collaborators and
stuff like that um third was
um what is the potential of having some
sort of um or organizational form that
consolidates some of those Tendencies
and an example would be um you're
probably familiar with the left Forum um
that that comes out of New York City
it's sort of bit of an bance since the
covid crisis but um something
um that
would be for the what I would call want
of a better term an
Anti-Imperialist um anal analysis of of
world politics some some sort of maybe
meeting or some sort of um
organizational form and and and what and
then finally what are the opportunities
for collaborative um projects thank
you thanks so much Roger that was very
very rich I can't help myself but to say
very quickly regarding fascism in the
United States that you know what we're
facing with Trump Biden is basically
a choice between two candidates who
agree on a lot they're both for a
capitalist war on workers on the home
front and for the perpetuation of
imperialist Wars abroad there are minor
differences between the way in which
they wage those two Wars but that's what
they really agree on but it is true that
there's a third element I think in the
case of trump and that is really
empowering a fascistic
oriented uh base and trying to AstroTurf
That Base as much as possible and we saw
this with January 6 we've seen this with
a lot of other things that Trump has
done and within the Trump World and that
does cause a kind of level of threat to
the very hollowed out and empty form of
boua democracy that we still have
operative and so I think that variegated
analysis is is important um we could get
into that in Greater detail if you want
because I think it's a really pressing
uh question and issue it's also a
question of why the Democrat why the
Democratic Party is is running to lose
because they clearly are you know Biden
can barely talk at this point in time
it's almost laughable from any from
anyone from the outside who would look
at this would say Well they're running
so that Trump gets in office as they
have done in the past right when they
ran Hillary Clinton and everybody knew
that Sanders would have won against uh
against Trump and there were studies
that demonstrated as much and so it
raises questions about the larger level
of collusion on the part of the
capitalist ruling class they obviously
fund both parties although some of it
you know some of certain sectors of the
capitalist ruling class are more
directed toward the Democrats and some
are more directed towards the
Republicans but there is a kind of level
of Crisis going on within us Imperial
hegemony that makes it such that I think
that there's a a large segment of the
ruling class that's saying well why
don't we try out something a little bit
harder uh this time around and see if we
can get our goals uh met so bracketing
that anymore though and turning to the
critical theory Workshop I mean the main
goal is to have a platform that has
academic credentials and is taken
seriously and not just dismissed as
something that's engaged in real world
politics and therefore shouldn't be
taken seriously by academics for
instance or journalists and the tendency
of thought I think you characterize well
it's Anti-Imperialist
Marxism um Anti-Imperialist Marxism that
also is not afraid of and in fact
actually advocates for a serious
rigorous scientific engagement with
socialism not just as an idea socialism
as a practice socialism that needs to be
understood in terms of movements of
parties of States Etc and that there's a
lot of the kind of cold war ideology
that I've been subjected to that assumes
that all that you can do is criticize
capitalism and that's what unites us but
we don't really need a positive project
or if we do have a positive project it's
in a kind of utopian socialist mode or a
Third Way politics I think times are
worse than they ever have been right
nuclear clock is closer to midnight than
it ever has been environmental
degradation and the loss of the
biosphere closer than it ever has been
this level and fascism is more intense
now than it ever has been at least in my
lifetime the crisis is at fever fever
pitch the utopian socialist directions
they've been tried out they've been very
present within the Cold War but they're
unsatisfactory I think in my opinion and
I know a lot of young people who are
also oriented in that direction let's
open up the spectrum of analysis and
take actually existing socialism
seriously there's a lot of allies for
the work that we do uh We've
collaborated with a lot of different
institutions uh internationally and so
most of them are on the website the
collaboration that we're doing right now
uh I think is an example thereof but I'd
like to focus on the last thing that you
say because I think it's so or said
because I think it's so important is
that I've been having a lot of
discussions with people about the need
for a larger platform or an organization
that operates at an even higher level
that could bring different organizations
together and have something like an
association an Anti-Imperialist
Association for instance or you know
come up with some other name for it that
would bring together and kind of
Federate between different groups that
might have different Tendencies or
various different approaches but would
provide a framework a platform for
debate and conversation and discussion
and I think it would be important for
that kind of kind of Anti-Imperialist
Association to draw on people who are
working more in an academic setting
perhaps or journalists and working kind
of professionally if you will a
knowledge production but also activists
and party leaders and union leaders
something along those lines I think is
really really necessary and so but I'm
still at least at the level of my
discussions and organizing having
conversations with people about how to
do that how to maintain control over it
so it's not poached by certain political
Tendencies or poached by the capitalist
ruling class and so I'd be more than
happy to follow up this conversation in
brainstorming further about what we
might be able to do uh and and I think
it could be done and should be done with
strong International connections because
there is actually being launched next
year there's a new international Marxist
Association that from what I understand
is going to be a kind of umbrella
Organization for National associations
and so if we were able to get something
off the ground then we could affiliate
ourselves with that as well and I think
we'd have to do it as non-sectarian as
possible so that we'd all be learning
and engaging but also have kind of a
principled position regarding the
importance of struggling against
imperialism and for socialism so thank
you Roger that was really
rich okay next is uh Janet followed by
uh kit followed by Raj and um I want to
encourage people who are first time
attendees at session raise your hand and
ask a question don't be intimidated
don't be shy go ahead and uh speak up so
go ahead
Janet okay thank you this has been a
wonderful
presentation I am so appreciative for
all your work um I by the way uh uh
zalinski ran as a peace
candidate which I thought was
interesting um
anyway I'm I'm wondering if you would
clarify if you consider colonialism as a
phase that uh happened prior to
capitalism or is a branch of it or was a
branch of it well we still have uh
Israel but um but that said I have uh
three questions um actually let's let's
try to keep it down to maybe one or two
okay I know Roger slipped a few in there
but go ahead ask and then you can choose
whichever ones um okay could you talk
more about where the Trump
Biden um where they you know those two
the uh Republican Democrat
um uh falls into the fascism liberalism
parallels in in the
US um can you also talk about where the
Muslim countries fall into your
Paradigm and finally uh uh would you
talk a little bit more about mil uh
about uh physical force that aspect of
capitalism the military and police
States great I I'll try to be quicker in
my responses as well because these
questions are really rich so I want to
hear them all and I'll continue thinking
about them after our
conversation Co I I I think that uh
colonialism is is baked into the history
of the capitalist project because it is
about taking natural resources and land
and dispossessing people Etc and that as
Lenin said by the time we get to the
late 19th early 20th century the
colonial project has saturated the world
but that doesn't mean that Colonial
Endeavors are over it means that there's
a struggle over who gets access to those
colonies or who can produce new colonies
and so I think that uh understanding how
colonialism shifts under uh the Imperial
phase which I believe is still operative
today would be important regarding Trump
and Biden on liberalism and fascism I
mean Trump and Biden are both people who
support the uh fascist elements of
imperialism globally and who have
empowered to some extent fascists uh
domestically although Trump clearly is
much more of the camp of those who are
trying to empower a domestic form of
fascism Biden is you know has not really
cracked down on the fascist movements in
these countries like if if the three
centers and the oathkeepers and
movements like this were Marxist
movements all these people would be in
prison and there wouldn't be you know
there probably wouldn't even been
hearings for that matter uh in this case
though they're really they have been
treated with kid gloves there have been
some prison sentences going as high as I
believe 15 years was is the highest one
that I saw but there's not a real
attempt to crush the fascist movement in
this country and there won't be from a
Democratic candidate in my opinion
because the good cop always wants to
keep the bad cop on call and they want
to appear like the good cop and do
things to present that image but they're
not going to crush the alternative but
Trump is very dangerous and I think that
we should be sober and clear about that
he is going to as he already has very
much empowered a fascist movement on the
ground and he's going to leverage as
much governmental power in his direction
as he can and that's dangerous and so I
think if we have this more dialectical
analysis of fascism at different levels
we can see yeah there's some support for
fascism that both of them agree on but
Trump does surpass at the domestic level
certain in certain aspects Muslim
countries and fascism I think a big part
of my future research in kind of
bringing this book hopefully to a close
is also looking at the ways in which the
United States has mobilized Islamic
fundamentalism for Imperial ends and
that this has been one of its princip
iple objectives in its Imperial
Endeavors in the 21st century working uh
you know hand and glove with the with
the if you know this goes back to
Afghanistan and the the kind of Afghan
trap that was run by the Central
Intelligence Agency and the state
department but it continues up to today
with trying to Foster terrorism on the
part of the Wagers to all of the splits
between sunnis and Shia in the Middle
East there's a real attempt to Foster
the kind of more fascistic elements of
uh Islamic fundament alism um I don't
know if that's where your question was
headed but that's definitely where my my
mind went and then the last thing is
that the US police state the mass
incarceration system the extreme levels
of repressive violence Unleashed by the
state on immigrant communities I think
we have to see all of those as not
somehow separate from fascism because
there's a tendency to think well fascism
buis Scholars differ on this sometimes
people will say well fascism is just
when fascists have control of the state
or others will say well fascism is just
Vigilantes and parate actors but I think
it's important to recognize no this is a
porous phenomenon in which the state the
bis State often acts handin glove with
parate actors these can be vigilante
organizations organized crime is very
very big and very important for the way
in which fascism is mobilized they can
be Islamic fundamentalists they can be
many different types of groups and that
there's a real paracity between the two
and that's what we have to be able to
see is how you know I'm sure some people
have seen memes like this but does it
make a big difference if you're getting
beat up by a cop during the day or if
it's at night and you're being harassed
by the KKK if the person wearing those
uniforms might be the same person and
often historically has been the same
person it's just during the day they've
got a job and at night or on the
weekends they happen to be in a militia
or an organization like the clan and so
part of my work is trying to really see
and and detail specific events at which
we really really see that coming to the
four right the history of the white
power movement in the 70s and 80s is
quite interesting because a lot of it
comes out of Vietnam Vets people were
coming back from us Imperial Wars abroad
subjected to quite a bit of mistreatment
on the part of the US government as
being vets but then aligning on a US
Imperial project against the immigrants
On the Border uh primarily in places
like Texas and in the southwest and so
you see these people who are formatted
by the military industrial complex and
doing work within the Civil sector that
basically parallels the work that they
were already doing within the military
and it's that type of fluidity that I
think historical materialists really
have to understand and and bring to the
four okay we're going to go next with
kit followed by Raj so kit if you would
unmute yourself and ask your question
followed by
Raj kit your your sound is really
breaking up can you hear can hear me no
it's not not doing too good maybe you
could go out and come back in give it a
try okay can I put my yeah put put in
the chat go ahead and we'll get to it
okay okay in the
meantime okay in the meantime Raj go
ahead okay Gabriel thank you very much
uh uh for the presentation um so I have
two questions first is uh given that
G7 is
backing Israel's genocide enabling it
standing by Israel uh against much of
the world um would you characterize them
as fascist States now so that's first
question second question is how do you
see Modi Le government in India
which uh you probably know that Indian
communist call either fascist or Neo
fascist but it is also uh working with
uh working with Russia and China China
which you say is a socialist project H
China and Russia which are opposing
fascism so in how do you see Modi
government the second question is more
important the first one is also
important so if you have time on for one
as so the second one only yeah they're
great questions thank you I think that
it's a a dialectical approach has to
look at the kind of different levels and
our if I could use a kind of philosophic
reference point Hegel always encourages
not just to think at the level of
understanding and if you think of the
level of understanding you have fixed
categories that have an Essence to them
and that's it and they're stable and
fixed so it's either fascism or it's
liberalism
and a lot of debates I think
unfortunately get locked into this idea
of well it's just this or just that a
dialectical approach thinks at the level
of what Hegel call reason and that is
that these are complex historical
processes with different dimensions and
we can do a fine grained analysis of
them that overcomes all the limitations
of the kind of bgea ideology so I just
preface that or say that as a preface to
insist on that like if we use the label
fascist that's obviously going to mean
something quite strong but if we're able
to do a kind of variegated analysis we
can look at different levels and so in
the case of G7 countries they actually
differ a little bit between them right
like the United States is really the
driving force behind Israel and it has
been since at least the 60s would we
call the US a fascist State well the US
AIDS and abets and supports and has been
I would argue the principal driving
force behind fascism internationally at
least since World War II if not before
that
uh at the same time it maintains a bgeo
democracy on the home front elections
and rule of law and a kind of good cop
relationship to its professional
managerial class Strat so that's not the
same thing as a fascist state that would
abolish all of that uh and but it is
also increasingly moving I mean you just
look at the Historical spectrum of
politics in the US and it's just been
moving to the right for a very very long
time and so there's an increasing kind
of drift if you will in that particular
direction um and but what one of the
things I like about your question I'd
like to insist on is that sometimes
people say well fascists are the guys
with baseball bats who are beating up
people and they don't say well the
fascist is Henry Ford who paid for
thousands of people with baseball bats
to beat up the workers we have to see
both of them as playing a role and the
capitalist ruling class is having a lot
more power than a guy with a B baseball
bat or a gun or whatever else they might
have and so I think it's absolutely true
that we have to look at the real drivers
behind fascism and that's the capitalist
ruling class and the bis states that
work uh with them and for them regarding
the mo the Modi government I think uh a
lot of people are better experts than I
am on India but the best analyses that
I've seen uh our analyses that highlight
the way in which Modi himself kind of
came out of political movements that
themselves had were very strongly rooted
in fascist movements there's a very
strong you know uh Hindu nationalist
orientation that of course culturally
mirrors what a lot of other fascist
projects have done there's the
unleashing of vigilante violence the use
of the state for that type of violence
the uh all of the repressive uh
Crackdown on uh workers on Marxist
journalists and intellectuals and things
like that on all of those fronts I think
it's manifesting f istic modes of
governance 100% uh on the international
stage India is in a little bit of a
different situation right it is at
certain levels proximate to the west and
taking certain lines that are closer to
the Imperial countries or the historical
Imperial countries but it is also
involved in developmental projects of a
kind of bgea nationalist sort with other
countries of of the East and so once
again I would say that we kind of need a
dialectical analysis maybe the last
thing that I would say is that since the
term Fascism and the concept is so
important it often is Central in
organizing uh situations where at times
it can be really important to say look
we did our variegated F grain analysis
and it seems that the country is like
80% fascist and maybe 20% keeps a
semblance of a parliamentary democracy
but for the purposes of our organizing
and the class struggles that we're
engaged in now we're going to come out
and we're going to say that it's fascist
because because we need the clear lines
of demarcation to be drawn and so I do
think we have to relate the kind of more
fine grained work that I've been talking
about to the need to draw a line in a
sand and say no this is fascist and
therefore we're fighting against it on
this front um so I just kind of want to
add that into the equation because it
can be two different things when we're
on a zoom call talking about fascism as
we are now versus if you're on a zoom
call talking about well we're organizing
an anti-fascist front and we got to be
clear about where we stand and we can't
have you know Professor rockel give some
long expose about the various levels of
analysis so that type of tactical
definition I think is really important
maybe the very last thing is Neo fascism
is not a term that I I particularly
support because there's been a tendency
to say that well fascism Was Defeated
and now it's resurgent fascism wasn't
fully defeated fascism is continuous
with the capitalist uh governance and so
I think that just calling it fascist and
calling it Nazi is is the way to go as
opposed to adding the prefix
Neo but we question or cycle back sure
uh next is uh let's actually have
Jonathan uh first time participant go
ahead Jonathan ask your question
followed by Sharon I will get to
everybody I promise so Jonathan if you
want to unmute go
ahead um hello um and I'll stay off
camera because I have my daughter with
me but U first I want to endorse
critical theory Workshop I attend I'm
also a patreon member so I recommend it
to everybody and Professor Rock Hill my
question is more about um I'm wondering
if you had any thoughts regarding
fascism and like the use of the welfare
state to quell the militancy prior and
during the Civil Rights
Movement that's a great question I think
the the biggest historical frame that
needs to be used to understand the
welfare state in the Imperial
PO is the threat of socialism that given
the fact that workers in the East had
access to free or affordable housing
Health Care education uh employment Etc
that this created a context in which the
Western struggle for social services
took on greater power and that the
capitalist ruling class decided on a
class compromise we're going to give to
the workers basic social benefits
so that we can Shore up our hegemony and
Rule at least segments of the um of the
workers
hegemonically and in that regard that
has had uh of course an impact on modes
of
organizing um but it depends on what
time period we're talking about right
because the social welfare state is it
existed at least in some form in the
case of the United States as of about
the 1970s and the neoliberal turn has
just been gutted ever since then and so
we're now living in a world where
increasingly everything's been
privatized and any semblance of a social
uh safety net is withering away very
very quickly if it you know any if any
of it's even left in certain sa uh
segments um but I take it that and this
is maybe the last thing I'll say is part
of your question is motivated by well
how does the social welfare state relate
to reformism versus a more revolutionary
form of Socialism and it is true that
and here I would reference of course the
great work of lennin and others who
highlighted how Social Democratic
reformism often really settles in within
the Imperial core when there are class
compromises that are made from above as
well as a labor aristocracy in the
Imperial core that is booed by the
colonial Enterprises and that
combination of social welfare state
social democracy and labor
aristocratic social standing
internationally does make or has
historically made a context within the
Imperial core where a lot of those who
are the more privileged sectors of the
working class have a vested interest in
keeping the capitalist system going as
is because they are beneficiaries of
that system and that has tended to work
against the interests of the more
revolutionary socialist orientation and
it's also one of the reasons that some
of the more radical forms of uh
organizing in a country like the United
States have tended to come out of the
racialized poor some of uh those who are
really at the and at the bottom really
of the the labor pools because they're
not benefiting as much from the social
welfare state from the wages of
imperialism and colonialism and from
Social Democratic rights and things like
that uh
so hopefully that answers at least some
of your
questions hey next will be Sharon
followed by Jean followed by Yousef so
Sharon go ahead thank you so um on on
Palestine so I think it's very true that
it's apartheid state and with an analogy
to South
Africa and but what can we learn from
the history of South Africa so at some
point the ruling class woke up and
decided that they could either have a
blood bath or they could let the AFC the
the uh black
population
uh have some equal rights as the white
working class and they could exploit
both which they are now doing
um and um in in it the Israeli working
class has never acted as if or rarely
acted as if they needed the Palestinian
working class to exploit um even though
they lack workers that's why they import
people from Thailand and the Philippines
and other places and um they have
historically had people from Gaza
working in in Israel uh green line
and or people from the West Bank being
able to work inside of Israel although
that's much less or practically none
none now um so when why can't the
Israeli work uh ruling class you know
have a similar um um stance toward
getting rid of apartheid in the interest
of making more
profits that's it's good and interesting
question I don't know if I can give a
really straightforward answer that was
more rhetorical question but yeah yeah
no it's I mean what you've highlighted
and I think brought to the four in an
important manner is that when there is
an Insurgent class that has been uh
racialized subjected to apartheid taken
had their land and natural resources
taken away Etc that there are different
ways of managing those populations and I
take it that you're suggesting that is
is is doing that in a way that's even
surpasses what South Africa yes did
right um that's I mean that's yeah
that's an important point it is also
related to the way in which you know uh
Emanuel NES has an excellent book on
this that deals with immigration as as
as a form of imperialism or migration I
should say and that is that if Israel
can rely on even cheaper labor from
abroad due to the kind of international
flows of immigr ation and then just push
out the Palestinians and take all push
out or kill the Palestinians take all of
their land because I'm sure we've
already seen that they're designing
projects for Gaza and already you know
they've got the beach resorts already
designed for what's going to go in after
they just bulldoze the entire place and
so I imagine that whatever those back
room conversations are they have to do
with a calculus concerning the cheapness
of the labor pools and also the you know
the ways in which colonial ISM and the
specific forms of racism that it takes
on usually tends to Target the
population whose land is being taken
away and so uh in that regard I do think
that the situation at least is a little
bit different than the South African
situation maybe the last thing that I
would say on this and this is a little
bit of a different comment but it
relates to the earlier question by
Jonathan and that is that this is often
been a case that capitalist ruling class
and buis states have faced that is that
there's so many forces rising up from
below and how do they manage
insurgencies and in the case of the
United States if you look at what was
going on in the you know in the 1960s
for instance within the more
revolutionary elements of the Black
Liberation struggle that was a similar
problem either we just Crush these
people and we keep segregation and we're
going to have a lot we're going to
discredit ourselves internationally and
nationally for that matter and it's just
going to be a bloodbath it already was a
blood bath to some extent would be even
worse then what do we do and what the US
decided to do in that case I think is
quite revealing and that is that they
really you know legally they said okay
well everybody has the same rights but
we know that def facto that's not at all
the case but then they also propped up a
black professional managerial class and
the Ford foundation and the
corporatocracy was involved in this very
explicitly and they knew exactly what
they were doing they were basically
honeypotting people who were leaders
from the black community who could play
the role of being kind of leading
reformists who were Pro corporate uh am
able to Black capitalism and things like
this and then they could create what's
now called a kind of black miss
leadership class and so you desegregate
in principle and then you only allow a
few up so that then you can point to
them in a form of tokenism and say look
these people succeeded and so it's a
different form of segregation that's not
the exact same as apartheid but
structurally and at the level of
Economics it still basically operates in
such a way that the masses of black
people are kept in working class or even
lower positions in that as a kind of
surplus population and so it'd be
interesting I just say this because it
would be really interesting to look at
different counterinsurgency tactics
right look at Israel look at South
Africa look at the United States and see
the different tactics why they were used
how they succeeded or failed in various
ways so there's a lot more that could be
said but these are rich questions so
I'll leave it at that yeah I would call
everybody's attention to the fact that
on February 25th Andrew Feinstein this
is something that he's spoken on he's
quite knowledgeable from from South
Africa so come back on the 25th and
we'll go more into that question um next
up is uh
Jean uh followed by Yousef followed by
Richard let's try to keep the questions
down to two minutes because we're
getting really close to the end here so
Jean go ahead okay okay well thanks so
much Gabriel this was really a great
talk and I find myself I think in
agreement with nearly everything you
said I can't remember anything I
disagree with i i just want to make
maybe two points one um one point is as
a former Marine I appreciate your
mention of smidley Butler uh in the
attempted coup of
1936 in which basically he blew the
whistle uh on the fascist and said he
would not lead a March on Washington and
uh he has a book uh um War as a racket
and he's kind of the patron saint of uh
uh all us ex-marines so I just wanted to
say that about uh uh Smedley Butler the
other thing is uh in terms of the threat
uh I mean we recognize that Trump is a
threat and really is and uh you know I
think the stakes are really serious
because he's quite explicit in terms of
you know he said that you know he'll
only be a dictator for one day but
that's all he needs to get rid of all
the you know these the lower race of uh
uh immigrants that are polluting our our
blood basically which is taken I think
directly from from uh Hitler and also
basically get rid of the Communists and
that's us so I think we have uh you know
I've never really felt that I was
personally threatened by any of these
fascist Tendencies but I just wonder
about that and I wonder how serious the
threat of uh uh of
uh um Trump really is so those are my
comments and again thank you so much for
your
discussion thank you I'll be really
quick because I do see there's a there's
a ton of questions I agree with your
comments and thank you the I think the
Trump phenomenon is is pretty dangerous
uh Trump round two I think is going to
be more gloves off than Trump round one
and he's been pretty explicit about
where he's headed it's going to be more
authoritarian it's going to be even more
anti-communist he's going to rev up the
war against China of course the war
against immigrants of course uh it's
going to continue you know if he comes
into office which at this point in time
I'm very sorry to say that's what it's
kind of looking like um but we'll see
what happens it's also kind of
impossible to predict exactly how things
will go down and but we do know that he
did everything in his power within the
bis state to stay in power and then did
some illegal stuff to try to stay in
power so I think these are quite
dangerous and intense times and so what
we need to do is to get as organized as
educated and as connected as possible
because uh things things could get quite
uh could get quite dark and so the more
power that we build in prior to the
storm breaking out I think the better
and
um yeah I'm not I'm not particularly
optimistic about things getting getting
better under Trump if he comes into
office that's for sure okay thank youf
youf go ahead
uh let me briefly answer try to answer
Sharon's question um well historic Palin
is um roughly uh New Jersey and Delaware
so when you have a um restive population
and population that's resisting in such
a small area then you have a problem um
from point of view of the Israelis uh
okay I think it's also worth mentioning
that once fascists get into Power uh
they actually
suppress or or really bring under
control the uh guys quote unquote with
the uh baseball bats and this uh
happened uh very dramatically in Germany
uh during the um night of the long night
where much of the sa
was outright
killed so I wanted to mention that and
if you have any comments
on yeah I I think you're absolutely
right regarding that earlier question
that it would be it wouldn't uh serve
Israel's interests now in thinking about
it to integrate Palestinians like that
into the workforce because given the
genocidal treatment of Palestinians you
can rest assured that almost everyone in
Palestine if not everyone has family
members who have been affected by that
genocidal assault and that tends to
radicalize people and so You' risk
having a more radicalized anti-israeli
Workforce and if you can get cheaper
workers abroad who don't have that
connection I think it's just a really
good point that you raised yeah
concerning the relationship between
parate and state forces of course you're
absolutely right I I alluded to this
very briefly but there's a way that uh
fascism since it's often if not almost
always astroturfed from above the people
from below can be used for different
purposes and often what they want is a
kind of mass base to get the vote out or
things like this and so they pitched to
a very broad audience and of course the
Nazis called themselves National
socialists for a reason the reason
wasn't because they were socialists the
reason was because they were trying to
get some of the workers to vote for them
and they knew that workers you know
positions were really important and that
they were widely supported by the
working class but when both in the case
of Germany and Italy once state power
was really Consolidated you didn't need
that mass movement as much and so that
could then parts of the elements of the
Vigilante groups were just integrated
into the state and then the more
leftwing elements were cut off and and
killed or incarcerated in certain
instances and it's similar to what you
see with the AO Battalion right it
worked as an a vigilante organization
and then was eventually it had major
segments of it if not the majority of
integrated into the Ukrainian National
Guard and so that also demonstrates the
paracity between parate and state
organizations and the ways that fascism
will when it mobilizes parate forces
often do it with different communities
or with different Target groups for
particular tactical ends right like if
you need to get votes then why would you
have a really Consolidated ideology it's
more it's better to have a diffuse
ideology that tries to bring in a larger
constituency uh but when you really
decide that you're going to go fullon
authoritarian you want everybody on the
line that you're taking um so that's
that's what I'd say about that but we
can move on since there's a lot of
questions yeah uh Richard F go ahead
Richard yeah um I was wanted to ask you
about the Democratic Party in the United
States it's it's historically been a big
problem for the left politically and
theoretically um I don't know I guess I
should ask the question is it liberal or
is it
fascist it's a good question I mean at
one level obviously it presents itself
as as liberal and maintains a liberal
facade but it is a party that has
historically supported you know
imperialism uh repeatedly and with an
enormous amount of fervor and support
it's also been behind the mass
incarceration industry and has worked
hand and glove in various ways with the
more repressive uh elements of the bouis
state and so as I was saying earlier
that the uh the relationship between
fascism and liberalism I think if it's
understood dialectically the elements of
kind of liberalism that you still have
within the Democratic party is that they
claim at least that they want to respect
the rule of law people have the right to
vote uh Bill of Rights and things like
this and so there is a very very Hollow
out formal democracy that they purport
at least to defend but if you look
internationally and in their domestic
policy at least at the level of the
bouis state right they don't empower the
Vigilante right as much as the
Republicans do but at those other levels
Global imperialism and internally they
certainly Empower Fascism and so we
should be able to be flexible and
nuanced enough to say yeah it's liberal
within the Spectrum of a
pro-imperialist pro police state party
within the Imperial core that wants to
keep certain rights and forms of
representation for the labor aristocracy
of the professional managerial class
within the Imperial Corp because that's
their base really um but internationally
I think that many people would recognize
that you know it's it's jde joke you
know and people who do this type of
thing and back this type of thing could
easily be described as fascist in
relationship to the global imperialism
that they're that they're driving so I
think I think my sense was that it was a
slightly rhetorical question um but but
it is a very good and important
rhetorical question final note on this
is that I think we're in difficult times
because it's as well within the Imperial
core at the level of organizing we do
also have to see that there are tiny
differences that still exist between
these two camps of the Republicans and
the Democrats they're not absolutely
identical they just absolutely 100%
share the most important orientations of
pro capitalist pro-imperialist
anti-communist Etc but there are some
minor differences that I think are
important at least to highlight so that
one doesn't just go kind of full-on ultr
leftist and throw the baby out with the
bath water so to speak or not see slight
nuances between the
two if that makes sense
Richard
right yeah um I probably should have
asked this question earlier on because
because it's going to be kind of a
complicated one I
think actually it's two
questions one of which is uh there's
been a there's been a bifurcation of the
economy into productive capital and
financial
capital u or that's my assertion in any
case um um it seems to be that there's a
circulation of capital within the
financial sector that does not really
approach the productive sector that
differenti that's differentiated in
China for
example uh I was wonder if you could
talk a little bit about that and the
other question I had is uh there's a
race there's a race by the capitalist to
see who can who can uh populate the the
moon and Mars
Etc um you know in search of resources I
I think this is the resources element is
what sort of stem these two
questions uh could you maybe comment on
that as well thank
you great question uh yeah with the
relationship between the productive and
the financial economy it I think is
clear at this point in time that part of
what neoliberalism did in restructuring
the global economy was to take the
productive basis for the economy that
was in the United States I'll just use
that as the example and then to shift it
abroad you know Mexico and then
eventually to Asia and other places and
that gutting of the productive economy
at home with the important exception of
the arms industry of course and the
prison industry and things like this uh
as well as the culture Industries which
were which are largely kept at home has
meant that there's been a major shift to
you know Financial capital and an
increase in if you look at you know the
stats are just amazing with the uh
amount of wealth that is made in the
financial sector far far surpasses that
in the productive economy but during
that time China for complex and
difficult reasons that we could get into
decided with the reform and opening up
to basically become the workhouse of the
capitalist world and in doing that
developed a productive basis for their
economy that far surpasses what you have
in the west right and so you have this
major Global displacement and I think
that part of the reason that so many
contemporary Marxist political
economists or at least in my opinion the
best ones that I've read have said that
neoliberalism is running out of steam
because of the uh gutting of the
productive economy at home on almost all
all fronts means that there is no longer
the basis for doing really basic things
like producing masks during a global
pandemic which we just saw relatively
recently and the fact that the China has
such a thriving and flourishing
productive economy and also keeps its
Financial economy under control because
the largest banks are state-owned banks
right and this changes everything in my
opinion or at least the most important
things and that is a is a really
important difference and I do think it's
one of the reasons that China really
functions as a an alternative to the the
neoliberal model of Economics as much as
they did engage with the history of
neoliberalism for various for various
reasons I think largely due to the fact
that they were forced to because that
was how the global economy was being run
regarding the source for you know the
search for resources I think you're
right Moon exploration and all of the
the uh outer space kind of stuff I think
is part of that but it's also just that
NASA and in the imperialist search to
control space is a military Endeavor and
it always has been because if you can
control space you can control the
movement of satellites uh the basically
all of the infrastructure for
telecommunications and for spying and
all of that is all part of that and
people like Elon Musk and others of
course they work hand in glove with the
US National Security State on all these
types of projects that's where they came
from in the first place that's where
they're propped up and that's where they
given State subsidies and and things
like that and I think that in China's
case you know I haven't followed their
Moon program very closely except for
knowing of course that it's quite
developed China wanted through the
reform and opening up technology
transfer from the West because one of
the classic problems in the history of
actually existing socialism is that the
imperialists will just blockade you and
cut you off and not give you any
technology transfer and as long as you
have that technological Advance you also
have a weapons advance and a military uh
progress that outshines that of the
socialist countries and so what China's
been able to do in opening itself up to
the West becoming the productive Center
is it would sign contracts that required
technology transfer and now we see
China's technological development being
quite remarkable and I think that one of
their goals is to be able to put
themselves in a position where they're
no longer uh under the kind of neither
under the Jack boot of of of direct
imperialism nor are they subject to such
a technological discrepancy that they
wouldn't be able to defend themselves or
keep developing themselves beyond the
capitalist West and so I think a lot of
the space race is really bound up in
this technology race and obviously the
race for resources as well but that
tends to play itself out at least
immediate resources tend to play itself
out on planet Earth at this point in
time so they very rich question we could
debate all these questions for hours
just trying to give a extinct response
we're uh we're running pretty late I'm G
to ask the last questioners Norma one
minute keep it short okay goe Norma uh
hi everybody um there's a uh there was a
broadcast uh news showing Netanyahu
waving of paper running chest out from
the river to the
Sea yeah and that's no Jews on Israel
with regard to get a Palestinian
Workforce okay Janet would you go ahead
and uh keep go ahead one more
question well I I just wanted to clarify
the two questions two of the questions I
asked regarding uh the one about where
you see the Muslim countries falling
into your paragram uh Paradigm I was
referring to countries and movements
like Yemen
uh the Palestinians Hezbollah and the
like and um also including the Saudi
Iran Coop uh
cooperation and then um and then there's
Malaysia too um and regarding uh the US
military police state question um the US
has 800 bases all around the world
acting as the World Police to enforce us
imperialis
ISM
yeah and that's that's often a low
estimate right some people say a
thousand and all other countries in the
world combined have 30 overseas military
bases just so we can keep it clearly in
Focus great Point regarding the uh
movements in Yemen and and Hezbollah and
Hamas and things like that I'm not a
specialist but I've studied them to try
to understand geopolitics and my sense
is that these are Anti-Imperialist
movements that want to get the US and
the Western imperialist powers and
Israel out so that they can have
self-determination but they are grounded
as well in religious movements right
that are actually quite good at
organizing people and getting them
dedicated and disciplined and keeping
them strategically focused on particular
goals those goals are not socialist
goals right those goals are not the same
goals as the pflp for instance in the
case of uh Palestine and so I think not
unlike movements for like National bises
that would be opposed to imperialism we
can recognize them as tactically as
anti-imperialists playing a significant
role because they're fighting back
against the spread of imperialism but
strategically we should not have any
Illusions about them somehow then
leading to uh of necessity or by
consequence a kind of spread of
socialism in each of these cases though
then you'd have to look at how the
different organizations relate to
collaborate with or not various Marxist
organizations so in the case of Hamas of
course they do what work with the pflp
and so there you'd have to descend to a
kind of more fine grain level of
analysis to see what's going on in in
that regard uh Ali Kadri has a great
book on the unmaking of Arab socialism
and I think part of the large ger
context is that the pan Arab socialist
movement has historically been
incredibly strong and very very
important and that part of the goal of
us imperialism particularly the kind of
New American Century model has been
destroying that socialist alternative
even if those forms of socialism are
aren't like full-blown Socialism or not
absolutely Marxist they can just be
somewhat socialistic in nature meaning
that they provide social welfare for the
people uh as in the case of Iraq or in
the case of Libya or other examples that
one could point to and so I think that
from a Marxist vantage point we really
have to be able to be tactically Savvy
and say yeah these anti-imperialists I
think they're doing important work in
pushing back while strategically we have
to be clear about like we're not headed
in that same direction we want to get
rid of imperialism but in order to
really do that and succeed that in in
the long term this can't be a project
that's rooted in a kind of religious
orientation in a religious state it has
to be oriented towards towards socialism
so hopefully that at least partially
addresses the
question okay this has been a tremendous
session um I want to thank Gabriel for
uh speaking wow I'm sure you're pretty
tired they really we have some pretty
good questioners out there I want to
thank everybody who raised such great
questions a recording of this site of
this session will be up on our website a
link to it on um also on YouTube uh so
if you want to watch it also the
critical theory Workshop you should
check them out they're going to have uh
a recording also um we want to encourage
everybody to go to our website ICS
mark.org sign up for uh future sessions
for email
notifications and uh with that we're
going to say thank you everybody and
we're going to stop the recording in a
moment so go ahead uh uh
let's just all check out and Let's Stay
Together we've got a lot of work ahead
of us and thank you Gabriel it's been a
great program thank you it's a great
pleasure keep up the excellent work that
you're doing thank
you thanks Gabriel thanks Alan for
handling all
this


## Keywords:
