---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q521mBZ7ThU
---

# Video
Gabriel Rockhill, â€œThe Intellectual World War: Class Struggle in Theory"
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q521mBZ7ThU)

## Transcript:
okay hello everyone welcome back to the
second week of the workshop um the
workshop summer school and today we're
having a conversation with david
rocktales um about one of his current
book projects um it has the title of the
intellectual world war
class struggle in theory um this is a
project gabriel's been working on for
years and it's um because we've been in
conversation about it for a long time we
wanted to just do an interview kind of
like we've been doing with the other
speakers
so we're going to go ahead and jump in
so starting i know you guys have read
some of the uh some of his texts for
today so um
starting out gabriel can giving your
current work and including the readings
that um people did for today
some people might be surprised that to
learn that you studied with shaktarida
here at the
um ehess and that you were deeply
enmeshed in what is called
deconstruction the philosophy of
difference and post-structuralism
key components of french theory
so could you talk about your work in
this arena your intellectual itinerary
and what led to the kind of current
perspective that you have on this
tradition
okay and we're hoping that the
zoom issues have been resolved so bear
with us uh well thanks i'm really
excited to talk about this work as jen
said it's work that i've been doing
basically for
decades but my perspective has changed
rather significantly
and i would say that i've always been
invested in forms of materialist
analysis
as well as in
forms of critical engagement that
martial intellectual tools for social
transformation
but i also came up in a world that we
could refer to as the belly of the beast
meaning the heart of the u.s empire and
did my early training in the 1990s and
so if you were in the 90s like me
looking for radical theory what was on
offer was french theory and german style
critical theory and that's what i was
drawn to because everyone around me was
saying well this stuff is really
changing the nature of the conversation
it is profoundly radical uh you need to
know these things and so
uh one of the elements they think that
we'll get into in the conversation is
that what i didn't know then but that i
now see very clearly retrospectively
is what i refer to as the intellectual
apparatus and this is drawing on the
work of brecht and many others it's not
like some concept i invented myself it's
part of a collective tradition of
critique and the intellectual apparatus
is the entire system of intellectual
production so everything that goes into
the production of ideas this is
universities
think tanks the media
mass culture so-called high culture etc
but also the entire system of
circulation what ideas become part of
the public sphere circulate widely are
translated into other languages what
ideas are not circulated widely and also
consumption right because there's a
system of pre-programmed consumption
that means that certain ideas are those
like myself growing up in rural kansas
uh was apt to consume because it was
what was on on offer and so when i came
to paris in the i came in the mid 90s
and it was really the tail end of the
grand era of french theory and i began
studying with lusa rigorei then i did my
masters with jacques derrida here at
this institution and then kind of went
and took classes with anybody that i
could who was really famous in what i
now understand is the global theory
industry
uh christeva sixxu paul riker leotard uh
la well then i discovered elambadjou and
jeff from sierra i ended up doing my
dissertation with baju and so i kind of
just dove uh wholeheartedly into these
traditions
and one of the things that i realized
given my dedication to materialist modes
of analysis is that first i felt very
insecure that i needed to train myself
in a whole series of things and so i
learned all the languages that i needed
and i thought well derrida is the most
prominent thinker so i need to know
greek i need to know latin i need to
know german i need to know french and i
need to know english and so i taught
myself those languages and i dove into
as well not just his work but then all
of the work that he was reading so the
kind of canonical history of western
philosophy
and in doing that i discovered that
there were unspoken parameters to his
theoretical practice and so another key
notion for me is a theoretical practice
i'm interested not simply in what people
say
or their ideas
but in their material practice qua
intellectual
not what they say they do but what they
actually do and what dairy dot actually
does i realized and it ended up ended up
becoming both my dissertation in my
first book is he operates within
a historically constituted intellectual
practice that i would now refer to as
bourgeois philosophy and in boudoir
philosophy what you do is you focus on a
specific objective analysis
the canonized texts of the western
tradition
you
uh concentrate on the quote unquote
genius producers of those intellectual
products so you know livenitz and kant
and people like that
and thirdly you engage in internal
analysis right one of dario's most
famous claims is that you can never
analyze the context until you've
exhausted the text but the text is
inexhaustible so you never have to deal
with the context right
the thing is that this entire modality
of philosophical engagement which is
integral to the bourgeois humanities not
just philosophy but kind of theory writ
large is itself a historical product and
so i began mapping out and this was my
dissertation product project and my
first book uh where this came from why
is it that theorists or philosophers
just interpret the world and not even
the world actually uh they just
interpret the canonized text
rather than trying to interpret or
understand the world or even better
change the world and so in that regard i
um
you know kind of
did unearth a lot of the elements of
bourgeois culture that i could now
understand retrospectively from a rather
relatively different uh vantage point
and a lot of that had to do with
breaking with the kind of commodity
fetishism of the global theory industry
right because when i first met derrida i
was in awe he was a saint you know could
say no evil about him no one would say
evil about him etc but he's just a
person and in fact he's a product of a
system and so my perspective changed
quite radically instead of abiding by
the golden calves that are just
commodity fetish you know commodity
fetishism within the global theory
industry began to see him himself as a
product both his intellectual project
and uh him as a person like him as an
intellectual uh and so
you know that's that's one of the my
kind of first serious engagements with
with that the other thing that i'll
mention i'll go through this quickly is
that
deconstruction and post-structuralism
has a reputation within the university
as being rigorous because it analyzes
texts very closely and so i took that
seriously and i looked at what dared i
was writing and i analyzed the text that
he was analyzing and what i found is
that even within the parameters of
internal analysis what he was saying
didn't correspond to the text that he
was analyzing so he wasn't even within
that theoretical practice doing his job
so to speak
i've written extensively on this in some
detail but what i'd just like to
highlight is that there it derrida's
intellectual project is ultimately
idealist meaning that everything that he
engages in
is put in relationship to what he calls
the history of western metaphysics and
western metaphysics is this abstract
spectral set of ideas in which people
think in binaries and there's always one
element of the binary that's privileged
over another and this modality of
thinking
is so prominent within the western world
that any text that he analyzes he'll
find the specters of western material or
west not western materialism
western metaphysics within it and so one
example that i'll just highlight in
passing is i looked at his reading of
descartes he says well madness and
reason or madness and language are
incompatible
by essence and in principle because
there's an essentialism throughout all
of gary god's writings and therefore
descartes must manifest this and i read
all of descartes and he didn't manifest
that in fact descartes says the opposite
and he says it very explicitly including
in both the latin and french versions of
the text that derek himself cites and so
there was a certain charlatanism about
his work that really struck me and
helped me i guess break a little bit
with the saintly figure that he was and
there's also a rampant idealism because
it's ideas
that determine material realities not
the material realities themselves
so anyway that's at least that's
probably a little bit too much but a
little bit of the background of how i
moved in registers from
uh you know taking seriously certain
elements from the from this theory
industry to then uh i guess doing a
concrete abstraction and looking at a
higher level and seeing them actually as
products of historical forces
having uh characterized the you know
generally the theoretical practice that
you you know that you critique also i
would be curious what you think what
about the politics of these speakers
that you were studying
yeah so when i was here 9 11 happened to
2001 right and i remember it very
explicitly because it was taken there at
a seminar in the next you know week he
had to address this because it was a
major issue
and he knew nothing he knew absolutely
nothing about global politics
imperialism
um it was embarrassing quite frankly and
then he went on to write a book with
jurgen habermas called the concept right
not the reality the concept of 9 11. and
jurgen havoc in case you don't know he
was a member of the hitler youth
he studied for four years with a person
he called himself the nazi philosopher
martin heidegger he also endorsed the
persian gulf war and nato's intervention
in yugoslavia right so this is this
guy's center of gravity politically and
so the response and this particular book
i think is is is very poor
and he also
condemned the anti-imperialist student
activists as being left fascists right
um so obviously this reveals some of
derrida's political center of gravity
but it corresponds precisely to his
overall orientation because although he
traffics in a very suspect form of
opportunist recuperation of the specter
of marx right only when he was a specter
only after the collapse of the uh the
soviet union
derrida played a central role in
rejuvenating the central the central
importance of martin heidegger as the
most important philosopher of the 20th
century in the post-war era martin
heidegger was an unrepentant nazi and uh
adam knowles book on this is excellent
because he's not only a nazi in his
thinking and never apologized for it
marcus went and like basically asked him
to and he didn't uh but he also was
involved in the kind of administrative
apparatus of nazism the purging of the
university etc and so making heidegger
into
this kind of grand figure and then also
work very closely with paul dumont paul
dimon if you don't know is a fascist who
worked as a nazi collaborator lied about
it for years but his biography is
fascinating because the way he ended up
at yale is he basically fabricated his
own history in order to leverage his
position into the university and so
derrida
not only rehabilitated fascists he
worked very closely with them and then
wrote obscurantist texts that attempted
to pass them off for something that they
worked um barry himself the center of
gravity was perhaps at best uh liberal
um but liberals as we know both
politically and intellectually are often
uh they work hand in glove with fascists
in in many ways and i'd love to say more
about that if people want to have a
conversation about it the other thing
though and i'll just mention this in
passing because as part of my more
recent research derrida was the
co-president of the jan hoos educational
foundation that was founded in 1980 by a
group of conservative british
intellectuals including roger scrutten
roger strutton is on record saying that
the cia's intellectual war that it was
waging that was discovered a lot of the
front organizations were discovered in
the 1960s he said the cia should get
back involved in directly funding
intellectual warfare basically
anti-communist propaganda right so this
isn't just conservative political
orientation it's a reactionary political
orientation and the young educational
foundation was an anti-communist
organization that aimed at infiltrating
particularly czechoslovakia bringing in
uh literature and philosophical
philosophy in particular from the kind
of free world or from the west and then
organizing seminars and things like this
led by philosophers who are
anti-totalitarian philosophers like gary
dot himself and it was funded by the
capitalist ruling class including the
ford foundation open society institute
the margaret thatcher foundation the us
embassy the u.s information agency the
us is and perhaps most importantly the
national endowment for democracy if you
don't know the national endowment for
democracy it is
as
alan weinstein said in 1991 it is
he's on record as saying that a lot of
what we do today in the national
endowment for democracy
was done covertly 25 years ago by the
cia right so basically he was involved
in a kind of anti-communist uh
uh propaganda campaign that was funded
by the nad which is a cut out for the
central intelligence agency a last thing
that i'll say about dairy dogs i can say
a lot of things and i'd be happy to
return to this is that
uh one of the interviews that really
reveals his center of gravity he says
quote
i cannot construct finished or plausible
sentences using the expression social
class
i don't really know what social class
means
so here we have
an intellectual proffering forth as if
his subjective point of view was
supposed to be objective reality that
class doesn't exist because he can't
construct a sentence with it it's not
his problem that as a petty bourgeois
intellectual he can't construct a
sentence with it and that doesn't mean
that it doesn't exist right so this is
another manifestation of his idealism he
goes on in the same interview recycling
straw person versions of marxism calling
marxism reductivist and economistic
basically demonstrating his profound
ignorance of the marxist tradition he
says that
um
that
uh
some engagement
his
his criticism of marxist he says that uh
some engagement with heidegger or a
problematic of a heidegarian type should
be mandatory right so basically he's
saying that marxist should be obliged to
read nazis
this is this guy's political center of
gravity so in a nutshell i find that um
there's really little or nothing
politically to be learned from
darydell's project other than to learn
how
an opportunist reactionary
anti-communist was promoted within the
global theory industry as being the most
brilliant thinker in the history of
humanity
um and then but after working with
darida and in this tradition that you
then went on to work
more in the
so can you talk about kind of how you
would characterize that tradition why
you moved into it um how you see it and
why you develop the critiques that you
have of it now yeah so given
the materialist basis of my orientation
i always wanted to test claims and
that's basically what i did with their
idols approach and it's not just darida
right it's also nonsein
and christeva like there's a lot of
people who um traffic in this kind of
post-structuralist or decon approaches i
was then attracted more to foucault to
rancier to bordeaux and others who were
doing at least in appearance some
modality of materialist analysis and
uh
what i found is that they and they also
had a reputation for doing radical
politics right um
and that i thought was was really
interesting but
one of the things that i identified and
i'll just unpack this here for a second
is that if derrida was an idealist and i
think is an idealist
what you find ultimately in
foucault and rancier is what we can
refer to pardon the philosophic term but
i think it's helpful is transcendental
idealism
and so
transcendental idealism which of course
dates from kant and kant theorized it is
a little bit different than idealism
it's a specific form of idealism
idealism just says that you know the
mind spirit metaphysics drive the world
and the empirical world is just a
manifestation of the spiritual or
discursive or intellectual forces
transcendental materialism says no
there's an empirical world there
actually is an empirical world and so
what transcendental interior materialism
does or transcendental idealism is it
takes empirical elements from the world
and then frames them within a
transcendental conceptual apparatus that
purports to explain them right
uh this is different than just
empiricism right empiricism presumes
that there's just brute facts that are
out there and we have to you know map
them and analyze them
and what i think we find in both uh not
only for code but also ramp sierra and
many other thinkers working in these
traditions is that they take empirical
data right what i liked about foucault
is he was actually reading things right
seriously he was in the archives and
roncia does the same thing like they run
a ton of bourgeois literature in the
european tradition uh no doubt and knows
it backwards and forwards but what did
they do with that empirical content
that's what i think is important what
they do is they have a transcendental
framework that they should form this
empirical data within and so what is
ultimately determinant is that
transcendental framework if it be uh the
epistemes or if it be the regimes of art
that rancier talks about or other such
things and ultimately what this is is a
modality analysis that is not
dialectical meaning that the power of
the historical materialist tradition or
one of the elements from the historical
materials tradition that is important is
it recognizes yeah there's an objective
material world that's out there
but we are product of that world
so the very separation between mind and
world that is the basis for
transcendental idealism but also for
empiricism or just pure idealism
uh is is based on a kind of substantive
approach and a reification and an
opposition between mind and world
historical materialism dialectically
demonstrates though that we as homo
sapiens are products of a material world
and so our thought process is only
elements of nature that come to reflect
back upon nature itself
and that that dialectical relationship
is um
is essential because what it means is
that our own categories of understanding
always need to be tested in relationship
to that material world of which we are
apart right so there's a dialectical
feedback loop something is true not
because it's a transcendental structure
that stands above history and purports
to define all empirical data it's true
because whatever conceptual framework
you establish you're constantly testing
it in the empirical world and in
practice
and you're changing it when it doesn't
work
right so this dialectical and historical
materials approach is markedly different
than idealism empiricism or
transcendental uh transcendental
idealism
um
i don't know maybe that's enough fun
on that particular point because i could
say more about this but uh the
both foucault and rancier
really do it's it's also a kind of
pseudo-materialism
because when you compare what it is
they're analyzing to their framework of
analysis their framework of analysis is
highly idiosyncratic right and so my
engagement with both of these thinkers
wasn't just reading what they wrote it
was reading all the things that they
wrote or that they were reading and then
comparing them to other analysts of the
same topics and finding that well that's
really strange that you know someone
like foucault would say that well
there's no longer these uh like horrific
displays of corporeal punishment anymore
like this is in an age of guantanamo bay
and abu ghraib like what planet are you
on and lynchings and like just look at
the history of the united states like
you can't just make these massive
transcendental demarcations and act as
if um you know this idiosyncratic
version of history mapped on to actual
material history and so by comparing and
contrasting their transcendental
accounts of history to other material
accounts of history i recognize that
they were highly limiting and that also
they were largely premised on trying to
come up with some like absolutely new
and individual understanding of the
world that no one had arrived at before
and one of the powers of the historical
materialist tradition is that that's not
how it works like one individual doesn't
rise above everyone else as a saintly
figure and bestow upon humanity the
gospel
no people work together to figure things
out and we have more brain power when we
work together and
it's a collective tradition of
elucidation right and so that
idiosyncratic nature i think is it also
is just part of their brand management
because ultimately what they wanted to
do was to ratchet up their symbolic
capital within the global theory
industry and you don't do that by
working with others and by developing
modes of analysis that are collective
you do that by saying everyone else is
wrong here's my new concept here's my
new idea of the 19th century and i find
that now in retrospect to be not only
problematic but ultimately to be a
product of how commodified intellectual
production operates under the global
theory industry and i've tried i should
probably have said i've trafficked in
this myself like maya cooper
for sure there's plenty of my own
writings where i look back at them and
cringe and think oh that neologism
doesn't or neologism doesn't really
explain anything uh it's not helpful
it's just me trying to wave my hands and
look you know more impressive than
somebody else so i probably should have
led with that because my own critiques i
think the beginning points of all of my
own critiques were self-critique uh and
when 911 happened and the political
stuff that i was talking about earlier
actually that was the worst it wasn't as
bad that dario couldn't explain it it
was that people were asking me you're
the sophisticated parisian intellectual
what's going on here and i was like well
i don't know you know
that's about all that it's pretty
embarrassing
and so
the motivation for a lot of this
critical orientation was really a
self-critique and realizing that i
didn't have the tools that were
necessary to understand what's going on
well i'll ask you the same thing then um
before having characterized the kind of
theoretical practice of these figures
what you know what is your assessment of
their politics in case people didn't
maybe catch that from the title of the
article on foucault
yeah the
uh
i know the article if you were able to
read it was was uh it was probably hard
to suss out what my
position was because it was so uh kind
of
clothed in academic references and i was
hiding my own politics and whatnot um i
think it's pretty clear that foucault
was he's a rabid anti-communist
there was only a brief moment in the
wake of 68 and he was following the way
that the wind blew the students were
radical everybody was radical around him
and
uh so he dawned the leather jacket and
kind of did the radical chic look and it
worked it worked really really well um
it took me a long time because i kept
reading these things in his text and
thinking well isn't that the guy with
the microphone and the bald head and he
went s m and all that like he's a
radical right but no he's not he's a
rabid anti-communist who is very very
close to some of the most conservative
figures in the french intelligence yet
in particular andre luxman who's
basically made an entire career out of
anti-communist propaganda so i can leave
maybe for code by the wayside or we'll
come back to him if people have
questions about it regarding ron sierra
i mean i've written a lot on rancier's
politics and so both in my book
radicalists are in the politics of art
and in
interventions in contemporary thought
i've gone through a lot of these details
but
uh ron sierra is an anarchist
who traffics in certain forms of
liberalism
and he's an anti-marxist and an
anti-communist and he's been very very
explicit about this on numerous
occasions he
is somebody whose political framework
basically takes
uh certain forms of insurgent anarchism
because anarchism is a rich and broad
tradition a lot of elements to it but
it takes a certain form of insurgent
anarchism that you can find kind of in
the 19th century and then he
universalizes it right so there's really
no
historicity to politics in russia there
is a trans-historical confrontation
between what he calls the police order
or the kind of given distribution of
bodies in a you know in a political
order
and then interruptions of that police
order which is what he calls politics or
politics proper la politica
and
this confrontation
is the transcendental framework that i
was talking about earlier and any
empirical content from the entire
history of the world is then shoehorned
within this transcendental framework
that transcendental framework itself is
highly problematic because the biggest
takeaway is that you never
will have a world without a police order
so a world without exploitation without
oppression a world of liberation is off
the table
all that you can have are these
anarchist-like moments of
destabilization where the given order is
then reorganized in potentially better
ways right so he's basically saying
there's no you know there's no way out
uh there's only capitalism and insurgent
confrontations with capitalism in other
words he
trafficks in
tina there is no alternative
or again in a subtle reference in the
other article that you might not have
picked up on because it was also
probably a little too refined in its
politics what i called abs theory
anything but socialism
and that theory is more specifically uh
and it's easier to do this in
oral presentation it's a
bs theory right
it's a theory that is full of
because it is a theory that excludes
from the global history of humanity
the entire socialist project
and that doesn't mean that then you have
to blindly accept everything that's ever
occurred under the banner of socialism
but you can't just exclude
the particularly uh the entire like
global south
orientations towards the attempt to
break with imperialism and capitalism
introduce alternatives
so uh this is the form of politics that
that frontier traffic's in and one other
thing that i'll just say quickly on this
is that
what i was interested in when i was
really into his work is testing his
theory
and what i quickly realized is there's
no possibility of theory exportation
because i thought well okay
if we take it if we believe that there
are police orders and insurgent you know
moments
there was a moment in 2005 in france
when there were enormous uprisings
particularly within the quote-unquote
immigrant community which are basically
the communities who continue to be
treated as immigrants within france due
to the fact that colonialism is still
just a very big part of the french
republic and there were major revolts uh
cars were being burned down symbols of
the french republic were being born down
the buses were being burned down and i
thought wow this is a moment of politics
right these people are saying are
insurgently calling into question the
distribution of the body politic
frontier came out and said no it's not
it's not politics because they have not
formulated their demands in such a way
that the state that they take basically
the bourgeois state as somebody to have
a discussion with
meaning he was completely denigrating
all of these moments of insurgent
uprising and saying who gets to decide
is there a theory that we can test
collectively and see if it works
no it's the theorist who gets to
understand who gets to judge right it's
the genius who stands above history and
says this is the order of things and i
had debates with him about this and i
said look according to your theory this
seems pretty clear unless you're just a
french chauvinist and you don't want to
recognize that you know colonial
subjects might actually have political
agency which is also another thing that
we could get into the social chauvinism
that plagues a lot of his work and he
wasn't having any of it so he also
traffics in certain forms of liberalism
so proper politics will abide by the
rules of the liberal state and this is
another problem
but i want to go into start talking
about your work on the cia and how did
you move from you know somebody working
on french theory to then and as well as
german critical theory to them having an
interest in the cia and
speaking about they could also kind of
explain what the cia really indexes
since it's not just about the uh
the agency
yeah i might just start with a quick
poll if i could struggle how many people
have read uh like rigorous
analyses of either the history of the
cia or how the central intelligence
agency operates just a quick show of
hands and it's not i'm not testing you
i'm just kind of curious one two three
okay how many people have seen either a
james bond movie or a mission impossible
movie
quick show of hands little embarrassing
i know okay well my point here is that
the dominant understanding of the
central intelligence agency is mediated
by
the central intelligence agency
i have a quick
quote here or quick notes here so
1947
screen products
tv shows and movies have been supported
by the department of defense
and
114 screen products have been supported
by the oss cia fbi including for one
screen product these are long running tv
shows like 24
homeland etc so the james bond film
mission impossible there's a there's a
lot of great scholarship on this but
national security cinema is one of the
solid books on this and so what they've
done is they've created the image of
themselves so that people are confused
about how they actually operate
this is important because the central
intelligence agency is and it came out
of the office of strategic services
which was the wartime intelligence
service and of course a deeper history
of mi6 in great britain who they learned
from and then incorporated and
collaborated with the central
intelligence agency
they largely two branches that are
important one branch that has been
widely studied and understood killing
hope by
william bloom is one of the best books
on the topic is the death arm right the
central intelligence agency has been
responsible for killing a minimum of six
million people worldwide between 1947
and 1987 according to
14 former members of the central
intelligence agency who did a study in
the late 1980s so that there's that
element of all of the coup d'etat
destabilization efforts etc overthrowing
a minimum or attempting to overthrow 50
foreign governments the majority which
were democratically elected since world
war ii alone right
but the other element that is
unbelievably important and understudied
and it's one of the reasons that i got
interested in it is research and
analysis
the oss the predecessor organization of
the cia was
uh had set up a research and analysis
branch the numbers vary uh depending on
who you look at but between about 1200
and 2000
full-time researchers were working for
the oss and this was the model for the
central intelligence agency
they
um actually recruited an innumerable
members a number of university
professors particularly from the ivy
leagues and the elite institutions to do
research and analysis globally this is a
big part of what they do in fact
according to two analysts that i know
the oss
research and analysis branch was the
largest think tank or largest
grouping of researchers
in the history of the united states and
set the agenda for post-war american
social science right and the people
involved in the oss there's many of them
right uh herbert marcuza um franz
neumann uh a lot of the leading
luminaries of the kind of post-war
social sciences in fact
if my memory serves me right seven
presidents
of the american historical association
in the post-war era were former oss
members and the joke in the cia is that
nobody ever leaves the cia so former is
a bit of a euphemism it means that
you're an intelligence operator and you
have contacts to lucha state so that is
an important context i think to
understand the other thing that i would
say is that you shouldn't get hung up on
the cia it's like you know as soon as
you bring it up people even people in
the know
it will evoke a whole series of
connotations there's a lot of other
agencies involved in this type of work
um not only the intelligence agencies
but also the private intelligence
agencies and um a lot of other uh
various governmental agencies and the
central goal of the cia is to
internationalize capitalist social
relations and if they do it through the
stick or more perhaps appropriately the
gun
or they do it through the carrot of
propaganda and through the carrot of the
mind management of global humanity the
objective is the same right so the cia
is not the real story the real story is
who they're working for right they work
for the capitalist ruling class and they
work for boudoir states in order to
manage the global population ralph uh
uh
mcgee i'm not sure exactly how to
pronounce his last name but he was in
the cia for 25 years and he said that
the central function of the of the cia
is
global disinformation right that's why i
think this organization is important and
understudied and so that's one of the
reasons that i kind of turned to and
began
investigating some of the work that they
were doing in part because i kept coming
across references to work that they were
doing and some of my early work looked
at the rise of american art in the
post-war era and why the center of
cultural production shifted from paris
to new york city and there's a lot of
great work on this why did the abstract
expressionists and uh the pop artists
and all these people become so famous
well the central intelligence agency was
actually really deeply involved in
promoting it and they work with
uh the the private museums in the united
states they uh pour funds into
supporting u.s culture because part of
the goal was they didn't want the global
population to think that the americans
were cracks and that they were just
chewing bubble gum and smoking
cigarettes and you know drinking
coca-cola they wanted uh the global
message to be they're reading faulkner
and going to see jackson pollock they're
a sophisticated i mean it's basically
like imperial rome right they wanted to
project an image of imperial power that
wasn't just walt disney and like crass
based culture and so they funded and
supported it and that was one of my kind
of gateway drugs into this this world
and then i began to discover how much
they were involved in the intellectual
world in fact according to the church
committee report in 1975
the cia was involved with thousands
of academics
at hundreds of universities this is a
quote right
that is an enormous enormous operation
uh the deeper you dig into this though
the more complicated it becomes because
i found out that the person who wrote
the church committee report himself was
cia and the report was vetted by the cia
and that the exploration of both the
academics and the journalists because an
inordinate number of journalists who are
cia was cut short because the people who
are investigating in this congressional
investigation began to discover wow
there's a lot going on here in the
university and the journalistic world so
they cut it off and said okay
we'll do what's called a limited hangout
limited hangout in intelligence parlance
is you give people a little bit of
something so that you can then control
the narrative right
um
so that was kind of part of the
background and then maybe one of the
other things that's important for
the work that i'm doing now is that
uh unlike a kind of standard image that
some people have of the cia where you
know somebody come with a briefcase full
of cash and and leave it in a
professor's office and then the you know
the professor's going to write some
you know really crass propaganda or
whatnot that does happen and i've seen a
lot of examples of that happening but it
actually mainly functions differently
and that is that they control the
apparatus of intellectual production
the entire system of production
circulation and consumption
is not just you know controlled directly
by the cia or something like that but
they have a hand in so many different
aspects of it along with a lot of other
agencies and along with the foundations
ford rockefeller carnegie et cetera
which are basically you know their uh
their ways of managing capitalist wealth
for
intellectual and cultural propaganda
and uh if you look at the history of
these foundations as i have they were
camden glove right so the ford
foundation has a cia liaison you look at
the history of who worked for the ford
and who worked for cia they go back and
forth
these are hand in glove operations
rockefeller's the same nelson
rockefeller himself was a super
coordinator of u.s intelligence and
oversaw the ciaa which was an
intelligence and propaganda organization
for all of latin america
and so there's we have to see the kind
of larger picture and not think oh
there's the private world over here
where there's the capitalists and then
there's the public world um this is
liberal mythology it's uh they work
really really hand in globe and so uh i
guess connecting this to some of the
theoretical elements i began to ask
really basic questions like why
was some curious you know farm boy from
kansas like myself
drawn to paris and french theory like
how did that happen what were the kind
of systemic coordinates that put me on
that particular path and i looked into
the history of french theory it's
reception in the united states and i
always knew oh there's this famous
conference in 1966 at johns hopkins
where they brought over french
structuralism and many people have
written that this was the grand arrival
of french theory and i began to look at
who was invited and who's paying for
this right really basic material
questions which i think we should always
ask
well the people who were invited were
not
people like louis altucera because he
was a member of the communist party so
he was a marxist and he was a persona
non grata in
the kind of you know the remnants of the
mccarthy era u.s
political orientation um so there
weren't marxists who were invited with a
potential exception of lucian goldman
who's a debatable figure
so there's already a filtering right
it's the kind of transatlantic
translation regime make sure that the
people who are circulating are the
people who should be circulating so
derrida
the khan people like this and it was the
ford foundation who invested millions of
dollars in this conference and then a
series of publications and other
conferences related to it that brought
this phenomenon and knowing more about
the history of the ford foundation the
type of cultural production they were
interested in
the promotion of intellectual
anti-communism globally right and that
was part of the project uh the piece if
you had time to read it on the front
foot school also looks a lot into this
right where was their funding coming
from there's a capitalist ruling class
why was the capitalist rolling class
doing this they they say it like i
quoted in the article they they funded
them because they were towing the line
that they wanted major intellectuals who
were radicals to tow in particular doing
things like workhammer did supporting
the us imperial intervention in vietnam
or the french
british and israeli imperialist
intervention in egypt right they were
doing the good work that the capitalists
and imperialists wanted them to do and
so we have to think of this
dialectically right it's not and
unfortunately there's been some slander
campaigns unsurprisingly against me it's
not that there are you know these
intellectuals who are just you know
getting cash and then like writing what
they should write and things like this
instead there's a phenomenon of uplift
and
if i think about it in these terms
the intellectual apparatus this entire
system of production circulation and
reception which is a big part of the
superstructure within capitalist
societies has an enormous amount of
control
and within that if you want to climb
your way up you're an undergraduate you
want to go to grad school you want to do
a postdoc you want to maybe get a job
maybe you want to get a job at a
prestigious university
we all know how to do that
you do not do that by becoming i don't
know a specialist in thomas sankara you
do not do that by
you know trafficking in ideas that are
linked to transforming the world the way
you do that is you give to the
intellectual apparatus what it wants and
there's a kind of suction
that is like uplift and the more you
give the system what it wants the higher
you'll rise within that system
and again i should uh i have trouble
being so self-deprecating at times
because i'm like oh we tried so hard to
do well but i suffered from this
enormously right the reason i got a job
is because i was hired as a french
theorist and i translated frontier into
english and doing that meant that i was
invited to junkets and i got keynotes
and people were like wanted to cozy up
with me i was feeling important and i
was feeling relevant because i was doing
radical theory right so um
it hasn't served me well to understand
better how that system works and think i
don't want uplift in a system like that
i don't want to be contributing to that
type of uh overall orientation yeah
given everything that you talked about
the kind of the global misinformation
campaigns i'd be curious to hear what
you know the critical theorists and
french theorists are known as the
masters of suspicion what analyses of
that did they have
yeah i should maybe just back up and add
one other thing to that and this i'm
going to be very quick on it but i'd
happy to go into greater detail if
people want to talk about it it's a big
part of my contemporary research
and i should also add as a proviso this
is not research that i found on
wikipedia or that you know it's on some
blog i've done
uh an
unbelievable number of freedom of
information act requests to get internal
documents that aren't available uh but
that are now some of them are available
as part of the public record i've done
interviews i've done archival research
um i've actually you know of course read
a lot on the history of the intelligence
agencies and things like this so the
things i'm about ready to say that might
be surprising are based on uh verifiable
facts and often i what i do is i always
you know cross-reference and compare and
contrast and so a lot of what i'm going
to tell you is base it's straight from
the horse's mouth these are intelligence
operatives in mi6 cia fbi etc who have
admitted what they were doing and there
are two organizations at least that i
think should be on everybody's radar one
is the information research department
the information research department or
the ird this was set up by the british
foreign office
uh it worked with mi6 mi6 is just the
kind of cia equivalent more or less
within british intelligence
and it later worked closely with the
central intelligence agency the role of
the ird was set up in 1948 by the labor
government
right by the labor government
uh and
actually well i'll get into that a
second because it's important that it
was a labor government it is an
international
anti-communist
propaganda
research center
uh that's
secret uh private and has
had unbelievably far-reaching
consequences
it uh
has contacts with newspapers and
magazines and news agencies and it runs
publishing houses it had only its own
publishing house it worked with academic
institutions radio stations um regularly
collaborated with the bbc with london
press service with reuters
it placed its people in the media and in
the academic world um
this is a quote just to sum up this is
by you wilford who has a done some good
scholarship on this he says by 1950
the ird had succeeded in establishing
permanent channels for the routine
transmission of its by now considerable
output of anti-communist propaganda all
over the world right so they have a
global network of anti-communist
propaganda if does anyone know the story
of george orwell and his communist list
right he released a list of 135
suspected communists
to the ird right he
he was in direct contact with a woman
who worked for the ird he is a snitch he
gave them information on people that he
thought were communists and
the ird had an enormous hand in making
george orwell what he is today and why i
read him in high school in rural kansas
because they translated him into at
least 20 different languages they
created an animated version of animal
farm they collaborated with the cia on a
feature length film based on the same
book and they worked with intellectuals
like bertrand russell arthur costler
milos krafchenko many others and many of
the leading specialists quote unquote in
the history of the soviet union were ird
they work with the ird and in certain
cases published books in which they took
ird files
put them in their own name and then
published them in particular robert
conquest's book the great terror
stalin's purge of the 30s
drew extensively on ird files david
barzolay the oxford historian ajp taylor
leonard shapiro at the london school of
economics brian crozier the list is
actually extraordinary when you go into
it and this made me think when i came
across this information said oh that's
why i thought that it was you know the
soviet union was just blood and terror
and horror and because they're pumping
this stuff out and it's given academic
credentials it's quite smart when you
think about it right the way that
they've done the operation because if
and they knew it right they couldn't
just pump it out in pure propaganda and
right-wing outlets they wanted academic
credentials and they wanted in
particular to work with
uh academics and intellectuals who had
some left-wing credibility
and in particular those who were
communist dissidents those who had lost
the quote-unquote faith as if communism
was a faith as opposed to like in
orientation that you would believe in
because it makes sense or something like
that right it's just a that's a form of
liberal projection in many ways um so
that's an important organization the
other organization is the congress for
cultural freedom the ccf the congress
for cultural freedom is a cia front
organization that whose power arguably
exceeded that of the ird it picked up on
a lot of the work of the ird the ird the
numbers of they had about 400 to 600
full-time propagandists working for it
right think about that for a second what
do we got like 35 people here in the in
the room imagine if
uh you know we had 200 or 400 to 600 and
we had full-time funding and the only
thing we did was anti-communist
propaganda right and we just pumped it
out pumped it out and pumped it out
that's an enormous amount of resources
right in in the intellectual apparatus
the economy's for cultural freedom far
surpassed that it was established in
1950
it had offices in some 35 countries it
mobilized an army of 280 employees and
it supported some 50 prestigious
journals around the world so it ran in
counter magazine the paris review de
monad in germany curve in paris
quest in india many others it published
at least 170 books it ran forum service
which broadcast free of charge and all
over the world reports from its
intellectuals in 12 different languages
it reached 600 newspapers and 5 million
readers right enormous operation it was
blown the cover was blown by ramparts
magazine in 1966
investigative journalists who revealed
that it was a cia front organization
run by michael josselson was
headquartered in paris and michael
josselson was with cia
and he referred to the congress for
cultural freedom as our big family right
it's kind of like a mafia right uh our
big family had a budget in 1966 of 2
million which is the equivalent today of
18 million
right
and what's surprising maybe is that this
was only a very small part of what frank
wisner of the cia called the mighty
wurlitzer
wurlitzer was a kind of jukebox
and so he wanted and established a
system by which in langley virginia at
cia headquarters he could press a button
on the jukebox or on the wurlitzer and
have the same story play worldwide
if you were i wasn't necessarily shocked
but i was flabbergasted by the lockstep
of the global corporate media
when it was decided that the covet
crisis wasn't going to be solved and
that we were going to pivot to war in
ukraine war against russia or against
china that
corporate
infrastructure is still very very
prevalent and i could come back to this
but you know the cia employed minimum
400 journalists um but it's most likely
much much more than that uh it depends
on what different accounts you look at
this is carl bernstein's account in the
mid 70s i believe um they also work him
in love with the new york times with all
of the major corporate media outlets uh
cooper what's his name anderson cooper
intern with the cia uh carlson tucker
apparently tried to get a job at the cia
um
i don't apparently didn't work out but
of course tucker carlson is like william
f buckley jr he gives to the system what
it wants it's almost people like that
you don't need to employ them you know
because they're already doing the work
that you want me to do um and there's
much more that i could say about this
because there are other levels to this
it goes much much deeper but i just
bring all of that in because part of the
agenda in the intellectual world war was
not to fight a crass right wing
war against the socialist alternative
the real goal
was to split the left
by
shoring up what they call a compatible
left
and the compatible left can be liberals
social democrats trotskyists maoists
anarchists as long as and that's the
fundamental dividing one as long as
they're opposed to any and all forms of
actually existing socialism
meaning as long as they say at the end
of the day there is no alternative to
capitalism they're part of the
compatible left
and so the agenda was to shore up the
compatible left
sever it from the non-compatible left
the socialists left and particularly the
revolutionary socialist left but
you know even not revolutionary but just
those who would support socialism and to
completely discredit and destroy
the socialist left
so one of the things that's
flabbergasting finally answering your
question sorry for the detour is that
in 1966
it was revealed and you can look at the
global press at that point in time that
the congress for cultural freedom was
this enormous global propaganda
organization that all of these
intellectuals were involved
a-r-o-n not necessarily very well known
in the united states but one of the very
visible philosophers in uh in france who
wrote um
is it the opium uh
what's the title of the book the opium
of the
the intellectuals i think it is just
anti-communist screed after
anti-communist street personal friend of
henry kissinger and he was the
face of the congress for cultural
freedom right he was also someone who is
very important because he was the mentor
to a lot of people uh in the french uh
intelligentsia at that point in time
played an enormous role within french
social sciences uh hannah arendt
was had ties in various ways to both the
intelligence services in in great
britain and to the new york
intellectuals sydney hook and james
burnham were philosophy professors at
nyu but they moonlighted as cia
and so
uh the number of intellectuals were
involved was was quite expensive
extensive
uh horkheimer went to cia conferences
you know congress for cultural freedom
conferences you look at the conference
lineup and they're all the kind of rad
libs of the day right and so that blew
up
and there's not a single reference
in any of the figures that i've studied
in german critical theory
or french so-called critical theory that
so much as reference its existence
not a word
absolute silence
right and these are people who literally
were at the same institution studied at
the same institute studied with these
people often published with them or
themselves were involved in these
jackets right
and so that to me communicated very
clearly
that this modality of so-called critical
theory has its limits and one of the
fundamental limits is that it's
incapable
of criticizing the very institutions or
the very intellectual apparatus that has
promoted it as
the best commodity on the market
right
and so if just as a quick counter
factual like imagine
if in one of foucault's seminars
there was one session where he said oh
there's a congress for cultural freedom
which was a ci front organization and
all these french intellectuals were
involved in it and this is what the
microphysics of power looks like this is
how institutions control and manage
minds
everybody who's
involved in the intelligentsia in some
capacity would have caught wind of it
and you listening to me now you wouldn't
be surprised hey he's rehashing that
thing about flipkart that we all learned
about like a long time ago right um but
in my case the fact that i'm one of the
you know there are others of course one
of the people who's bringing this to the
fore uh reveals to me it's i think less
interesting from a kind of subjective
level than an objective level what does
this demonstrate about how this
intellectual apparatus works and what
the limits of critique are within that
intellectual apparatus
and the limits i think are really clear
and then the other thing that i'll add
to this just the political horizons then
become very clear
right because
people like adorno and porkheimer
they were very critical of capitalism
and consumer society and have written
some very good things on that critique
of the culture industry and um various
modes of analysis of how desire and need
is constructed by capitalist social
relations and consumerism there are
resources you know within the frankfurt
school that i've read extensively and
learned from
but as bad as capitalism is
the alternative is much much worse and
so the heinous racist things that they
say about the soviets about the chinese
about the koreans about vietnamese about
latin americans they don't even talk
about cuba you know adorno's family kind
of went through cuba um but there's no
reference whatsoever to the uh the first
major socialist revolution within the
western hemisphere and so it began to
make me think a little bit differently
about what this radical theory was that
i was attracted to and i thought oh okay
this is the compatible left
and and then and then you start to
connect the dots and it all makes sense
right because
when you think and we could cycle back
and should to like
you uh would be interesting because i
studied with veggie and i've read a lot
of
probably too much and so uh they're
interesting figures because you think
well these people are marxists right
like wow they're like revolutionaries
and you can tell from their book covers
because there's like stuff on fire you
know and they're like making symbols or
wearing red or whatever
but what's unique about them is that
actually there's a fundamental consensus
and that fundamental consensus there can
be a little bit of wavering and you have
to look at the details but they tend to
be
anti-party they're against political
organizing at a party level parties are
bad parties are bad because when you're
in a party then you're organized in such
a way that you like the rank and file is
disciplined by leadership and there's a
focal point and modes of organizing that
are hierarchical that are top down et
cetera which i'll just say as a side
note is a
complete misrepresentation of how
parties actually work
particularly good parties but we could
come back to that if you want the other
thing is they're anti-state
they're against
they're they're all for
forms of resistance
that do not succeed
as long as you're struggling and getting
crushed
they'll support you
they'll say yeah we are you know some of
them it depends of course we have to
look at the individual cases but most of
them will be like yeah we're in support
of the palestinian people
if the palestinian people establish a
socialist state i don't think they'd be
saying the same thing in fact i'm
certain they wouldn't be saying the same
thing because it's not what they say
about cuba it's not what they say about
nicaragua it's not what they say about
china it's not on and on and on right
which is not to say of course i would
never advocate for a kind of you know
blind engagement where you just say well
everything that is
a state that presents itself as
socialist should just be like blindly
supported or it means that you know it's
absolutely perfect or anything like that
on the contrary i believe in a kind of
dialectics of socialism where you have
to look at all of the nuances and
analyze them but these people these
radical theorists on the compatible they
don't do that
in fact one of the other
amazing features of almost every single
one of them
is that they'll go on at length about
how you cannot whisper in a hallway
the slightest critique of adorno
unless you've slept in his archive
read the personal letter that he sent to
you on his death bed and you know
learned uh all of the things that he
himself studied on and on and on you
can't be critical
but
when it comes to actually existing
socialism
not only can you be critical
you can be critical without ever having
studied any aspect of it whatsoever
so people that i studied with for the
most part they don't know anything about
what's going on in the places that i've
just named they've never studied them
seriously usually they don't have the
language skills to do it anyway they
don't care and they just say it's all to
be condemned it's awful and it's
horrible right and so what that is is
just a kind of ideological moral reflex
that's a scientific
that's lacking in rigor
and that was also highly politically
suspect because if if there's a real
problem with socialism then let's figure
out what it is let's study it right
let's figure out what's working and
what's not working and so that overall
consensus within the compatible left i
think is precisely why they've been
shored up and so the most famous
marxists in the world today
are famous within the capitalist world
and they're famous for a reason
they're famous because they toe the line
that needs to be towed and that is that
as bad as capitalism is the alternative
is much much worse and so not what is to
be done the answer to lennon's question
nothing at all but read my books right
and i can explain to you how horrible
capitalism is and how we shouldn't be
organized and shouldn't get involved in
any way shape or form in supporting
projects that might if we studied them
be leveraging power away from global
capital right so it's a defeatist
politics it's a defeatist politics
through and through and of course there
are different versions of this right
i'll just give a quick shout out to my
manager
because he came out i mentioned this in
french but people might not have gotten
it he of course
said that we should vote for donald
trump in the most recent election and
his justification for that
was you you might think oh he's a
marxist accelerationist right we vote
for trump and it gets really bad and
then it's gonna catapult the revolution
but no hear me out the reason we should
vote for trump is because that's gonna
force the democratic party to get really
radical
and then the democratic party is gonna
like say this or something i i don't
know like he doesn't know anything about
the history of the democratic party and
these myths have been going on again and
again and again like people are saying
this about reagan people are saying like
just know your history um and he himself
is an anti-communist dissident right
that's how he cut his teeth in
yugoslavia right he ran on a
presidential ticket against the comics
on the liberal ticket right and he just
came out in support of the nato
intervention in ukraine and wrote this
piece for the guardian which is
basically an intelligence cut out for
british intelligence um the ird has many
many links historically to the guardian
and said that any leftist worth his or
her salt uh will basically you should
read the article but basically blindly
support
uh the nato intervention and then he
says some very contradictory things
which he's prone to do uh but we should
support nato but like not with the us
leading it like what do you like nato is
a us
it just makes no sense it's completely
incoherent which is another thing that
they do is they traffic in obscurantism
and pseudo-dialectics right so gg said
about just about everything and just
about the opposite of everything and the
point is to produce
objects of consumption that people buy
and need to buy because it's like oh
this is as late as hot take that's
different than the other pante so a lot
of these figures have actually really
revealed their colors because they've
supported u.s imperialism and said
that's where they stand just like
horkheimer was saying back in the day
that he supported the war in vietnam
um i just want to ask one last question
um but since you talked a lot about the
misinformation campaigns during the cold
war
what about now
yeah great question um i think there's a
few things that are important to
understand about now one is that the
institutional infrastructure that has
been set up in the intellectual
apparatus has a certain inertia to it
and that's all still very much in
existence and now we have generation
upon generation who've been trained
within this kind of general dosa if you
will and that means that it's become the
general kind of lingua franca uh of the
day
uh
the other thing that i'd say is that the
there's arguably been even a greater
consolidation and greater centralization
right with the top-down class warfare
that has been unleashed with
neo-liberalism on steroids kind of
post-91 it means that now you can really
discipline intellectuals right because
there aren't jobs out there because 70
of the us labor pool in the academy is
adjunct like this really creates and
there's a cia document that says
precisely this right that the more we
keep the intellectual labor pools
precarious the more we can control uh
what the narrative is and five
just as a side note regarding the media
five gigantic media conglomerates
control 90 of what all people see and
hear within the united states so there's
an unbelievable media monopoly that is
important
as far as other things are are concerned
i might just jump uh uh to the
the ways in which like the central
intelligence agency
has for years but now increasingly so
been working with a lot of private
intelligence agencies in various ways so
outsourcing this labor and it has also
used the united states information
agency the usia the united states agency
for international development the usaid
ngos the nad that i mentioned earlier
the national endowment for democracy
they have this entire global
infrastructure basically for promoting
propaganda uh worldwide
uh the digital age has also brought with
it unique opportunities for even greater
control of
the circulation of information i mean
we've seen this very clearly with the
very overt censorship and deep
platforming of anyone who is taking a
progressive line i'm not talking about
revolutionary socialists or marxists or
anything just a progressive line in the
u.s media sphere
i'm just talking about the us because
i've been there over the last two years
and seen it happen up close uh rt being
basically expunged the deep platforming
of so many people etc uh there's a
really fascinating article that recently
came out just to give you a sense of
their involvement with big tech because
big tech isn't some private sector
that's separate from the intelligence
agencies on the contrary these you know
amazon has uh if i remember correctly it
hosts uh cloud space for the cia google
of course contracts with the
intelligence services i mean these are
these are hand and gloves don't believe
the hype about private public it's
nonsense
here's something to think about so in
2021 last year the pentagon's signature
reduction program
uh it was revealed has an undercover
force of 60 000 people
some of whom are involved in assuming
false personas online and engaging in
espionage as well as influence and
manipulation campaign
this same report says that every
military intelligence and special
operations unit has developed some kind
of web operation cell that both collects
intelligence and tends to the
operational security of its activities
right so if anybody followed what some
people call the bay of tweets uh around
cuba where there's an attempt there's a
destabilization effort that are ongoing
destabilization efforts with a
stranglehold around cuba uh that is
enforced by the u.s empire uh there was
enormous so social media conflagration
that now has been studied in great
detail and it's very clear that it was
an intelligence operation
to create a tweet storm with sos cuba
and make what was a very small protest
around access to electricity and other
such things that are linked to the
draconian sanctions and embargo
into this enormous uprising against the
government right which it wasn't and in
fact there are many images that were
then circulated in this international
propaganda campaign that were images of
the pro cuban uh not protests but
marches and things like this that were
labeled as anti-cuba and again very well
documented there's lots of good sources
on this that i could share with you and
so
this is just a larger media ecosystem
and of course within the intellectual
world uh that this is a big part of
what's going on in fact did anyone see
the paul mason revelations just recently
this week i would very strongly
recommend do people know paul mason
yeah he's a he's probably one of the top
five most famous progressive journalists
label progressive i put that in quotes
uh in great britain has an enormous
platform guardian bbc etc
and somebody hacked his emails and what
came out well what came out was that he
has been corresponding with intelligence
operatives about uh basically if you
read through it i'll give it very
quickly uh the need to set up the
equivalent of the ird
that i was talking about a moment ago
meaning a propaganda network of media
assets and academics in order to slander
and destroy progressive voices within
the media and within the academy and he
even has you see in the uh his email he
has a chart that he outlined where he
names particular people it's completely
chaotic like the people and he names
people like vijay pasha you know if you
know vijay prashad he's like a really
well-known academic historian
journalist like who's progressive he
names carlos martinez that name might
remind you of some a name that you've
heard before because he's going to be
here next week
right
so this type of stuff is not only going
on now it's like just been revealed last
week of uh what some of these operations
look like there are um
uh well there's a series of reports um
by uh that we can share with you and
some podcasts on it that are quite good
and so
i think that uh you know we have to be
very vigilant about how the intellectual
apparatus within the capitalist world is
still trying to control the narrative
and make sure basically that there's not
a free and open
debate about ideas right all the myths
of like everything's on the table we can
talk about anything the university is an
open platform
no it's not the university is very
tightly controlled by what counts as
valid ideas and so in that regard i
think that if you have any takeaway i
hope it is that we have to develop
modalities of critique that aren't just
kind of internal critiques if you will
or critiques that remain within the
these unspoken parameters right you can
be critical of capitalism but you have
to just slander anything that would be
an alternative instead we have to open
up the parameters of critique so that we
can also take into account the
institutional apparatus that itself is
forging the intellectuals who are
putting forth these messages in various
ways
okay great well then why don't we go
ahead and open up for questions
yeah we can we'll why don't we go ahead
and we'll take uh maybe three questions
do you guys want to start
um
oh and do turn on the mic if you have oh
so yeah maybe i'll talk a lot because
this is what's in my area of interest
but
i'll just start by
mentioning that paul neeson
foundation i saw i saw one
partner on midpress news yeah
and so like um
my question was originally gonna be
about like um people that you would
describe as
yeah radical recuperators working today
and
my question was going to be about gj
specifically because like my my research
into propaganda like
um
i had read like a lot of gj in the in my
20s and
his work is about like ideology
and
and and i realized when i started like
researching you know the cia and their
role in um in
the production and dissemination of
propaganda i was like
and at no point in like the eight books
that i've read on idiom does he mention
um
this you know
and i i found that so so suspect and
then you know that was confirmed by his
latest article on ukraine i was so
heartbroken and disappointed
um
but so
you already mentioned him so
my question is you know
i'm a socialist and i'm
an activist an organizer and as you've
laid out um
so in such detail
this after
security apparatus and
their power to disseminate and
infiltrate you know cultural
institutions journalism
um
popular
media
all of these facets of
you know what we consume as information
um
how
can we you know
outside of you know media literacy and
being aware of these things
how can we put this knowledge into
you know practice and find a way to
combat this
you know huge onslaught of
anti-communist and not just and you know
because it is anti-communist but it's
it's also like in this in the case of gj
someone who
identifies himself as a marxist but it's
it's such a it's a pessimistic you know
um world view where you read it and
you're just left immobilized and almost
like all right throw your hands up and
you know
accept
the misery so yeah i'm just going to
repeat that real quick sum it up for the
people online it was a question of how
do we put this knowledge into practice
beyond media literacy you know knowledge
about this um anti-communist propaganda
but also the kind of promotion of a sort
of defeatist so-called politics
okay so uh so my question is
not exactly the same question but it is
kind of along the same lines
and it it has a very general um
a very general version of the question
and then more specific um
so my my first uh the more general part
is
following the your analogy or incredible
analysis of the intervention of
all this
apparatus this uh
ancient agent of
the intelligence apparatus and to
write into the production of
intellectual life of culture etc
seeing seeing the amount the expense and
the intensity of that effort shouldn't
that also uh
mean for us as
organizers as
you know the the ones you know who see
ourselves as revolutionaries shouldn't
that also mean for us that
this field holds a whole lot of
importance right and um if that is the
case then uh also you know similar to
the question that eduardo was making um
aside from um
sort of like denouncing right like the
the
uh the material reality of those
networks of influence of um funding and
all of that uh what else could we do um
and again
going back to my
uh question from last week again as
academics most of us here
are or will be
working mainly in a classroom um should
we
just give up that space um
of the you know of the bourgeois
classroom in a dry university
um should we
denounce the
you know everything that that you're
denouncing now
and
and the specific question would be
should we go one step
ahead in the specific context of the
classroom and maybe teach
um
alternative lineages of uh of
intellectual traditions that are more
that are about liberation and not about
you know sophisticated neologisms or
whatever you know anti-communist
anti-communism is disguising itself as
um
and if if so
who would you include in that potential
list or lineage of just asking for a
friend
just to sum this up the question was
seeing the intensity of this propaganda
ever doesn't this also mean that this
field that is culture and information
holds a great deal of importance for us
as socialists so beyond denunciation
what can we do specifically as academics
and as teachers should we also teach
about traditions of liberation and who
specifically might you recommend
we teach
about
and we'll take one more one
okay
yeah thanks for that it was really
interesting um
i'm sort of interested you said that you
had had discussions with polzier about
these topics and i'm wondering
from what you know or what you can
project or imagine how these
conversations are responded to within
that sort of world of the compatible
left so even if you're not an marxist if
you're a theorist with a critique of
power or of
us imperialism or institutions you might
sort of have um
a reason to cover for your affiliation
with the cia with cia affiliated
institutions so
what is sort of the the logic or the
rationale or the response or what you
imagine the response might be to a
pretty straightforward critique asking
why you're taking money from the cia so
like what's the intellectual response
within the compatible left
to
the engagement with cia funded
institutions especially as this becomes
more public ideally more discussed
in other academic traditions
well maybe i'll just work backwards then
uh thank you for the great questions i
would say that
the responses are
a lot of people uh
you know the actual concrete responses
that i know of denied any knowledge
whatsoever of the involvement right uh
hannah arendt is a good example of this
acted surprised and shocked which is
highly revealing because these
operations
were within western europe that had been
destroyed by world war ii
all of a sudden you have all these
academic networks that are flush with
funds
and i think it's jason epstein who
pointed this out like it doesn't take an
idiot
you know to figure out that the
situation was such that the money must
have been coming from someone with an
agenda because it wasn't internal money
right so there are just the basic
coordinates that should have been um
clear
those who had so much egg on their face
that they couldn't deny it anymore for
the most part would say well i never
wrote anything i was never forced to
write anything right which is a really
interesting response because it reveals
their kind of liberal ideology and that
is that the presumption would be
that it's a relationship between the
freedom of the individual and some you
know structural determinants that's
gonna force you to do something that's
not how this works the reason you got
money is because you were freely and
willingly towing the line
and so it's not about like being
controlled they choose the people who
they fund and support and they have been
remarkably consistent right um i don't
know patrice lumumba didn't get a check
from the cia
and lots of other examples and so those
have been the main main reactions uh
working backwards as far as the
the second question is concerned the
there are so many internal documents
from the central intelligence agency and
other agencies that i've looked at that
say very explicitly the most important
battle is the battle for hearts and
minds
it's interesting right
it is more difficult to slaughter people
than to control them through their minds
because if you slaughter people
you have to dispense those resources you
get blow back people get angry their
children get armed and try to kill you
right and so
that's one of the reasons that this
ralph mcgee the cia officer says that's
the central function is the role the the
battle for hearts and minds and so
i think both of your questions are well
what are we what is to be done about it
given the context that we're in and i do
think that it's important to recognize
that there is an institutional setting
that has a certain amount of inertia the
us political culture where i principally
teach
is reactionary through and through it's
pr i think the most reactionary
political culture definitely in the
modern world but potentially in the
history of the world um you know there
might be some other you know comparables
but what that means is that you have to
deal with that particular context but
also find ways of connecting people to
bring them in and at least in my own
teaching one of the principal ways of
doing that is begin by simply saying
let's be open-minded about things let's
actually investigate what's going on in
the world let's not start with the
presumption that there are things that
we can't read let's share information be
open investigate and then maybe we'll be
critical in various ways and so i think
you're absolutely right that we have to
teach alternative lineages and that's
what i do regularly myself and that
those lineages i think that there there
are intellectual lineages related to
those who are developing intellectual
tools to understand and transform the
world right
uh the historical materials tradition is
one of those uh one of the principal
ones there are others as well that i
also teach because i think people should
know about them various indigenous
struggles anarchist struggles and other
such things um but there's also just
liberation struggles straight up
right to find out well how did
you know
the burkina faso people liberate
themselves from french colonialism what
did that look like most people don't
know the name don't know where the
country is so we can start from a
presumed ignorance because one of the
things you know maybe summing this up is
i try to teach what i wasn't taught
i was never taught about liberation
struggles i always never talk about
historical materialism i was taught
about the canonical history of western
metaphysics and you know i guess i know
that stuff really well but it doesn't
seem really helpful for the state that
we're in right we're in a world in which
there's greater socioeconomic inequality
than ever in the history of humanity and
we're facing an ecological crisis where
the u.n is now saying that human
distinction is on the horizon the stakes
are very high
i can't read and reread live nets in
that situation i've got to teach things
that are liberation struggle and
intellectual tools that will help us
liberate and so as far as specific names
go and there's a lot of them claudia
jones uh thomas sankara who i mentioned
before ho chi minh incredible writer um
i'd look at uh ernesto che guevara i
would look at uh
mariactiki i would look at you know
there's many many uh vietnamese fiends
there's many many people that i could
think of but the people who have been
invested in human liberation and who
have been developing theoretical tools
for us to understand what human
liberation looks like and we don't read
them because we're just gonna like take
what they said and apply it to our
circumstances or think it's absolutely
right 100
i'm going to read them because we want
knowledge that has use value because we
want to save humanity and hopefully
planet earth in the greater natural
world
regarding the first question of course
cycle back if i haven't answered these
or you know we can we can continue the
conversation uh i will say just a quick
note on g-shock because i was the same
way right that was that was my gateway
job to i never read him in in school but
i remember somebody saying when he
published his very first book uh looking
awry
uh hey this is this new thing and i read
it wow this is hot this is really
interesting and it was a gateway to a
certain form of marxism that was fun it
was cool it was interesting it was
radical chic it wasn't like the you know
stereotype of this 75 year old like
white male socialist who's like you know
on uh
you know stand up on a soapbox on the
corner right and and that said like
there can be value in that that can
bring people in
but we also have to identify it for what
it is and slav
is the court jester of capitalism who
has made a mockery of marxism
that is his global social function the
guy is a joke
right and he's meant to be a joke he
tells funny jokes sometimes i'll give it
to him right definitely much more
entertaining than a lot of other people
though he goes on at length um and he's
incoherent but he is giving an image of
marxism that is laughable it's
buffoonery and that's why the capitalist
ruling class supports him because he's
the jester he makes everybody else look
bad and anytime you bring up marxism in
a classroom setting people gonna be like
oh yeah i've read g-shock it's like no
that's not what we're talking about
we're talking about materialist analysis
and liberation struggles
we're not talking about like the
lacanian reel and looking at cervixes
online like show them the out man
anyway where are you gonna bounce back
for something here yeah yeah i was gonna
say that uh yeah that's why he's so
effective and so dangerous because he is
such a buffoon and
but at the same time you know he talks
out of both sides of
his mouth like he's like oh i'm silly
you know i took i told the dirty jokes
you know it's okay but then he writes an
article for the guardian where he makes
huge historical missions
and supports nato expansion
in a very serious manner he's not making
their jokes yeah and that's why figures
like him are so dangerous and we have so
to be so weird of them even
you know as a i've read so many of these
books in my 20s and when i realized this
i'm like this guy talks about ideology
throughout his whole career and at no
point does he mention how ideology is
propped up yeah material well what he
does because he said he's also he uh
trafficks in a form of transcendental
idealism meaning it doesn't matter what
film he sees
the lacanian reel is in there
somewhere right like and he's gonna find
it and famously he has like drove like
armies of research students that
watch films for him he doesn't even
watch them yeah oh well i could i
shouldn't do it maybe in a recorded
setting but i could tell horror stories
about the way that man publishes and
what he publishes and how it operates
yeah
yeah uh we'll get a drink later this is
the informal segment uh juan has one
too mentioned something
can you sir
um

like now they were talking about
institutions they were like you know
funded by this uh like
like for the rockefeller there's a
french institution that is super
important and where on it
is
well they are sure
yeah
like this university started like that
too it was part of the rockefeller and
and they tried to always like
like split from them like no we didn't
know we have we're free to do whatever
we want but there's a lot of criticism
behind this because this university
i don't know if i should say it another
this is becoming something that should
be critiqued in other ways
yeah no
absolutely i feel like i didn't uh fully
answered one of those questions really
quickly because you're right that the
uh
zizek engages with ideas and he pilfers
elements from empirical reality that he
situates within his intellectual
framework right this isn't materialist
analysis uh the man is not looking at
the system of cinematic production and
who's funding what and like all of the
details of the political economy and
cinema not at all he's watching
hitchcock finding a khan and he's
basically it's a form of projection in
which the philosopher projects his or
her great ideas onto the empirical
content right so the lack of materialism
is a real problem in everything that he
does and it's probably one of the
reasons that he doesn't understand
what's going on in ukraine the
the real question or the second part of
the question that you ask though is how
to combat this and i do think that it's
really important to understand how this
works and so part of at least not just
my project but i think a collective
project is to figure out how these
institutions and how the intellectual
apparatus functions and to map it out
because once you map it out you can
understand how it operates and how best
to intervene in order to transform it
right if you don't understand how it
operates and you think oh there's just
like one person who was paid by the ca
or whatever you're not going to
understand who your enemies are right
you need a theoretical mapping but the
other thing that is really important is
developing
infrastructure
for
the
production
circulation and consumption
of alternative
ideas that have real transformative use
value
we need
alternative media platforms we need
alternative educational platforms we
need alternative publication platforms
and we need to develop it collectively
so that there's infrastructure material
support
for these forms of research these types
of conversations i mean obviously it's
one of the things that we've been trying
to do with the critical theory workshop
we're nested within the academy we work
with the academy they we have academic
debates we have intellectual debates but
we also want to be bringing to the table
things that have been largely expunged
or excluded from the academy in various
ways
and that means that the project can't be
individual right it's not just about
individuals and i'm going to publish a
new book that's going to become more
famous than zizek's book or whatever i
mean i you know back in my like rad live
opportunist days i did think that way it
was there were bad times i felt lonely
and isolated and self-important
i'm really glad now that i'm working
with a lot of other people to develop
the type of infrastructure that we need
because we need a lot of it and we need
to do it quickly
let's take the two questions um online
first emiliano
um hey everybody um yeah so many
questions so little time
uh i think mostly i would like to focus
on
what i see as
a particular
phenomena that happens in the
you know within the us left
and my desire to try to find ways in
which we can resuscitate the
revolutionary socialist tradition of the
u.s left
and i was thinking about
the
struggle that chavez
carried on in venezuela i was also a
hoodwinkled by
foucault and i thought it was super cool
because i had read
all of foucault's books and uh and then
i was good wiggles once again by g-check
and now
my uh
my illusions have come crashing and uh
but i think in some ways i think chavez
and the project that chavez developed of
in some ways production circulation and
reception uh were very interesting
because he had to fight that battle
which in some ways
necessitated
you know to continue the project of
simon believer of unity unity unity but
at the same time within the the
venezuelan land and the latin american
left there was this segment of what
challenge used to call the exquisite
left which were the you know mostly the
trustees and some sectors of the left
who
will love any revolution that was not an
actual existing revolution any
theoretical form of revolutionary
struggle was great except the ones that
actually existed
and in the context of the united states
one of the things that i feel is very
important is to start making those
distinctions between what is the
historical materialist
socialist revolutionary tradition and
what it is this kind of a fall
pseudo-radical
identitarian
form of politics that in some ways i
think it has
colonized
every aspect of the academy but but it
also has colonized places that you
wouldn't think of like for example the
black lives matter movement i was you
know i lived in minneapolis six blocks
away from the george floyd square
and uh i was very excited the first time
i went to the george floyd square
because i thought it was going to be
some kind of uh
bolshevik
um
you know
planes of revolutionary
or organizing and what i discovered was
very very disturbing because what i saw
was that these forms of academic
pseudoradical politics were being
implemented in this space that was
supposed to be revolutionary right and
just to put an example so i make myself
clear
i went there and there was a woman
a black woman who was
organizing the space and telling the
white people to come to the front and
the people of color to stay outside
and then she proceeded to chastise the
white people because of all their
privilege and
a black man who's standing by me said oh
i'm not gonna make you go to the front
of the circle and i turned around and i
said but i'm not white
because as a latin american i don't feel
like a white person in the context of
the united states
anyways
what surprised me is that these people
these white people who were at the
center of the circle were my neighbors
there were dishwashers i know many of
them were making minimum wage
and i know also that they were potential
allies in the revolutionary struggle
right but
this this kind of
exclusionary politics has kind of taken
hold in some ways of the u.s lab and i
think we need to find ways to
confront it in a way that
allows us to carry on the the

the project of creating a united uh mass
movement that could actually take on the
capitalist class
not from the perspective of
identity uh or not
i mean we don't need to exclude those
things but from you know rooted in a
kind of historical materialist analysis
of class and i think that's what's
missing from uh within the
you know what the kind of dynamic that's
taking place in the us now so anyways
i'll leave it there and hopefully that's
uh
enough
of a question
okay and i think the other question is
from rhys
hi uh thank you so much for all of this
uh fantastic historical detail gabriel
i was wondering if you would be willing
to expand a little bit on some of the
theoretical shortcomings of adorno uh we
talked a lot about
rancier and
dereda
and what really internal research on
leading to some of these these problems
namely
this kind of transcendental idealism um
did you have that same kind of diagnosis
of adorno's thoughts um what what is
going wrong there
in the in the context right of course of
all of the
the funding issues and uh material
productive background right of course
there's that but then how is that
influencing the theory itself uh because
uh in particular you've acknowledged
that there is something that adorno
still can do that the doorknob is
valuable for and i'm wondering if that
has to do with
um
his negative claim and his positive
claims um that
kind of leans into this this negativity
both in an affective sense of this kind
of pessimism but also of making claims
against um uh certain kinds of
structures like being against capitalism
but then that it's the shift to the
positive so what should we do what is to
be done uh where a donor falls short
i've heard that kind of an argument
before
how would that fit in with your
understanding of where uh adorno is also
going wrong theoretically and how this
material the history of adorama's
theoretical production is influencing
his theory
uh great questions uh
i guess i'll start with the emiliano's
question
the the very first part of it i like the
term of exquisite left is fantastic i
didn't quite get some of the the things
regarding chavez in venezuela but i do
think there's a very good example of the
attempt to develop alternative
infrastructure in the case of telesur
because here you have a media platform i
think it just celebrated its 14 year
anniversary or so that is sharing
information investigative journalism etc
that's outside of the mighty wurlitzer
um that's incredible right and that is
also you know video platforms available
online and other such things and
um i wasn't sure if you were alluding to
other things in venezuela but at least
that's what immediately came to mind so
i'll give a shout out to telesur for the
work that they've been doing but more
specifically the case of identity
politics and how it relates to class
politics i think that and this overlaps
with some of the things that jennifer
and derek were talking about in the very
first thursday i guess second session uh
because i think the first session of as
drinking in the park
the
uh identity politics at least within the
u.s context really arose and became
consolidated within the neoliberal
conjuncture of about the 1970s to the
present
and one of the things that identity
politics and various forms of
culturalism because it took many
different iterations and we should be
able to identify them right it was
political correctness now it's wokeness
you know it goes through different
iterations but the basic beast is still
the same and that is that you
replace
class politics
by
race politics or gender politics or
sexual politics and you oppose them
right in a very non-dialectical fashion
and then you denigrate the
non-compatible left as being people who
are class reductionists and have no
account of race or gender or sexuality
or any of these things right and so it's
really putting forth identity and
culturalism as the primary focal point
for your politics and anybody who spent
any time in an american classroom knows
this right
you always have to announce the point
from which you're speaking and you're
always talking about what your various
identities are or inventing new
identities in order to be able to
um you know use them in the kind of
marketplace of identities and what that
does politically is a number of things
one is that it completely divides and
separates
the working and toiling masses
because instead of us sharing in common
what we all share in common and that is
that we have to work to survive
like we don't have gardens we can live
off like
in the feudal era and unless you're a
trust fund baby you'll probably not get
a job right meaning that you're the
member you're a member of the global
proletariat in the very precise sense of
the term you do not have the means of
subsistence you have to work for someone
else you have to sell your labor power
that we all have and is a very clear
basis for politics and for identifying
the fundamental
undergirding problem in the contemporary
world and that is that our labor power
is being is producing value that's being
siphoned off and taken from us by
parasites who are the ruling class
instead of in the case of socialism
taking that value and redistributing it
in the form of universal healthcare
universal education
universal housing and a universal right
to employment
as well as a focal point on the full
development of human beings as cultural
beings as sexual beings as complex
beings who can do different things and
are not simply reducible to their
vocation or their cause within the
capitalist system and the other thing
that this does is it completely erases
the entire history
of liberation struggles that have been
inspired in various ways by marxism that
have been at the forefront the vanguard
of struggles for racial liberation
gender and sexual liberation and it's
it's remarkable but it's just part of
the lingua franca of the contemporary
academy people don't know this uh
valentin mogadon has a great study of
the history of revolutions where she
demonstrates that the
russian revolution was the greatest
liberation of women
in any moment prior to that point in
time
and any moment since that time
women were integrated into leadership
women were given maternity leave there
was a socialization of care work so you
had teams of people who were workers who
would clean all the houses so the women
didn't have to be trapped in drudgery
and didn't have to do the social
reproductive labor there were
kindergartens and there were care
centers that were set up in order to do
that labor and to take that seriously
and not just outsource it to women as
domestic slaves right uh in the united
states who was at the forefront of uh
racial liberation in the interwar period
it was the it was the uh marxists who
are organizing that's a very well
documented history it's not known but
very well documented so these people
aren't class reductionists they're not
class reductionists at all what they do
is they recognize that there's a class
relationship
within which there are very specific
modalities of super exploitation and
oppression
and if you can
create an ideology that says that well
women
should not be given a wage for taking
care of children and doing horse house
work and cleaning
then you super exploit them
right and you maintain these kind of
patriarchal relationships of ownership
and other such things just as if you can
create the myth that blacks are subhuman
then you can justify slavery right and
so
uh emiliano's question i think really
goes to the heart of it's not saying
well we need a class politics and we
forget about all you know race and
gender and sexuality no there's class
politics is a foundational and
structural element for different
ways in which we can struggle concretely
and materially
against super exploitation and
oppression
this doesn't mean waving a blm flag or
like speaking in certain ways it means
material change
it doesn't mean you know allowing
another voice in the room or only that
it means actually changing the
conditions of production so that women
aren't subjected to domestic slavery and
racialized groups aren't subjected to uh
super exploitation right that requires
structural change not gestural politics
and that's what identity politics is
it's gestural politics and it's symbolic
politics that divides the working masses
and it's not by chance that it's gone
hand in hand with neoliberalism and it
has a deeper history in the deep history
of social chauvinism in general because
it's a way of destroying
progressive organizing because then as
you were pointing out instead of having
a basis for our solidarity and that is
that we're all workers and some of us
have been super exploited and some have
been oppressed but guess what we're
bonding together in a common struggle
we have a politics in which we're
divided and fighting against each other
and saying that the real fundamental
issue is about identity not about our
common struggle for liberation which
includes racial gender sexual liberation
and other forms of liberation for that
matter so anyway i got a little fired up
there and could say a lot more about
that but i'll leave it there uh reese
really interesting uh question and point
adorno has a complex corpus of course
right so there's a lot going on there i
would say that there are certain
elements that i take to be the best
elements in adorno's work where he take
that he takes directly from the
historical materialist tradition his
analysis of the history of
sound recording and its impact on music
it's really solid and interesting
historical work that provides us with uh
you know some elements of a political
economy but then more specifically a
materialist economy of how recordings
operate how they circulate what their
impact is on musical production it's
really interesting work
uh the some of the other work that he
does
does i think transition more into a kind
of transcendental idealism of sorts in
which there's a large conceptual
structure and that empirical data is
just sandwiched within it dialectic of
enlightenment you know there's some
insightful things in that book about the
culture industry and other such things
there are also unbelievable abstractions
that are kind of laughable from a
historical point of view um they're just
you know
yeah they're so conceptually abstract
that they're uh that i don't find them
particularly helpful and i would also
say that uh within a book like dialect
of um enlightenment and some of his
other work he traffics in a lot of
enforced obscurantism and one of the
problems with a lot of radical theorists
is that there's the assumption
that the more difficult it is to
understand your discourse
the smarter it is
when in fact it's often the opposite
the clearer that you are in elucidating
something means that you actually want
to communicate connect with people share
resources with them be part of a
collective project
that's
being intelligent if by intelligence we
mean working on a collective project of
elucidating the world so that we can
gain a grip over it i think you're right
that in many ways the positive claims i
mean
adorno basically doesn't happen he says
that only despair can save us you know
again and again and again some of the
negative claims i think are helpful
right they're good uh you know some of
them are good critiques of consumer
society
jennifer and i on wednesday are going to
talk about aesthetics and i do have a
lot of problems with the larger
aesthetic project that adorno has
for a number of reasons one of which is
that he basically defines aesthetics in
terms of bourgeois aesthetics even
though at times he says he doesn't if
you look at his theoretical practice
what is he analyzing he's analyzing
bourgeois he's not looking at like
quote-unquote folk culture at um you
know dance practices he's looking at the
performances for the bourgeoisie of
dance and music and art and things like
this and so there's an assumption that
it's highly problematic and that is what
counts as art
is bourgeois art
not culture writ large mary louise pratt
i'm sure we'll touch on this as well not
the culture that we make
right but the culture that's elevated
above people like us and that is
institutionalized and is part of the
bourgeois project of adorning itself and
making it look like imperial rome
because
and so when you take those horizons as
the horizons of art you are basically
being a bourgeois philosopher of art
who's shoring up and protecting
bourgeois art and moreover making a very
incorrect assumption and that is that
there's a magical relationship between
this bourgeois art and social
transformation and the causal linkages
can never be explained because there are
none because it's mystical thinking it's
superstition
sorry
great um we can we'll take another round
here we have umberto and then i'm sorry
can you remind me
wait anybody else the third one and then
i stay on okay and then and then should
we take four
uh yeah sure yeah
we should say because we have like five
minutes left so today we're not going to
judge you if you leave early so you can
you can you can peel off if you need to
so
okay
because i need i do need to leave a
little bit early but i still want to
praise my question because i it's
something that is so important
for my research it's just i
uh
when i was working for to do my
prospectus i
did a lot of research about like the
culture of the
congress of cultural freedom
uh and the basically
cold war politics and how they influence
cultural production around the world
and one of the things that at some point
i started i don't know feeling a little
bit uncomfortable with
is that
the more i read
this
piece of information
basically the more i felt like i was
sort of like
intoxicated by the

by a way of thinking about the world
that very much
uh mimic the the vision of the cia of
the world
so i was feeling like
i was believing tca completely when when
i read all of these
informs about how they
gave money to all of these organizations
and they organized the universities et
cetera et cetera and i was wondering uh
when you're working on this and
how do you
leave space for a personal agency
one and then also
how do you think about
geopolitical
uh forces that do not follow the
the dynamic
the dynamic right
yeah
binary binary
schema of of the
almost
the upper level cold war between the us
and the
and the
um
right
i'm thinking more about precisely like
the third world or uh for example
uh mexico or latin america and the place
of the cuban revolution that didn't
really follow
uh that
uh schema
if you have to leave early should i
respond really quickly and then we'll
look at the others yeah um so i think
you're absolutely right that there's
there's a dialectical relationship
between personal agency and structural
forces and that we always have to be
attentive to that level of personal
agency and so it depends on the cases
the
elements that i've read about the like
history of what the cia has said it's
done itself
themselves always need to be
contextualized because there are
instances that are very clear where the
cia has uh documents that are not they
don't correspond to material reality
they're fabricated right um and they
also do a lot of things that they don't
document on purpose so you have to have
a general understanding of the modus
operandi of the company as they call it
the cia in order to try to navigate that
and compare and contrast different
narratives in various ways to try as
best as you can to get to the bottom of
what's
of what's going on and i think you're
right that the
if i heard you correctly regarding kind
of uh third world anti-colonial
struggles in general if they be aligned
on the soviet union supported by the
soviet union or not
um
has been one of the principal terrains
that the cia has been interested in
because they want to control the third
world or you know so-called third world
and in doing that they have um
expended an enormous amount of energy in
obviously controlling what's going on
politically and economically but also
intellectually right and setting up
various forms of you know organizational
relations and other such things in fact
one of the things that i didn't mention
is there's an excellent book
by uh raul antonio capote that's
entitled
he's a cuban who worked for the cia in
up until the 21st century it says very
they're within the 21st century i
believe primarily very interesting book
because he was also working for the
cuban
intelligence services so he was actually
and it's a good case of agency right he
was pulling one over on the central
intelligence agency and then told the
whole story in this book and it's a
remarkable remarkable story and uh you
know the the evolution of cuba has been
um it's complex it's gone through
different stages it's had different
alignments and things like this but i
don't know if that responds to some of
your
question or were you aiming at something
else yeah i'm just thinking about like
how to distance ourselves from the
narrative created like cia for once yeah
and
both in in terms of political and
uh
yeah basically political ideas in uh
globalized uh yeah well the cia too like
if you read tim wisner's uh is it tim
wisner i think that's his name tim
weiner maybe uh the two big like new
york times bestseller books one is on
the cia the other was on fbi either
intelligence assets or publications like
you have to situate them for what they
are that's very different than philip
agee's book the cia diary right he was
he worked for the cia for years in latin
america and then he told his whole story
and was trapped by the cia in fact he
came to paris and was in in london and
then told an incredible story about how
the cia was trying to prohibit him from
publishing that material and so i think
we really have to absolutely we have to
do good situated analysis and compare
and contrast resources there's a history
of the congress for cultural freedom
that was published by the cia that's
available on their website it gets a lot
of it right like basic facts but it also
has a very clear agenda right so
uh and that's where hermeneutics comes
in right the ability to interpret and
compare and contrast texts and
uh do it in such a way where ideally
you're not just taking something at face
value but you're asking the questions of
who produced it who paid for its
production why was it produced what line
are they towing like all of the
important critical questions yeah
um
thank you
very interesting and something that sort
of may be kind of a practical question
but something that struck me when you
were speaking about these kind of things
and ideas is that a lot of them um sort
of you know the pivot from
um like over to ukraine and um like this
sort of idea of the caa it's all the
material reality rather than
um but a lot of them correspond to these
um quite contemporaneous alt-right
critiques looking local conspiracies of
that
and i'm wondering how do and those sort
of
platforms that have those ideas have so
much such a huge following but also
um
i guess can be the local for some
other toxic ideas so as leftist how do
we
engage with those sorts of um
groups and how do we sort of marshal
those sentiments towards leftist ends
rather than
um you know when there may be a kernel
of truth to some of these
conspiracies that they sort of um
i guess yeah trafficking but um
it comes from a toxic place and often
goes in quite toxic directions
um
thank you very much
well
my question was initially again about
the material is part of
dielectric terrorism
uh but your explanations on
class structure
kind of uh
responding to what i had in mind so
but anyway
yeah the question would be well
at least the first part would be well uh
where should we
stop
the
dialectical
understanding of things in order to to
say things like
the
real
the real materialist uh
uh
sorry the the
the material reality as you said like i
even if i i
sympathize a lot with well dialectical
understanding of what happens in general
and social reality and and of course
material explanations i have troubles
when
i hear that
things like but
the material reality the
itself or material reality themselves so
if you could say something more about
this it would be great and
my the second part
concerning the
the explanations regarding
uh class structures
which are very eliminating very
important to understand my first
question i think
uh is
yeah
in order to consider those alternatives
that you mentioned
related to more infrastructure
alternative ways of
organizing
and
is it also possible to think of
different notions of
information or different ways of
communicating instead of
like
building
more competition on the basis of the
same notion of information like
like the
the the
the working class sometimes needs to
or
needs to
turn it off you know to say it briefly
like
just stop listening to the their
to the to the misinformation and maybe
do something else or
i don't know that
in particular
how would you understand
an alternative notion of information and
materialistic terms like
being a notion that it's
it seems very like abstract but at the
same time depends a lot of uh
technologies and
yeah
legal
systems like today we yeah we're having
a like this
base on
nemo rights and such uh kinds of stuff
thanks
isabella
thank you thank you for
everything um
so i
my question could be more like an
extension or maybe something that
has been already said but
so
i'm i'm coming from urban well the
critical theory
is very important and all the people
that you mentioned will pass before
we're there or have some kind of
relationship with the place
and it's very like um i don't know like
uh unsettling to me to to see that
people like very dark
that you have been criticizing uh today
was where in your life i have been
created being as my alpha pessimist yeah
so it's hard to you know situate
yourself between
what type of theory right so
and you mentioned that then history
historical material is thinking is could
be like an option and
basic liberation struggles will be like
an example of this but i wonder then so
how can we build like a critique without
also idealizing fetishizing these other
struggles right or how can we because of
course they all have
how can we avoid like
um falling into identitarian
formulations as well by saying that i
don't know like critiquing daria by his
political or in action or inaction you
know what i mean so
how can we situate ourselves within all
this messy
um
map of critical theory
yeah
who did you want to
tag one on yeah sorry i would like to
find out what is asking because
i felt absolutely interesting the notion
of intellectual apparatus because i
think it corrects buddhist idea of the
intellectual field that is obtained
and now we have the politics in that
so i was thinking
you know for for many many years
we were used to look at being scorned
for his participation in soviet politics
so i would say to what extent and and i
really appreciate the research that you
are doing
to which extent we don't risk doing the
same on the other side i'm just saying
this is blatantly
not productive because it's produced at
a certain stage of politics because
when the critic of luggage was there
the idea was the intellectual has to
produce autonomous but that's an
illusion
from the capitals
idealism
so to which step how
my question would be
how can we build the criticism of
theories and categories that takes into
account the political
but doesn't use it that's the only
mechanism of upsetting
or
counterbalancing different narratives
like how can we
and that's a project
like for the future
what will be
the methodological way of putting again
uh to talk look at chanadono
now making ourselves consciousness of
all the determinations
that surrounded the discussion
from both sides and i think that would
be
that has a lot to do with what is saying
yeah
really great and interesting questions
i'm going to do my
best
i might start kind of at the end and
work back
um
i think it's really important not to
fetishize anything just as i was saying
you know don't criticize their diet or
pull them on uh you also shouldn't
fetishize particular liberation
struggles or particular figures like
we're human beings and we're trying to
figure stuff out but just as we
shouldn't fetishize our own parents we
should recognize they're human beings
right they're kind of messed up too and
they messed us up and we're kind of just
dealing with it in various ways and the
other thing that i would say in a less
anecdotal fashion is that critique
and self-critique is the lifeblood of
the left
the right doesn't do this
they don't subject themselves to
self-critique
uh and by right i have a pretty
expansive notion of the right that
includes a lot of just pro-capitalists
right i'm not just talking about like
extreme right they don't uh
you know announce me a koopa we messed
up we're gonna really change our
politics um we're gonna shift things
considerably no but the left does and
that's actually one of the single most
important things is a collective
tradition of self-critique in which we
remain open to those critiques we take
them seriously and it's not simply
theoretical we change our practices
right
and i could give lots of examples of uh
of this we actually talked about gender
and sexuality there's lots of critiques
of cuba in the 60s and 70s for their
position on gender and sexuality what
did they do and there were problems they
should be pointed out they should be
highlighted we should know about what
those problems were where they came from
as well right because they also came
from the deep history of machismo within
latin america and a lot of them predated
the cuban revolution but
through a process of self-critique they
transformed quite considerably the
institutional apparatus for supporting
lgbtq folks for also educating the
general population they just were
working on the new family code and the
new family code has a very expansive
notion and it's a family code based on
you know input from the entire society a
very expansive notion of what a family
is that's largely self-defined as
opposed to being the bourgeois nuclear
family with domestic slavery and other
such things so that's just one example
of the importance of self-critique and
the other question more about
intellectuals it's true that people like
lukach or gramsci in the early 20th
century they were involved in political
organizing very explicitly and gramsci
spent most of his life in prison because
of that
a lot of the later intelligentsia within
the western world was not
or then they were severed from it in
various ways either willfully or well in
many cases it was willful and so i take
it that some of the other questions both
of the questions have to do with well
how do we situate ourselves in in these
landscapes and what do we do as
intellectuals and within theoretical
world i do think there's there's an
enormous power to theory
um
you know i could quote someone like
lennon who said that you know
there is not practice without theory we
all have theories of how the world works
and what we're supposed to do to change
it but what we need to do is develop
better more coherent more uh
theories that also have more leverage
are able to really latch onto the world
and change it in significant ways and
in my experience at least and this might
be where we have slightly different
vantage points
i think that some of the theorists that
we're talking about i always have what i
would call a variegated hermeneutics i
don't just read somebody and say well
it's all crap or it's all fantastic
right just as we shouldn't fetishize
anything we also shouldn't say i mean in
certain cases you know like henry
kissinger i don't think has a lot of
good stuff going on but um
there are people who as i was saying
about adorno like yeah i've learned some
things from him i've learned some things
from reading volleyball i've even
learned some things from reading derrida
even though i think his politics are bad
and i think that he's a poor reader in
certain instances
um and so with bourgeois cultural
production and it's also a problem
really within there's a big debate
within the cuban uh cuban history about
well what do we do with buffalo cultural
production i think that you have to
recognize that bourgeois cultural
production is largely the result of an
intellectual apparatus within the
capitalist world but what this means is
that these were the people who were
identified for better or worse as you
know having the most potential as
artists as intellectuals etc they were
given incredible resources to do what
they were to do
and there are elements that we can take
and learn from in various ways but i
think we also dialectically have to
understand that they're also operating
within a system that largely controls
the parameters of what's possible and so
in pointing out the parameters of what's
possible i'm interested in intellectuals
who are connected to struggles because
the state of the world right i've got
kids
the planet is being dissolved
nuclear war and world war iii is on the
horizon um you know i don't think it's
uh alarmist
to say that there couldn't be a better
time to connect intellectual work to
practical work in a way that the western
and it's important it's in the western
capitalist core has not done for a long
time latin america has a big tradition
of it africa has you know other places
have deep traditions of it but within
the capitalist court hasn't happened as
much um
so i don't know if some of these
questions seem like things we might
follow up on and have a further
conversation about but if i work back up
just to in the interest of time
about material reality itself i would
simply say that
human beings
are the result of a material reality
that
precedes us and super and surpasses us
we don't know the limits of the universe
and therefore human thought has to be
understood as a product of these broader
material forces
but when i say material reality i'm not
saying that like a like an empiricist
would say
empiricists would say there is just this
world and it is precisely this and i can
objectively understand it no a
materialist would say
there is a world out there that has
formed the history of homo sapiens and
me and how i think
but the only way i can understand it is
through the categories that i've
inherited
from my culture and my situatedness in
society
and therefore when i describe this
material reality it's dialectically
mediated by my conceptual framework
right so
any empirical reality in a brute sense i
could never apprehend it because it's
mediated by my sensory apparatus by my
conceptual apparatus by the words that i
have like material reality and things
like this and that you know lenin is
actually really good on describing how
dialectics
is amongst other things
the process of learning
from the limits of our own fault
learning how our categories are much
more limited than the infinite
complexity of the empirical world and so
one thing we have to do and this comes
back to theory is develop theoretical
tools that allow us to capture better to
describe better the material world and
its infinite complexity and by describe
better that's not just a theoretical
project it's being able to describe them
in such a way that you can get a handle
on them and intervene practically if
it'd be in a direct political sense or
just more generally like actually be
able to make a table as opposed to not
be able to make a table the second thing
the different forms of information where
my mind immediately went and i see
emiliano's projected here on the screen
who's a well-known brechtian is direct
because
uh when you're asking about how to like
share information what we're doing here
is mediated by discourse and you know a
few hand gestures and that's as good as
we get but communication human
communication is so much broader than
that and we'll talk about this with
aesthetics and one of the things that's
so powerful in rex work is he talked
about form and the way brecht understood
form
is that form is the way in which you
take an understanding
and you
mediate it
through whatever it might be
it can be language it can be song it can
be dance it can be performance it can be
music in order to
communicate to someone else
and the form is principally important
because sometimes the best way to
communicate to you know whomever it
might be is a dance performance is um
getting someone you know one of the
reasons that i got interested in
transformative politics was like getting
getting wrapped up in the punk scene
right the punk scene wasn't an academic
lecture saying hey dudes we got to be
alternative no it was people who were
stage diving and a sense that we can do
a different world and we don't like this
other world it's very conformist and
there are limits to that of course but
there's also the form that brings people
into different ways of understanding and
so this expansive notion of form is
really important i think we'll come back
to this because jen and i worked a lot
on this in aesthetics conspiracy theory
question is great i will just say really
quickly that the notion of conspiracy
theory has been so widespread within the
western world beginning i'll look at the
precise date since 1967 because the cia
made a very explicit decision to label
as conspiracy theorists anyone who
questioned the warren commission report
on the jfk assassination and they s they
uh specifically identified that in all
of their press assets anyone who said
well maybe jfk wasn't killed by a lone
gunman would be labeled as a conspiracy
theorist so there's a weaponization of
conspiracy theory in order to discredit
discredit materialist analyses of
history and i'd be happy to talk about
the kennedy assassination because
there's a lot of things that people
should know about it because it reveals
how the u.s state works and who's really
in control
but i'll leave that aside and instead
say that you're absolutely right that
there are a lot of people particularly
within a reactionary culture like the us
who have these right-wing conspiratorial
theories where they do get certain
things right
the big wigs the fat cats
they steal from you they're out to get
you that's true
they
the government is against you that's
true right and so one of the things and
uh thinking here of of uh eduardo's
question earlier a little earlier on is
that like
we want to be educators not just in a
classroom
we want to be involved in political
organizing and connecting to people in
broader like popular education and so
for me one of the best ways of dealing
with this is that you have to recognize
that ideology functions like a gestalt
it takes empirical data from the world
and it formats it in an explanatory
framework
have people seen there's the great image
of the the duck rabbit image
it's an image and you look at it looks
like a duck and you look again it's a
rabbit
but it's the same image
that's a gestalt shift right and so what
i think is important to do in outreach
in connecting with people who have some
right factual ideas they see the lines
in the drawing
you have to get them to see a rabbit
instead of a duck or vice versa meaning
you have to allow them to identify you
know your real enemy isn't the
immigrants these are working people
whose lives were destroyed and they're
coming to this country to try to survive
your enemies aren't the black people
have been subjected to horror upon
horror in the history of u.s you know
u.s capitalism your real enemies are
those who are have constructed a system
where you have to work yourself to death
and where your kids get poisoned by uh
you know water that's not drinkable
those are real enemies so take the facts
validate them be like yeah you're right
about that you're absolutely right but
then help give them the frame
and through you know the form of
understanding that allows them to see
what who their true enemies are and then
they can be brought on board ideally you
know if you're if you're good at doing
it it's but it's also like those
messages have to be reiterated you have
to have a culture that actually does
that one of the things that's powerful
about a lot of latin american societies
there's a kind of culture of
progressivism so you're not just one
person saying hey guess what there's a
different way of thinking there are
bookstores and there are performances
and there's just a kind of vital leftist
culture that was decimated in the united
states unfortunately but it is
rebuilding really quickly because like
the many handed hydra it comes back
because reality is radical and people
recognize that the system doesn't work
it should be quite obvious given
unemployment levels and the housing
crisis and many many other things
oh okay
um

so i'll just read the question real
quick i don't know if everybody can see
it um this is sabrina i'm wondering
about the division of mental and manual
labor and the relationship between the
sort of intellectual proletariat as
academics are kept precarious as liberal
pointed out and the manual labor workers
who are more
over represented in the global set
how does collective organization work
across this division
yeah it's it's an important point
because one of the things that
capitalism has done historically is it
divides those who have the right to work
with their mind and those who have to
work with their hands they underpay the
ladder they usually pay a little bit
more the former and it's also a form of
class warfare because then you can
develop the professional intelligentsia
who's paid a little bit more to make
sure that the ideas the gestalt that's
given to the general working class is a
gestalt that doesn't allow them to see
what's going on and doesn't allow them
to see the real enemies so it's an
enormous enormous problem and of course
a lot of socialist organizing is about
breaking down those borders and so
popular education is about validating
the ideas of working people because
ideas come from practice and you know if
you want to know somebody knows
something about exploitation talk to
somebody who's working as a dishwasher
as somebody mentioned earlier or a lot
of other
i work construction for years that's one
of the ways in which i understood what
exploitation was you work 14-hour days
in you know rural kansas when it's 104
degrees and then in the summer you
figure it out pretty quickly you don't
need to actually read many books to
understand it but
part of the socialist project as well is
validating that knowledge that manual
labors have about material reality but
then also providing an intellectual
framing that allows us to move from
existential level of experience to a
more objective apprehension so that you
don't just know what your experience is
you see how your experience was produced
by a system and it's producing other
people who are having similar
experiences and therefore it allows for
systemic uh analysis and so maybe the
only other thing that i would say is
this is one of the reasons that a lot of
organizations that cut across these
divides are so important so if it be
parties uh various associations unions
or other organizations that bring
together people who are working
within the intellectual realm and as
working-class people because one of the
problems in the university is you're in
a bubble and if you're only talking to
other people you don't realize like how
actual people live you know these rat
infested homes and like the
stuff they have to deal with day in and
day out because your material reality is
protected from it and so the
organizations associations and parties
that do that really also it's also about
educating the intellectuals right it's
not only about giving an intellectual
frame to workers it's about educating
intellectuals about what real life looks
like and how their work might be able to
contribute to that in various ways
i think
any final questions if we go and wrap up
it's already late thank you all so much
thank you gabriel
you


## Keywords:
