---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L5eSghtiBDg
---

# Video
Gabriel Rockhill | Why Slavoj Žižek is Capitalism's Court Jester
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L5eSghtiBDg)

## Transcript:
thank you
okay now we're live
um greetings friends and comrades
welcome to another interview segment
hosted by the Midwest remarks Institute
for Marxist Therian political analysis
today we will be talking with Professor
Gabriel Rock Hill about his recent
article titled capitalism's Court's
gesture slavoy shishek which you can
find linked to the description of this
live stream Gabriel Rocco is a
franco-american philosopher cultural
critic and activist he is the founding
director of the critical theory workshop
and professor of philosophy at Villanova
University his books include counter
history of the present untimely
interrogations into globalization
technology democracy which was published
in 2017 interventions in contemporary
thought history politics Aesthetics
which was published in 2016 radical
history and the politics of art which
was published in 2014 and logic of
History which was published in French in
2010. in addition to his scholarly work
he has been actively engaged in extra
academic activities in the art and
activist worlds as well as a regular
contributor to public intellectual
debate you can find them on Twitter at
Gabriel Rocco comrade Gabriel thank you
for being here thanks for having me on
it's a pleasure
nice so uh I guess we can get started
right away
um I remember as an undergraduate
philosophy major getting into Marxism
shishek was the main person who would
pop up for me to watch it felt that
regardless of what I was watching
somehow shishek was in the mix naturally
I took a liking for this quirky fella
who was always introduced as the world's
best-known Marxist and the most
dangerous philosopher in the west I
remember he would reach conclusions I
would disagree with but always kept
coming back to here after all this man
kept citing what seemed to be an
infinite amount of names I had yet to
engage with in my young philosophical
career he must be really smart I thought
let me continue checking in to see if at
some point I finally come to understand
what he's really about the more I got to
this point the more ridiculous his
self-labeling as a communist seemed to
me in your article you hint at a
somewhat useful captivation with the
sniffling Jester can you speak a bit
about your initial engagements with
shishek as an undergraduate student and
can you elaborate on the story where the
editorial in which you published a
translation of a Rancier book made you
get an introduction from shishek also
since shishek is a part of this larger
phenomenon you describe as the global
Theory industry which includes thinkers
like Alain Badu whom you studied with
can you tell us how that went and in the
process maybe describe what you mean by
the global Theory industry
great that's an expansive question but a
great place to start so I first
encountered g-jack uh as a young student
in the early 90s in the United States
when a lot of the dominant discourse was
deconstruction sort of post-modernism
post-structuralism and she's like bursts
onto the scene being labeled this kind
of you know lacanian Marxist uh radical
dangerous thinker Etc and I shared with
you the kind of enthusiasm of a young
person who personally I was generally
ignorant of History political economy uh
the history of class struggle I've been
educated after all in the Imperial Corps
and therefore I lacked really
fundamental reference points about just
the nature of the world that I was
living in and there was something sexy
and cool and exciting about someone who
could talk to someone like me and I do
really think that gizak pitches to the
youth culture in general and is a kind
of a force for bringing people in at a
certain level but the difficulty with
that is that his most profound insights
of which there are very very few are all
borrowed from the Marxist tradition and
what he does is he mixes those insights
in an Eclectic kind of homo fashion with
non-marxists and often anti-marxist
discourses and modes of analysis and
what you're left with is a kind of
cultural mashup where you still get
glimmerings of the Marxist tradition but
they've been commodified and they've
been commodified because of the way in
which they've been crushed and subjected
to ideological elements from the larger
kind of theory and culture industry and
so it did not take very long for me to
figure out that Zizek was not someone
who had a really robust uh political and
philosophic project that was actually
linked to the liberation of the you know
Global working class uh he struck me as
someone who had a careerist uh you know
orientation and an opportunist
orientation and even though I could
sense that early on it became confirmed
much later on as I got to know his work
better in the case of the translation
that I did I ended up publishing I'm
sorry translating a book by Jacques
Rancier who is an anti-communist
anarchist and uh I didn't have my
politics fully sorted at that point in
time and thought that there was
something more towards here than there
actually is and I was mainly interested
actually in his aesthetic work and some
of the history of art stuff that he's
done some of which is solid but again
suffers from anti-communism and a lack
of materialist analysis but that's
another story in any case in the case of
uh Zizek the only way that I could get a
translation published that I had already
worked on was by finding someone who had
a lot of credibility in symbolic Capital
within the theory industry who would be
willing to preface it and so in short I
was given the condition that I could you
know publish this translation if Zizek
wrote the introduction for it and this
itself speaks volumes to the way in
which the global Theory industry
operates and also how we need to
understand it because at the end of the
day my critique of Zizek is not an ad
hominem critique it's not a critique of
an individual person it's a critique of
a system that produces someone like
g-jac and promotes him as the most
important thinker the most dangerous
thinker
Etc and so the fact that I would be
basically obliged if I wanted the
translation to come out to work with
someone who is uh charlatan and an
opportunist really demonstrates how that
whole system works and it just became
much worse after I ended up accepting
that because he ended up writing the
preface basically to a different book
than the one that I had translated but
wanted me to go ahead and write you know
just basically change the title of the
book and run it anyway and so that
revealed to me me and very close up
because I've been working in Paris at
that point in time with derida and baju
and other kind of luminaries of French
Theory it revealed to me that kind of
crass nature of his intellectual
production and I'm not the only one who
has had kind of close-up stories anyone
who's kind of in the mix so to speak
knows that zizak is not only sloppy but
kind of takes pride in being someone who
will you know uh simply not follow up on
his on scholarly rigor in any really
serious way whatsoever and so anyway
there's there's that aspect to it but
then to come back to your kind of a
larger question which I think is really
important is that a lot of this work
then addresses the question of the
global Theory industry and so the
critique that I just put out of shizak
is part of a larger Book Project which
is tentatively entitled The intellectual
world war on the failed attempt to kill
the idea or the very idea of Communism
and it looks at the material forces that
have been marshaled by the capitalist
World in order to denigrate not only
actually existing socialism in any
manifestation that it takes but also uh
all of the theoretical work in the
Marxist tradition and to replace the
historical materialist tradition with a
kind of compatible left uh traditions of
thought and in the case of those like
zizak or baju or heart or negri or
Rancier Judith Butler we could add a lot
of people Ernesto leclaude Chantal we
could the list goes on and on and on
this is a very particular segment of the
global Theory industry because of course
that industry is actually dominated by
people like Samuel Huntington and
Francis fukuyama who do the kind of
direct bidding of U.S imperialism but
the role of these particular figures
that I just mentioned is that they're
radical recuperators what I mean by that
is that they are tasked with and have
tasked themselves with producing
purportedly radical discourses that call
everything into question the history of
Western metaphysics the existence of man
uh Enlightenment uh European thought in
general all of these Grand kind of
Monolithic things and they appear to be
uh unorthodox and uh transgressive and
liberatory in various ways but if you go
through the details as I have because I
studied very closely not only this
tradition but within this tradition it
was trained within this tradition and
unfortunately for a long time quite
honestly I believed in certain aspects
of this tradition you realize that they
are all profoundly anti-communist
um there are different versions of this
and it takes on different forms but
they're principally against what they
refer to as totalitarianism which is of
course a kind of originally it was a
concept that was developed in the
Communist tradition but then it was
recuperated by the U.S national security
State and uh intellectual figures like
Hannah Arendt in order to discredit
actually existing socialism and try to
affiliate it with fascism which is an
impossible intellectual task because
they're you know World historical
enemies and fought World War II
basically uh around that kind of or was
constructed around that opposition
between fascism on the one hand and
socialism on the other and so that
critique that I have of Zizek is part of
a larger critique of the radical
recuperators and the function that they
play in the global Theory industry which
is to recuperate the possibilities of
radical critique within the
anti-communist camp and the
anti-socialist camp uh in other words
what they do is they police the left
border of critique and they also are
part of an imperial project a project of
cultural imperialism because as everyone
knows or I presume a lot of people know
who are familiar with intellectual
Traditions outside of the United States
there's a way in which those who are
promoted within the Imperial Corps
within the euro-american world become
kind of uh sacred values in the larger
globalized uh intellectual world and so
if you're in Argentina or if you're in
South Africa or if you're in India and
you're an intellectual and you operate
in certain circles it is almost a
requirement that you have some
familiarity with Foucault or veju or you
know people of this ilk derida and
others even if you tend to disagree with
them for whatever whatever reason it
might be and that's not the case with
the thinkers who have been excluded from
this tradition right those who maintain
a more historical Marxist I'm sorry a
historical materialist mode of analysis
so that's another function that they
play is they play a really specific role
as radical recuperators within the
larger system of cultural imperialism
but maybe I'll stop there I don't know
if I got to every aspect of your
question but I'm sure you'll bounce back
to me if there's more
yeah that was excellent um I really
appreciate your concept of radical
recuperators
um the way that we've thought about that
phenomenon in the past is as if the
ruling class realizes that uh because of
the periodic cycles of mass crisis of
capitalism people are going to end up in
positions where they want to dissent uh
to the existing order and they need some
form of a controlled counter hegemony
where they know that if they're there
they're safe because the the established
order isn't being substantially opposed
then I think it's very easy to assume
that this is just like you know
intellectual bickering uh and it's not
activities that are sustained within the
academy because all of these ideas and
modes of thoughts and outlooks and
perversions of of Marxism they roll into
uh this fear of activism through the
academy itself through ngos through the
media through pop culture
um so it's something that has a uh some
weight and some Stakes when it comes to
organizing for socialism it's not just
something that I think is relegated to
the academy
yeah absolutely just very quickly on
that Carlos I couldn't agree more that
it's a controlled counter hegemony right
because at the end of the day what a lot
of these figures do is that they are
working for and pitching to the
capitalist apparatus of knowledge
production that promotes them
internationally right and so there's a
relationship of complicity between their
intellectual production and what the
system wants and it does function very
much like a release mechanism so that
instead of getting involved in political
organizing or
um doing things of a more radical sort
one will you know buy a Zizek book or go
to a trendy book talk in Chelsea or hang
out in an art gallery and feel radical
and so what it is also is the
translation of the potentialities of
radicalism into consumerism and this is
one of the main ways in which you take
active subjects potentially active
subjects and you turn them into passive
consumers of cultural products and so I
just wanted to hammer that point home
because I couldn't agree more
likewise and what's sad is that uh one
of the few points um that you mentioned
that shishek is right because he takes
it from the classical traditional
Marxist tradition
um is is one of these he makes the the
constantly references the example of
Starbucks using the portion of the thing
you buy for uh
to go to some NGO or something and he
talks about how activism has been
consumerized has been incorporated into
uh consumptive practices of capitalism
but he is himself a part of that
phenomenon that he seems to describe
um
a big portion of the first part of
shishek's anti-communist career is
located in the now overthrown and
frankly criminately natal bombed uh
socialist Yugoslavia can you speak a bit
about shishek's anti-communist
activities in Yugoslavia but sort of
Nefarious Western imperialist forces was
the allyin and or collaborating with and
just for context can you speak a little
bit about socialist Yugoslavia itself
what were some of the achievements in
brought its working masses and how have
these been undermined by the forces
shishek a now self-proclaimed Communists
supported and to some extent LED
specifically in the case of co-founding
and leading leading the liberal
Democratic party over there
yeah it's important that the analysis
that I'm doing is of zizek's theoretical
practice which needs to be understood
within the larger social World in which
he operates and a theoretical practice
isn't one you only do subjectively it's
always in relationship to objective
coordinates and so the fact that he grew
up in an actually existing socialist
State Yugoslavia which was an
independent you know social estate in
the sense that it wasn't aligned on and
had some sort of a complicated
relationship to the zone of Soviet
influence but shizak himself was drawn
to Western pop culture Western
theoretical Traditions over and against
what
um you know he's sometimes described as
the kind of dogmatic Marxism of the
Yugoslav state
for the record it's also very important
to know that Yugoslavia and this has
been very well documented by a number of
sources I would send your readers and
viewers if they don't know it to Michael
parenti's great book on Yugoslavia but
there's a lot of other work that has
also um foregrounded the fact that
Yugoslavia is not only you know a
socialist state but was uh extremely
successful in developing a system a
socioeconomic system that looked out for
and bolstered the lives of the most
exploited and the most oppressed So
based on World Bank data we know that
the two decades before 1980 from 1960 to
1980 annual gross domestic product in
the Yugoslavian socialist Yugoslavia
grew by 6.1 percent Medical Care was
free the rate of literacy was 91 life
expectancy was 72 years right but of
course as we also know after a decade of
you know or once the West came in and
through its imperialism never through
the NATO bombing and other such things
we saw all of this uh plummet and there
was a massive massive assault on the
working class in well globally really
but it took uh particularly uh severe
forms in you know former socialist
countries like Yugoslavia and Zizek not
only had a direct hand in this he has
proudly bragged about it repeatedly in
various interviews and in some of the
texts that he's written
um you know there's I point to a lot of
examples in the the text maybe just a
few of the highlights really quickly one
is that g-shek's very first book was not
on you know Marx or or even altuser for
that matter it was on Martin Heidegger
who is an unrepentant Nazi and Zizek
also translated was the first person
apparently to translate one of the books
by Jacques derida into uh Slovenian and
derida of course made his career amongst
other things by rehabilitating the work
of Martin Heidegger and helping prop him
up and make him into one of the quote
unquote grateful greatest philosophers
of the 20th century and of course there
I got worked hand in glove with Paul
Damon who also has a very
well-documented Nazi uh history in the
time that Davidoff spent at Yale and
various collaborations that they had
together and so what the young Zizek was
attracted to intellectually was the
tradition of heideggerianism and
neoheidegarianism that was anti-marxist
through and through and he played a
central role also in then uh
participating in dissident movements in
Yugoslavia dissident movements that he
himself has described as being driven by
an interest in heideggerianism and
French Theory so this was the Western
oriented opposition that wanted to
dismantle socialism introduce capitalism
and one of the clear reasons for that is
that he saw opportunities for himself as
a petty Bourgeois intellectual for
social Ascension and so we have to
understand his own individual
theoretical practice as related to the
larger coordinates of his existence and
the recognition of Greater possibilities
in the capitalist world and indeed
that's been the case right he's become
one of the most famous philosophers in
the capitalist world I should also
highlight though his work only wasn't
only theoretical he was the principal
weekly columnist for a dissident
magazine meaning an anti-communist
magazine called ladina which has been
accused in a very long and detailed
report by the Yugoslav Communist Party
of being backed by the Central
Intelligence Agency he also then you
referenced this very uh you know in
passing he founded the liberal or
co-founded the liberal Democratic party
and the name says all that you need to
know Zizek is a liberal who supports
forms of so-called you know plural
democracy or at least he was at that
point in time he kind of repackaged
himself and we can talk a little bit
more about that but he was very explicit
and I encourage all of your viewers and
listeners unfortunately on social media
sometimes people respond to things
without actually reading and engaging
them if the people who have seen this
article actually go through the 99
footnotes and read and listen to all of
the documentary evidence that I Marshal
they will see Zizek in his own words and
in his own words he said as president of
Yugoslavia he would substantially assist
in the decomposition of ideologic real
socialist apparatus and he argued four
planned privatizations claiming quote
more capitalism in our case would mean
more security right so he took a
pro-capitalist pro-liberal
anti-socialist position and moreover he
supported the ruling party for the first
10 years
of uh post socialist Yugoslavia right so
it's not as if he ran for president and
then all of a sudden you know announced
that mayakupa he was wrong the turn
towards capitalism was horrific because
it was destroying the lives of so many
workers and laying them off and there
was just in uh you know there was even
plummeting life expectancy and other
such things no on the contrary he
continued to support the LDS this
liberal Democratic party that he helped
co-found uh while the IMF in the World
Bank were pushing through brutal
economic counter reforms that led to the
collapse of real wages laying off of
workers at terrifying Pace there were
massive declines in in living standards
and so he saw on the ground must have
seen very clearly what was going on but
the Zizek that he kind of presents
himself we have to relate to the Zizek
the kind of practical Zizek or the
practically oriented and the things that
he's actually done as a political
activist and what we know is that he was
against
socialism in its state form and for
civil society and dissident politics
so-called Democratic politics
um during the socialist government in
Yugoslavia and then once the socialist
government was overthrown and there was
a
a liberal Bourgeois democracy put in
place it was for the state and against
Civil Society not only that he was also
very much in support of the party that
was behind or it was one of the
principal driving forces behind
slovenia's driving joining of the
European Union and of NATO and of course
zizak has a long-standing history of not
only being eurocentric but very
explicitly supporting the European Union
saying things like only Europe can save
us this is one of his most recent pieces
that came out in the figuero French
newspaper and also a very strong
supporter of NATO in certain instances
at least like the NATO this the criminal
bombing of civilians and socialist
infrastructure in Yugoslavia as well as
um the current intervention in uh the
Ukraine the U.S proxy war in the Ukraine
in which he says that we need a stronger
NATO and any leftist worthy of their
salt will be a supporter of you know
what he calls a supporter of Ukraine
which is basically a blind supporter for
you us proxy war which has nothing to do
with supporting the Ukrainian people on
the opposite it's about using the
Ukrainian people as Cannon father for an
imperialist project but a of course
there's more that could be said here
Carlos but maybe I'll stop there
yeah that's very interesting I remember
when he uh put out that article I
believe it was in the guardian about
Ukraine asking for for more bombs and
more armaments to be sent over to
Ukraine some people were surprised but
you shouldn't have been if you're
familiar with his history and him asking
for uh more bombs and uh so that the
bombs were being sent too late in in the
new Left review uh back when Yugoslavia
was being bombed you mentioned Michael
parente's book I put the title in the
chat it's called the color Nation the
attack on Yugoslavia It's a Wonderful
book
um and it depicts along with other
attacks that deal with the fall of
Eastern European socialism uh a process
that historians have begun to call
demodernization because of how bad uh
conditions got uh in the in the years
after the fall of socialism
um before jumping to the following uh
scheduled question you uh mentioned
something that I would like to have you
elaborate a little bit more on you
mentioned that he was repackaged from
liberal Democrat to Communists can you
speak a little bit about how that
process occurred
well the way I referred to Zizek at one
point in the article that we're talking
about is as a native informant from the
East and so given the fact that he grew
up in a socialist culture inevitably was
exposed to ideas in the Marxist
tradition
as the Berlin Wall fell and then the
Soviet Union was dismantled Zizek caught
the kind of rising tide of radical
democracy discourse this is the
discourse affiliated with people like
Ernesto leclaude Chantal move and others
Jacques Rancier a little bit later on
that consists in you know basically
saying that well yeah we're
pro-democracy but we need this more
radical form that's not just about uh
forms of parliamentary representation
and other such things but not socialists
right and that was really one of the
things that catapult did zizak uh early
on and I think there was some confusion
about this based on some comments I saw
on my work referring to zijak as a Pomo
radlib precisely because this is what he
was doing he was working with the
post-modernists who are rad Libs and
taking a very similar position in fact
very explicitly saying he was opposed to
the global solution of the Marxist
Revolution is the position that he
shares with Ernesto McLeod and Judas
Butler right and so he very much is
inscribed within this position another
thing I'll just say very quickly is that
uh we have to be attentive to people's
theoretical practices not simply their
discourses and so someone like Zizek
like a lot of the other figures for that
matter who I've just mentioned they'll
use words in a lot of different ways to
describe redescribe and contradict
themselves in their descriptions but if
we're attentive to their practices uh
Zizek is very much practicing this kind
of postmodern mashup rad lib discourse
that pilfers from Marxism but dilutes it
into uh or dilutes it with anti-marxist
and in particular liberal discourses but
some reactionary discourses like
Heidegger as well and one of the things
that's interesting about the trajectory
of Zizek is that as the
Soviet style Socialism or our Soviet
style socialism was being dismantled and
his career was taking off in the west he
saw a second opportunity for this kind
of opportunism that I alluded to earlier
and that was to begin presenting himself
not simply as a pro-western
anti-socialist but instead as a Marxist
and to embrace certain forms of Marxism
in fact to engage in what I refer to in
the article kind of Kami cosplay right
he not only calls himself a Marxist but
he calls himself a leninist which is of
course laughable given all of the things
that I've just said and many other
things that we could go into about his
political and his philosophic career
he's anti-lenens through and through
um in fact he has an image of leninism
that is the same image that the extreme
right has of uh leninism which is
leninism is just about power grabs and
things like this and so this is a
marketing Ploy on his part and it's part
of his rad uh radical recuperator image
He's the bad boy native informant from
the East who really knows what socialism
is because he was there himself on the
ground he's got the kind of the
equivalent of the street cred that a
rapper would have you know except for
instead of it being the music industry
that picks him up it's a theory industry
that picks him up and then they use him
and he uses them because he can play a
role as a native informant and act as if
he really knows what marks is knows it
from the inside and he uses that as part
of the kind of packaging of his uh
radicality and it's interesting the way
that this has happened right because
with people like baju and there's a
whole click of people who who operate in
these circles and they did three volumes
with Verso the idea of Communism volumes
one two and three all three of those
books really present this new idea of
Communism and I remember when they first
came out it was very radical because
communism is like back on the uh back on
the agenda and people are talking about
it again well if you read those books
and particularly acknowledgments and you
get a sense of what their center of
gravity is their center of gravity is
very explicitly against actually
existing socialism in just about every
imaginable shape and form with a
potential exception of the cultural
revolution for a few years that baju
tends to fetishize in the anarchist
sense of the attack on the headquarters
and whatnot but no support for actually
existing socialist States and so there's
a comic cosplay repackaging of Marxism
that's very salable very marketable very
trendy and it works perfectly because it
allows communism to be repackaged as
anti-communism as a project that's
actually pitted against actually
existing socialism it also really
confuses people and it gets a lot of
people who might be interested in
socialism and communism to pick up their
books and read them and then get lost in
the obscurantism and all the references
and things like this but think well
there must be something to it because
there seems to be so much interest given
the way in which they're commodified and
marketed that uh you know there's the
kind of what I refer to as in in the
article again as intellectual commodity
fetishism right that they these are
Commodities that are produced by the
global Theory industry and there's a
fetishization around them that produces
the sense that there must be something
really powerful even magical about
what's going on there and if I can't
understand it it must be my fault I must
just be stupid right as opposed to and
this is what I encourage all people who
read books by bed you or Zizek or hard
or negri and feel stupid to think about
particularly Working Class People is to
think well no maybe you are not stupid
maybe the system produces these
obscurantist discourses to try to
Hoodwink people into believing one that
they're stupid but two also that they
have to Aspire to this particular mode
of discourse if they want to be engaged
in Marxism and as the great Michael
parente pointed out you know there's
often a direct relationship actually to
between the clarity of someone's
discourse and the clarity of their ideas
and so if you compare the writings that
we just talked about to the writings of
Michael parente which Working Class
People can easily understand you see the
difference very clearly one is a
commodified Kami cosplay that's to
obscure things confuse people make them
feel dumb not bring them into a
collective struggle but just get them to
buy a book read half of it put it on the
shelf and remain demoralized attached in
in kind of individual consumer culture
versus a mode of discourse in a
theoretical practice that connects to
people it gives them tools it brings
them into a stroke that is Meaningful to
them because they can connect it to
their actual real lives and I think that
that difference in theoretical practice
is really essential one is opportunist
one pitches to the capitalist culture
Industries the other is invested in a
collective transformation and it's
really part of the essence I would say
if we want to use that terminology or
the core of the Marxist tradition is
that it's a tool for a struggle and it
should be understandable it should be
something that people can relate to and
it brings them into a collective
struggle that doesn't lead them to
either individually fetishized an author
or to be just struck in awe and
incapable of criticizing them because
they feel like they can't understand
them and therefore they must be stupid
that's wonderfully said I really
appreciate the point that you brought up
of parenti and the clarity of the ideas
reflecting itself in the clarity of the
writing and
um one of the things that I have found
specifically with shishek is that uh
part of his uh lack of clarity
especially when uh speaking more
directly in line with the thinkers that
he claims to be inspired by and I can
speak more to Hagel and Marx than to
lacan is that he doesn't really know
what he's talking about half of the time
they're really bad
misinterpretations of things that
specialists in those areas would catch
very quickly but he bounces from so many
things that it makes it appear as if
I've kind of mystical and the way that
you said it
um
uh so in meshed in his uh opportunism
and anti-communism as is usually the
case at least in my view is a deeply
embedded social chauvinism and a form of
your centrism which you've been getting
at can you elaborate a bit on this
aspect of this anti-communism would you
say that this is a general component of
the global Theory industry also in this
area Roland boar has argued that shishek
holds quote a patronizing orientalist
attitude end quote towards socialist
countries like China
while I agree with the sentiment I tend
to think the classical Marxist leninist
label of social chauvinism it's is much
more appealing than Edward saeed's
orientalism was sticking to social
chauvinism as opposed to adopting the
post-colonial categorization of
orientalism a conscious choice for you
yes absolutely in fact I think that
social chauvinism is a category that
really needs to be reintroduced into
contemporary discourse because it's not
commonly used but it was in the early
20th century particularly in Marxist
debates around World War one and just to
explain what it is or how it was
conceived of at that point in time and
then its relevance to today Lenin of
course Drew heavily on the category of
social chauvinism to index or reference
the ways in which
certain members of the working class in
Europe were chauvinistic because they
expressed their fealty
to their National bourgeoisies
and to the idea that they should defend
their Fatherland during World War One
and therefore line up on their National
bourgeoisies against the interests of
the international proletariat right so
social chauvinism in that sense is a
chauvinism regarding your own
nation-state or your own group thinking
that you're Superior to others elevating
yourself above them and actually
fighting to defend that superiority and
thereby lining up on the interests of
the imperialist powers in World War one
and Lenin also pointed out and you know
exactly as you said that social
chauvinism and opportunism are
intimately intertwined because one of
the reasons that uh some of the workers
and some of the Socialist organizers in
the second International revealed social
chauvinism is because that chauvinism
itself is driven by the economic base
meaning that they were benefiting from
the wages of colonialism they're
situated in the imperialist corps the
state of their lives even if they're
exploited and oppressed in various ways
is superior to the state of the lives of
this you know quote unquote slaves in
the colonies and that meant that their
social chauvinism was also ultimately
rooted in their fealty to imperialism
and their dedication to maintaining an
imperial system in which the European
working class sat above the working
class of those outside of Europe and so
the category of social chauvinism I
think is very helpful for understanding
contemporary politics
but we just have to understand social
chauvinism in a slightly more General
sense meaning that social chauvinism is
a zealous Devotion to one's own group
and that group can be your nation state
and often is like crass nationalism is a
manifestation of social chauvinism but
it can also be one's region like a
dedication to you know Urban organizing
as opposed to rural organizing for
instance but it can also be race it
could be sex it could be gender it could
be just about Envy gender I'm sorry any
identity category right so there's this
Devotion to your identity category as
being Superior to other identity
categories and that's of course combined
with a denigration of and a
discouragement of those outside of your
group right so orientalism if we
understand it from a historical
materials vantage point which is of
course different from syed's foucaian
inflected perspective is one specific
manifestation of social chauvinism I
would say and there are many other
manifestations thereof and I think that
the advantage of the category of social
chauvinism is that it indicates the form
of that relationship right of a
superiority of One's group of over
others and that the content itself can
change right there can be many very
different forms of social uh chauvinism
and that a lot of the social
chauvinistic attitude is baked into the
uh
uh how to put it
um
well there are two different aspects
actually one is that social chauvinism
is rampant within the imperial's core
because of the widespread assumption
that we quote unquote are the most
developed the most advanced uh the
leaders uh etc etc etc but there's also
the phenomenon of the labor aristocracy
that I was referring to before and so
the unequal exchange between the
Imperials Corps and the colonial
periphery which makes it such that the
working class in the appearance core
tends to be situated at higher
socioeconomic level than that of those
at the at the periphery and this has led
to and this comes to the issue of the
global Theory industry that we were
talking about to what I would refer to
as an intellectual labor aristocracy
what I mean by that is the group of
intellectuals who are feted by and
promoted by the most powerful academic
institutions in the Imperial core right
those like regularly invited to NYU to
the you know all of these really
prestigious institutions I'm sure paid
an enormous amount in Keynotes uh you
know for keynote lectures and honoraria
and things like this and the junkets so
wined and dined and all of that
these figures so if it'd be zizak or
Judith Butler or many many others who we
could uh lump into this form part of a
click that is supported by this
institutional mechanism the Imperial
University
and they operate above that of the other
intellectuals either within the
appearance Corps or uh nationally or I'm
sorry internationally for that matter
and that tends to breed an extremely
profound form of social chauvinism the
assumption that the discourse that they
traffic in is the most sophisticated the
most advanced one that everyone
everywhere in the world should be
studying and learning and the idea that
any ideas from the periphery
could only be of value if somehow they
can be plugged into the symbolic economy
of knowledge production in the Imperial
core right so someone like spivec can be
of value because she trafficks in a
diridian discourse and herself is part
of that kind of ascendant
um uh kind of how to put it you know
post-colonial uh intellectual labor
aristocracy the same with figures like
you know do cells infatuation with Levy
NOS or you can kind of go around the
world and look at these different
figures who are affiliated in various
ways with
um the the third world in the sense that
they might have some type of link to it
in in various ways but they have been
integrated within the imperialist corps
and have become major players in this
intellectual labor aristocracy and so
what this social chauvinism also does is
it makes people turn a blind eye to so
many other forms of intellectual
production and I know that I've suffered
from this immensely myself and my own
intellectual and political development
when I was 19 or 20 uh I would much
rather go and read the hot Commodities
produced by the Imperial University and
Publishing houses and things like this
meaning zizak and the plow and things
like that then sit down and crack some
like book from 1914 that was public
pushed you know by uh you know some
unknown quantity that would be
irrelevant to those debates or not
packaged within those debates in such a
way that it could be marketable in such
a way because there's also this symbolic
economy right where if you want to have
traction within the Contemporary
University you better be able to talk
about people like Foucault and Saeed and
you sell and people like this but you
don't have to talk about people like
parenti or Dominique lasordo or bishop
kruska or Michelle Simon or any Lakota
East or like lots of other names that we
could name or Thomas Sankara or ajaz
Ahmad or you know people like this who
don't traffic in that same symbolic
economy and so anyway there's more that
could be said on on this front but I
definitely want to make a pitch for uh
reintroducing uh social chauvinism into
contemporary discourse not necessarily
introducing it but making it become part
of a common way in which we can
understand a certain kind of you know
almost moral and intellectual
disposition that leads to a denigration
of theoretical practices that do not
traffic in the most commodified forms of
theoretical practice that you get in the
Imperial core
I'm with you there and bringing back a
social chauvinism I don't think it
should have ever left and I think part
of the the Paradox here is that some of
these people who participate in this
discourse which completely ignores the
actual periphery are the are they Place
themselves as the ones who speak for the
periphery in areas where it is unspoken
for and more specifically the
post-colonial tradition is I think the
archetype of doing this
um absolutely you are you argue that
shishek and his and your former teacher
but you are transcendental idealist can
you elaborate a bit for the audience on
what you mean by this and uh considering
the role neocontianism played in
eclecticizing the Marxism of for example
the second International and part of the
macest trends within the Bolsheviks do
you see their transcendental idealism
developing out of any of these
variations of eclecticism we've seen
infiltrated in some of the marxisms of
the past
yeah the very first thing that I'd say
is that when I refer to them as
transcendental idealists I'm referring
to their theoretical practice what they
do not necessarily what they say they do
because both that you and jija have
different ways of describing their
projects and redescribing their projects
for that matter often changing over time
or changing their definitions over time
so that's very important for me Albert
zamanski I think makes this point very
clearly in a pamphlet that he wrote
years ago where he explains well if you
want to know if somebody's atrocius or a
maoist et cetera don't listen to what
they say look at what they do and then
you can really know because there's
plenty of people who will do one thing
and say another thing particularly the
people that we're talking about and so a
transcendental idealist is one who
begins with the assumption that there is
a relationship between mind on the one
hand so ways of thinking and the world
on the other and that these two meet in
some capacity and that transcendental
videos and courses determine that comes
from con but I'm not using it in a
strictly conking sense what I'm using it
to index is that there's different
there's for the sake of argument I'll
say there's just two different ways of
thinking about this relationship and
that what Jesus and bed you tend to do
is they take empirical content right so
zizak will go and watch a Hitchcock
movie or a blockbuster or he'll go on a
porn site or you know whatever the
empirical content it'll also be just
wait in line at the airport to go give a
long lecture and he looks at the back of
this coffee cup and that's his empirical
content right that's the Empirical
research that's being done what's done
with that empirical content though is
that there's not a materialist analysis
in the sense that historical
materialists understand this and I'll
return to that in a moment but instead
what's done with that is that there's a
pre-established intellectual framework
which is what comes from the side of
mind as opposed to world and that
intellectual framework is the system
that g-jac has established his system of
idea is or bet you for that matter and
the relationship between the empirical
content and the system of ideas is that
it's taken by these thinkers and it's
remarkable particularly it's
particularly clear when you read any of
their work on uh history I mean they
don't really do history so it's kind of
laughable when they when they try to do
it or uh art or Aesthetics or culture
right because they take the empirical
content and the analysis consists in
discovering within the empirical content
they're pre-established intellectual
system
this creates an illusion and a very
powerful illusion and that is that a
Hitchcock movie for instance proves that
gizek's ideas which are basically
repackaged lacanian ideas are correct
there's two problems with that one is
that you
do not establish the correctness of an
idea based on one empirical content that
you read that idea into right that's not
the proof of an idea that's not
historical materialist analysis
the second is that there's a way in
which those ideas that themselves are
pre-formulated their truth is
presupposed right so the pro the truth
is presupposed and then it's potentially
can you know confirmed by this empirical
evidence but the confirmation of that
truth the truth of the zhijekian system
or the bajusian system
is a truth that is like a castle of
cards built in the air it is dependent
only upon itself right it's not
dependent on a materialist foundation
and a materialist analysis of actually
existing reality right and so what
transcendental idealists is I understand
the term or I should say I'm using the
term or appropriating the term do is
they pilfer empirical data that they
don't subject to systemic analysis that
they then take to confirm their
pre-established set of ideas which
themselves have never been proven to be
true
this is the opposite of a historical
materialist mode of analysis because a
historical materialist mode of analysis
doesn't begin with a pre-established
system of ideas and then cherry pick
empirical isolated empirical facts or
elements that it shoehorns into that
system of explanation instead it begins
in many ways the other way around it
begins with the recognition that there
isn't mind over here and world over here
but instead a dialectical uh situation
in which our thought processes
themselves emerge out of and are
constituted out of forces that come from
a material world
therefore our modality of analysis is
that we're subjects situated within an
objective world who are trying to
understand as best as possible the
systemic nature of that objective
reality with no illusions of a God's eye
view like a bad newsian or zijakian view
where you could stand outside and have a
perfect philosophic system that would be
pristine and every card would be well
placed and every term would be well
placed I'm talking more about Vegeta
because his terms and Concepts tend to
be pretty scatter shot and really messy
it's a really messy castle of cards
um but for historical materialist mode
of analysis the only way that something
is true is by constantly testing an
ongoing system in relationship to actual
practice
and that testing is collective it's not
individual it's not based on oh I went
and saw a Hitchcock movie and I had my
idea about the lakinian Rio confirmed
um it is instead subjecting the uh world
that is put forth to be analyzed to a
systemic mode of examination that then
constantly tests those claims over time
and tweaks the system of analysis so
there's never a static system of ideas
or philosophic system there's an
evolving and changing account of an
evolving and changing uh reality if you
will and the other thing that I would
say is that that requires a you know for
lack of a better term
transdisciplinary although I don't like
that term and it's an analysis of the
social totality so what both that you
and zijak do is they take these
empirical data that are isolated and
they never give us an actual materialist
analysis of the system that produces
that empirical data they don't give us
an analysis of the social totality so
g-shek will look at Hitchcock films but
not ask the question of who produced the
films who paid for them why were they
produced who was what was the system of
production that made them in the first
place how did they circulate within the
larger world what was their reception
what was the entire kind of
um system of production circulation and
consumption of the particular you know
cultural product that he is interested
in instead he isolates the aesthetic
artifact and then just uses as an
example to illustrate his ideas and I
realized I kind of went on length about
that but I didn't get to your second the
second part of your point which I think
is really important because
neocontism is is a you know complicated
and diverse phenomenon that traverses a
lot of the 19th and a lot of the 20th
and early 21st century for that matter
but one of the core elements that you
get in various neocontian Traditions
that is also very very prevalent in
French theory is an undielectical and
even anti-dielectical mode of analysis
right just as I said before the
transcendental idealists think that they
take mind and world and find a bridge
between them and they sometimes refer to
that as kind of doing dialectics it's
not what dialectics is dialectics
doesn't start with mind over here and
world over here and the assumption that
there are these fixed substances if you
will it's a very kantian mode of of uh
analysis and it's a very
non-dielectrical mode of analysis and so
a lot of the neocontian Traditions were
pushing back of course against the
hegelian traditions and the Marxist
Traditions that were uh manifesting and
said a dialectical approach that makes
their very approach kind of null and
void and so kantianism and the
reification of these kind of oppositions
is a classic way in which you uh exit
dialectical thinking where you denigrate
dialectical thinking like a great
example of this is the fact that so much
of French theory is dedicated to this
idea that Western thought is trapped
within binary thinking and there's no
way of getting out of it and even if we
try to get out of it the idea of out is
in opposition to it and therefore we
re-inscribe the binary and that's proof
that binary thinking inhabits everything
again very very confident or neocontian
but the problem is that we're already
out of binary thought in the sense that
dialectics is assist is is both a way of
thinking and also uh uh the way in which
the world operates through process and
relations Etc that is beyond the framing
of of binaries and so all of that is to
say that that kind of neocontian
orientation that you find in various
ways is a refusal of the kind of
dialectical term that you get in Hegel
and definitely the dialectical
materialism that you then find in in
March Carlos I'm not sure if I got to
all of the points that you raised though
but I'll turn it back over to you to see
if you want to mine Down Deeper or move
on to another question
well I I think you hit the nail on the
head I couldn't agree
um anymore with you I think I it comes
down to a
a Poverty of Outlook
um a Poverty of Outlook I've been
developing the concept that the Purity
Fetters to describe it but there are
objective forces that are propelling
this Poverty of Outlook and which
benefit from the lack of dialectical
materialist analysis on being prevalent
on the left
um there's this quote that Engels has a
that comes from a letter in 1890 he says
what all these gentlemen lack is
dialectics for them Hegel never existed
all they see is cause here effect there
and I think that's as true today as it
was in in 1890
um but piggybacking on that uh you argue
in your article that quote uh shisha but
you choose specific empirical elements a
current event a tax a Hollywood movie a
candy wrapper the back of a cereal box a
Starbucks cup a porn site or literally
anything else particularly in the case
of shishek that they contend confirms
their pre-established theoretical model
thereby producing the illusion that it
has been proven true and quote there
seems to be the same sort of foisting of
ideas onto reality that Lenin criticized
plug off for doing when he spoke of
dialectics do you find it paradoxical
that both shishek and Badoo while
denouncing the development of
dialectical materialism in the Soviet
Union as mechanistic sophistic and
vulgar because of their own
transcendental idealism or at least in
the way in which you're using it from
the real Marxist point of view they're
the ones that are actually mechanistic
sophistic vulgar and frankly
undielectable
yes
no I absolutely I absolutely agree in
fact it's a classic case of projection
right right
um where what these thinkers do
themselves which uh you know is
precisely what they accuse others of
doing and that that reveals a lot about
the ways in which one of the things that
they're invested in because some of this
question we kind of touched on in my
response to the last question one of the
things that they're really invested in
is developing not a collective mode of
analysis where we'd have shared skills
and tools that we would tweak together
based on practice right and that's what
the dialectical materialist and
historical materials Traditions are it's
not like there's this fixed super system
with mechanical laws and everything is
reducible and no I mean from there's so
many examples that we could point to
within the Marxist tradition that has
been rapidly critical of economism
reduction reductionism determinism etc
etc etc precisely on the basis of a
dialectical understanding so you don't
have you know determinism over here and
freedom over here and Society over here
and an individual over here no you have
a dialectical process in which subjects
are forged out of a society within which
they are marshaling their agency to
either transform that Society or
perpetuate that society's main modes of
action and so the dialectical approach
is very much a kind of collective tool
to elucidate a shared world and what the
theoretical practice of figures like
baju and Zizek is invested in is not
that right they're invested in
developing an idiosyncratic very
singular philosophic system that can be
brand marketed as unique and as superior
to the other philosophic systems on
offer and they compete with one another
to sell their Wares and that means that
the very Foundation of their theoretical
practice is the kind of mirror opposite
of what you find in the tradition that
we're talking about the tradition of
historical materialism and dialectical
materialism because it's all about the
individual thinker their genius ideas
that are capable of producing a unique
and singular product that nobody else
can produce because that's another thing
about their system of ideas is at the
end of the uh the day if you look at you
know a system like veggies or a system
like ggex
whether or not something is true within
it depends on what they say it doesn't
depend on testing those claims in
reality and so that unique product is
linked directly to the quote unquote
individual genius who is purportedly
produced them and they're supposed to be
consumed through internal analysis right
because they're sold as products and
what you're supposed to do is read them
and analyze them internally not
necessarily raise questions like the
questions that I raise and that is well
why was this product of the global
Theory industry produced and what are
the material forces behind its
production and its promotion and so in
all of those ways I think that the
theoretical practice that Zizek and baju
are invested in reveals itself to be
anti-marxist it's an anti-communist
right it's more a theoretical practice
that is very widespread within a
capitalist world and within the larger
Theory industry one great example of
this that I'll just give a shout out to
is if well I wouldn't actually encourage
anyone to read it but
um but you's book called the century
which is based on a seminar that he gave
on the 20th century I followed the
seminar and then I read the book by the
end of the book
it becomes very clear that the 20th
century is the century of a
confrontation between baju's ideas his
philosophic system fighting itself out
across you know decades and decades and
the level of just profound Naval gazing
narcissism is just an incredible but on
top of that it again reveals the nature
of this theoretical practice and the
kind of opportunism and the social
chauvinism that saturates it because
it's a theoretical practice that is not
really interested in giving us and but
you says at the beginning of the book
I'm not going to give you a historical
analysis of the 20th century I'm going
to give you a philosophic account of the
20th century so he's not participating
in a collective project of understanding
the history of the 20th century so that
we can learn from it so that we can
organize our movements around it and
other such things no he's branding the
20th century in terms of his philosophic
system and taking this empirical like
basically empirical data that he Cherry
picks a poem here an event here Etc and
he
fits it all and shoehorns it all within
his overall philosophic system and so
all of that I think demonstrates the
extent to which their their theoretical
practices are really unfortunately you
know it's unfortunate because they're
they're people who are well trained they
have a lot of time to do analysis and
have research assistance I'm sure and
things like this so it'd be great if
they would kind of come over to our side
and put their mind to use instead of for
their individual careers to use for
Collective humanity and for Collective
projects but unfortunately it doesn't
look like that's in the cards and
they're both older gentlemen so I don't
think that they'll be giving up on their
careers at this point in time
yeah we we spoke uh about a month or so
ago with vivec shiver and uh there's
something that he said which is that
insofar as they can continue publishing
a bunch of stuff and and living
comfortably
it it doesn't seem like it's going to
change much within the academy they're
gonna have the material incentive to
continue
um their practice uh can you talk a
little bit about their usage uh maybe
she shark specifically but if you want
shishek and Badoo their usage of lacan
and altuser and specifically the latter
so Altus here is a concept of
interpolation and how they view it
yeah in the French intellectual and
political scene altuser really is an
important hinge figure because there's
in a certain sense altuser has a foot in
two camps uh probably more camps than
that but for the sake of uh argument he
has one foot in the French Communist
party and in uh dedication to a certain
form of Marxism leninism and he was
dedicated to the Marxist tradition and
has some insightful analyzes of various
aspects of that Tradition at the same
time he of course has a deep interest in
or had I should say psychoanalysis and
really
uh much of his work was subjected to the
influence of Lacon
and that influence I think uh really set
the stage for a lot of the figures that
we're talking about who I would refer to
as lecano altusarians just as the
Frankfurt schools often refer to as
freudo marxists we have in the latter
half of the 20th century in many ways
there's deep deep continuities between
these Traditions that would be
fascinating to unpack and talk more
about but the lacanian altusarians are
ones who take
fundamental insights from the Marxist
tradition and again this is the same as
with the Freudian Marxist but they merge
these insights with a framework of
analysis that is not historical
materialist but is based on the or
emerges out of both Freud and Lacon for
that matter a kind of at best liberal
ideology within the capitalist core
right so what you do is you take a
Marxist discourse a non-marxus discourse
founded on liberal ideology and more
specifically definitely in the case of
Freud like Colonial ideology patriarchal
ideology and other such things and you
do a mashup and that mashup does not
work out so well
um not because there should not be a
Marxist account of psychology and
psychoanalysis on the contrary I'm very
dedicated to that I think is extremely
important and there's excellent work you
know the goatsuki comes to mind but
there's a lot of other people who work
in that particular tradition because you
need an analysis of the social totality
and human psychology is a very important
factor in the social totality but the
Freudian and lakinian traditions
unfortunately you see the very clearly
in Freud you know his model for
psychoanalysis was basically the white
Bourgeois male European subject and that
under heard it so much of the way in
which he understood the so-called human
psyche and so the universal descriptions
that you have are actually a description
of a very particular psychological
formation and there's not an analysis of
the social production of that
psychological formation and so Freud of
course and you find some of this in
Lacon as well traffic's in a lot of
um Colonial patriarchal discourses Etc
there's excellent excellent critiques of
both Freud and Lacon on that front You
Know Carl schwarzka's work on Freud or
Lucy rigorized critiques of um the Khan
and there's many other examples that one
could point to and so I'll do say it was
very very influenced by lacan and that
led to uh really fundamental problems in
his understanding of ideology
and the famous ideology essay
ideological State apparatus is is in
article it's actually you know a chapter
in an unfinished book uh that itself
really manifests this split because
about half of the analysis is rooted in
a Marxist account of ideological state
apparatuses but then in these strange
points in the essay he introduces what
is very easily understandable as lacon's
mirror stage as a way of describing
ideology the mirror stage in a nutshell
is the moment at which the subject
recognizes their image in the other and
becomes constituted cost subject
and altercare's interpolation scene is
modeled on lacon's mirror stage because
what happens is he says an individual is
walking down the street is hailed by a
police officer and in turning around and
recognizing that they're the one who's
been called by the police officer they
recognize themselves as a subject as an
ideological subject in the image put
forth by the other the police officer
but of course the problem and altusar
actually says it quite explicitly in the
essay himself is that this interpolation
scene contradicts in profound ways the
entire analysis of ideology that he had
outlined in the preceding part of the
essay in particular it presupposes that
there's an individual who would somehow
be outside of ideology and then called
into ideology uh of course I alter
himself says early in the essay we're
always already ideological subjects
because we're born within a society that
constructs us and composes us
ideologically
um it also suggests and this is one of
the big problems with a lot of the
people coming out of this location
tradition who almost all don't focus on
the materialist theory of ideology in
the kind of marxist side of altitude but
instead on the subjective side right
that turn to the subject is it suggests
that well maybe a subject could just
keep walking or like ignore the cop and
therefore just ignore ideology and so it
trafficks very explicitly in the liberal
ideology of the free subject who can you
know uh just cut their ties and you know
run away or do other such things and
there's plenty of uh kind of later
thinkers who draw on this tradition and
say various things along those lines and
so aldouser unfortunately really opened
up the floodgates to this more liberal
mode of analysis within debates around
ideology they're focused on the subject
and the freedom of the subject Etc and
really ultimately and we could tie this
back Carlos to uh it sounds like our
very shared interest in making sure that
dialectics is at the center of any
understanding of the social totality
because the fetishization of the subject
and the possibility of the subject would
turn away or do other such things is
really a non-diable practical way of
understanding the process of ideology
and with Jennifer Ponce de Leon one of
the things that we've been developing in
a book project that we're working on and
this is of course collectively drawing
on the Deep tradition of historical
materialism is a compositional model of
ideology meaning understanding ideology
not in terms of oh there's a social
structure over here and a subject over
here and the social structure just
implants itself onto the subject and
that's how ideology Works we're just
formatted like you know a cookie cutter
formats a cookie that's not how ideology
Works ideology is a dialectical process
and it's a process by which subjects are
collectively over time
composed within a social totality and
they're composed not only in a way in
which they think and understand the
world but they're also composed in the
way in which they feel their affects
towards the world the way they perceive
the world the words and the discourse
they use to talk about the world all of
those things are composed out of the
social totality and there's not a
determined relationship a rigorous like
reductivist relationship
um but the agency that's mobilized is
always an agency within a process of
ideological composition and so the
compositional model of ideology is
dialectical through and through there's
not structure and subject there's a
process of composition in which if we
use these terms and we have to use them
carefully so that one doesn't fall back
into non-dialectical thinking we could
say that subjects are composed out of
structures that they them cells
contribute to composing in various ways
and it's the limit of our Concepts that
makes us think in these rigid terms like
structure and subject instead of being
able to develop a you know more complex
vocabulary for articulating this process
right and dialectics amongst other
things is the way in which we can
identify the limits of our conceptual
understanding and thereby tap into
elements from Material reality that
surpass our conceptual categories right
so there's not just subject in society
or structure or something like that
there's instead these complex material
processes of uh Collective composition
and for that matter recomposition
because a lot of the focus that is that
you get in the lacanian and altusarian
traditions is on the subject in its
interpolation so it's all individualized
but ideology is collective and the
process of ideological recomposition
right of breaking out of dominant
ideology if you read g-shek or you read
you know uh but you were people like
this it's often in terms of this like
Messiah complex that I'm gonna read a
book and I'm gonna realize everybody's
wrong and I'm right and that's going to
be my magic pill moment like in The
Matrix and I'm gonna see through things
and be outside of ideology that's not
how I mean that's how it works in
Hollywood and that's why they tell us
these magic button theories of ideology
in Hollywood because it's not true the
way in which ideological recomposition
operates is it's a collective project
that is material through and through and
it depends to a very large extent on
various social structures and
institutions that recompose right and so
we don't just do this individually or
idiosyncratically or in an isolated
Manner and it's one of the principal
reasons why we have to not only
um work collectively to recompose our
ideology but we have to do it through
Institution
through building organizations and
parties and associations that create a
different net material set of forces
that can pose subjects in very different
ways and anyone who spent a lot of time
in organizing spaces or travel to
actually existing socialist countries or
things like this knows exactly what I'm
talking about right because you can walk
in to spaces or be part of communities
in which the center of gravity is such
that your kind of participation in that
Community or that environment
interpolates you if I was to use the the
misplaced alcazarian vocabulary slightly
more correctly in a way that would draw
us out and recomposes you or potentially
recomposes you in in significant in
significant ways and that's one of the
reasons that the exit from ideology
isn't individual it's something that we
have to do together we have to help one
another do it and it's not like you just
get to the promised land and then you're
done because ideologies so complex it's
not just the cop who's like hey are you
you know Gabriel Rocio no it's it's our
affect it's even our desires you know
what we find attractive what we find
disgusting like all of these different
layers of ideological composition have
to be recomposed and that's an ongoing
process and even within socialist
countries you know of course Che pointed
this out quite poignantly that that
process of ideological composition goes
on and on and on right uh so it's it's
the remaking of humanity through its
shared Collective Endeavors of of
recomposition
um I've probably gone a little uh you
know to length into this particular
question but I think it really hits home
because that lacanian and altusarian
approach I think really leads to a dead
end and that a dialectical understanding
of ideology Collective compositional
Force
leads not only to I think a better
theoretical description of ideology but
also has much better far-reaching
practical consequences because it brings
us into a collective community of
recomposition which I think is part of
what Midwestern Marx is invested in it's
part of what I'm invested in my
organizing it's part of what I'm
investing as a teacher it's part of what
I'm invested in the critical theory
workshop and so these are things that we
that we need to do together because they
give us faces and they Empower us and
they allow us to leverage power away
from the dominant forces in in the
society that we live in
I think that's wonderfully sad
um I wholeheartedly wholeheartedly agree
with
um the way that uh the theory of
interpret interpolation is grounded on
uh a deep form of liberalism and I see
it embedded in the way that communism is
kind of seen as an identity in the west
and other uh specifically socialist
countries if you say you're a communist
what's implied is that you're a member
of a Communist Party
um in in the U.S at least when you say
you're a communist it means you're an
individual who believes in the ideas of
Communism and I think part of the the
Paradox that emerges uh when it's so
deeply
um identified at the individual level is
that
there is maybe an unconscious interest
in not achieving socialism because it
would mean a loss of identity a loss of
being able to labor yourself as an
individual socialist within the existing
capitalist order
um I found the your development of of
the project that you're working on with
Jennifer Ponce de Leon of the
compositional theory of ideology
uh pretty pretty interesting um and uh
it reminded me of Richard Levin's and
Richard lewanson who are both Marxist
evolutionary biologists and who have
developed a notion of subject object as
a way of thinking dialectically about
subjectivity
um and as far as uh L2 series essay I
mean give me a better example of
dropping the ball halfway you're going
pretty good you're doing good and then
out of nowhere it just uh it goes to
um so do you think that that sort of
split is is part of the reason why
altuser students some end up going down
the route of Badoo and what you call
transcendental idealism and others down
the route of you know quite literally
basically founding post-modernism
yeah I definitely put the Richard Levin
uh broke in the notes if you could
because I don't know it and I'd love to
check it out
um
yeah I think that the the
postality or the the kind of
neo-alkissarians uh those who studied
with him or followed his seminar were
close to him people like veggie and
zijak but then also people like Rancier
ATM volleyball and Pierre mashre and
others of that sort that you know they
each have their own individual
trajectories in various ways but one
thing that is very revealing is the
direct relationship between
their merging of marxian not necessarily
Marxist but marxian so vaguely Marxist
elements with other discourses and other
theoretical practices
the more they have done that
historically
the more that the star of their brand
tends to rise within the global Theory
industry right so someone like
volleyball is very interesting he had a
very clear diridian turn and has become
very very invested in a kind of his
discourse itself is very diridian in in
very many ways and he has become a major
major figure uh in the anglophone world
and regular invited to Colombia and
things like this you know it's very
different than some of his very very
early work on the dictatorship of
proletariat and and and other things and
you know so you see I think one of the
things that is really important
is to recognize that
you know just as we have a music
industry or clothing industry we have a
theory industry and the people who work
in that industry are for the most part
competing with one another to
Advance their careers and that the
radical recuperators within that
framework know very well and very
clearly and actually I should say uh
very explicitly that I know this because
that's how I was trained and that was my
intellectual habitus that was my
ideological composition of an earlier
version of myself was I knew full well
that what I needed to do was brand
Market myself in such a way that I was
Radical but I had my own terminology and
my own system and my own way of
explaining things that engage with all
these thinkers and all of their symbolic
Capital that I could leverage for myself
but that I had my own brand that I was
pushing forward and that to push that
brand
didn't mean reading and engaging
seriously with Lenin or losordo or
parente or Claudia Jones or you know a
lot of the figures that we've been
talking about or traditions for that
matter that we've been talking about no
it meant engaging with leclao and
Rancier and you know Judas Butler and
the trendsetters of these various uh
traditions and so I think that that's a
big part of the way in which those
Traditions operate is that the
capitalist cultural apparatus the system
of production circulation and reception
relates to ideologically composed
subjects who are the intellectuals who
operate within it who know and feel the
uplift of the system they know that well
oh this diridian thing that I'm doing
kind of got me invited to a lot of
things and I got some Keynotes and wow I
got to publish in this really
prestigious press that doesn't really
like that you know crass Orthodox vulgar
Marxist stuff that I used to do or maybe
I used to read or other such things and
so that phenomenon of uplift I think
really clearly highlights the
relationship between the opportunism of
the individuals who recognize that if
they give to the system what they want
they're going to have very very
lucrative careers and that has really
pernicious effects uh I see it all the
time and it's really hard to break with
like my own self-critique which for that
matter is ongoing is is painful you know
it's really difficult to look yourself
in the mirror and say okay I'm actually
I've been invested in things that I'm
ashamed of and in order to take that
self-critique to the highest possible
level I actually have to really
understand the system that has produced
these phenomena the people who
participate in it call it out for what
it is not because I haven't asked to
grind with individuals like I really
want to you know bury a hatchet in you
know zizek's chest or something like
that I actually don't really as far as
an individual goes he's not my audience
I don't really I don't really care you
know sorry I don't really care uh what I
care about is understanding the system
that produced a charlatan like him and
that Hoodwinked someone like myself and
hoodwinks a lot of other people
and it pushes a lot of potentially
radical intellectuals or activists into
an impasse
and so my own work in is a self-critical
work that consists in diagnosing that
not just for the pleasure of you know
writing a hit piece or calling somebody
out on their or something like
that it's really the positive aspect to
it for me is principal is is primary
that is if I understand how the system
works I can elucidate how it operates I
can help other people understand it as
well while pulling on what other people
have done in their critiques of this
system I think it will be better
positioned to
um move theoretical practices in a
direction that actually have relevance
to the struggle of humanity that we're
in which is you know apocalyptic at this
point if you take seriously the
situation with capitalist driven global
warming the threats of nuclear war and
World War III
um and just the crumbling of the
capitalist system in general and so the
stakes of class struggle are very very
high and I wouldn't want to get kind of
you know sidetracked in kind of
individual attacks we've got to keep our
eye on the system and our eye on the
prize of uh collectively developing
theoretical practices that are healthy
that are sober and that are directed
towards a revolutionary optimism because
if we don't turn this world around then
the world is going to go straight into a
wall because that's where it's currently
headed and it's quite obvious I think um
based on you know a number of different
factors that we could that we could look
at
that's wonderfully said and I think one
of the sad parts is that uh
um even though you're doing this one of
the reactions which I've seen people say
is that it's just like a first an
individual Vendetta against uh shishek
when it's absolutely not and it makes me
think you know are some of these people
even capable of Thinking Beyond just
that very individualistic framework and
realize that you're you're looking at
the objective forces which have allowed
something like a shishek along with many
others to to have Arisen
um uh sort of the last uh question that
or the second to last question that I
wanted to ask you is do you think the
left has what some have called a
professional managerial class or uh for
short PMC problem and if so what role do
you think this has played in the
popularity that shishek has in Social
Democratic or Democratic Socialist
organizations
you know we should do a few sessions on
this because it's enormous but really
important question I'll just highlight a
few uh issues one is that we need and
people are developing some people have
done some great work and uh you know
radical dasai comes to mind
um Zach Coke comes to mind uh Nicos
polansis is some of his politics I
disagree with but he has some great
analyzes of what he refers to as the new
Petty bourgeoisie and this is the
professional managerial class stratum in
the Imperial core very important to
highlight that I think because we always
have to keep the international
perspective in mind as well as the way
in which neoliberalism has offshored uh
you know a lot of forms of production
and has uh developed a more uh kind of
bloated service and professional
managerial class stratum within the
Imperial core and that that phenomenon
which I think we really need more
developed analyzes of
does have an enormous impact of course
on organizing because this professional
managerial class stratum is one that I
think it's important to say that it's
not really like in a strict sense it's
not really a class in the sense that you
have two classes you have the class that
owns the means of production and the
class that can only Survive by
selling its labor to those who own the
means of production and the professional
managerial class stratum is sandwiched
between these two in certain ways often
will not be in the productive sector but
still working for a wage and so anyway
there's a lot of things that would need
to be analyzed in that professional
managerial cluster item but one of the
things that it does is it it works for
the capitalists
um but at the same time the radical
recuperators or those who think of
themselves as progressives within the
professional managerial class job often
want to think that they're on the side
of the people
and so they'll position themselves
posture themselves put themselves forth
as if they're defending the rights of
the you know average person or on the
side of workers or things like this
sometimes this might be legitimate
sometimes it might be uh disingenuous in
various ways but the that stratum given
the fact that it's actually working for
the capitalist ruling class in the
Imperial core has interests driven by
the material base that go against some
of the interests of the working class so
in that regard the petty boothwa class
stratum is often quite a contradictory
class stratum and there's so many great
analyzes going back to Marks and angles
that point out that the petty Bourgeois
class stratum is one that is
um very frenetic it doesn't have a
stable politics
um it can bounce back and forth it can
realign in various ways going from you
know fascism to liberalism for that
matter
um and sometimes it also traffics in a
belief in third-way politics right that
there's some way out of this
confrontation between capital and labor
and this could be through utopian
socialism it could be through Democratic
socialism it could be through anarchism
it could be through liberalism but Third
Way politics is very very prevalent
within the imperialist PMC and so that
all leads to yes I do think that there
is a profound problem with the PMC
stratum within the imperialist corps and
that what we need to do is develop based
on some of the work that I referenced
just very quickly really robust analyzes
of the political economy of the
production of this class stratum how it
operates and how it's changed under the
neoliberal phase of capitalism but then
also what its various uh kind of uh
political roles have been you know one
of the thinkers from uh France iskra is
going to put out a book by uh Emeryville
on Michelle kruska and I could spell
that name and put it in the the notes if
you'd like one of the things has pointed
out is that the petty Bourgeois class
stratum in the Imperial core he's
thinking of France in particular also
plays a really specific function because
one of the things that it does is it
traffics in a consumerist Utopia of
desire in which the PMC given the wages
of imperialism and given often the kind
of Social and economic standing that's
Superior to that of the working class
they can be major consumers they can you
know go on vacation in various places
and go to the movies and buy lots of
books and t-shirts and whatever you know
and so consumerism is a big part of the
PNC uh stratum and one of the principal
ways in which their politics then
manifests itself is through a politics
of consumerism which I had alluded to
earlier meaning buying up shizek books
and going to a trendy talk at an art
gallery on the you know Lower East Side
uh in New York City you know as opposed
to joining a workers organization or
getting involved in in some other way
and that consumerism
uh or that consumerist politics I think
is another big part of the problem in
addition to the fact that identity
politics plays such a central role in
the PMC stratum because identity
politics you know understood I'm
thinking here of the work of adolfree Jr
and others understood as a kind of uh
politics that evacuates class analysis
in favor of reified non-dielectical
identities that are then embraced
defended valorized fetishized and then
politics becomes a politics of
representation but a representation that
competes within the PMC strata for
elevating one's particular identity
right so if you're in institutions like
I am or you are familiar with the way in
which a lot of PMC institutions function
there is very clear and explicit
competition within this diversity
industry for who's going to be the next
spokesperson who's going to have their
identity category become an identity
category that gets jobs that gets um
valorized within that larger kind of
consumerist mentality or that
consumerist network of the PMC stratum
and so you know I haven't of course
answered the question in full other than
to say that I couldn't agree more that
it is a really important problem and
that we need to continue to collectively
develop analyzes of its formation and
its political consequences because it's
really uh I think plays an extremely
significant role as well in the policing
of hegemony
and the controlled counter hegemony to
use the term that you brought up earlier
which I think is really spot on
um and so it does play a very Central
ideological role
that's uh wonderfully said I had a no
deal I'm excited to hear that uh
Michelle's card is being printed uh in
English I think that his uh critique of
of 68 is something that is very
pertinent
um today
um let me roll into the next question
the last one
um what have the reactions to your
article been like
oh they've only been positive
as usual right right yeah well you know
that social media lends itself to sober
healthy exchanges in which people engage
fully with one's arguments and analyze
the evidence and it you know it's
basically like a science writ large uh
so no it uh the reactions you know
they've been buried I was surprised
actually that it blew up as much as it
did in part because it's quite a long
article and it does actually also engage
with some of the philosophic elements
which I thought was important because I
didn't want the cheap critique of oh he
doesn't know the Khan or he's never a
g-jack it's like give me a break I've
heard way too much of that guy you have
no idea like I was reading him before
you were born please get off Twitter and
like go do something else
um so that's one thing but there there
were some kind of you know negative
reactions but a lot of the negative
reactions you could just tell by the way
they were formulated that they didn't
actually read the article and so and
they ignored the 99 footnotes of
documentation so it's just kind of
disingenuous dismissal which of course
is very common on social media because
you're just looking for whatever hot
takes and things like that and I
actually like disagreement but I like it
when it helps the collective project of
intellectual elucidation growth and so
if people have disagreements with me
work through those footnotes uh analyze
all of the data that I've looked at
produce a better analysis and
explanation of all of that data
publish that humiliate me in the process
if you can
and I would be thrilled because the goal
is the scientific
analysis of society of history of the
world that we live in and the best
explanatory framework wins
as well as the most powerful explanatory
framework for actually contributing to
practical struggles right because of
course the purpose isn't only to
describe the world but to develop the
tools necessary to transform it I
haven't seen that forthcoming meaning
somebody who actually takes all the
evidence seriously and says well I ran
the same experiment and I came out with
these results and I have a better
explanatory model and It disproves Rock
Hill I would read it in a second and I
would read it with alacrity
um that said I also have had a lot of
positive feedback just from people who I
think felt empowered you know a lot of
comments like I always kind of thought
this guy was a charlatan and it's great
that somebody who has been trained in
this stuff
took the effort to go through and
demonstrate that
um or other people who have said yeah he
kind of smelled wrong you know and I
never really dug that deeply into his
books
um My Hope and you know I shouldn't look
on social media to find this hope
realized probably but my hope would be
that this would be a contribution to
this kind of you know there's a few
people who reached out to me that that
clearly are pushing in this direction
there's a large very Consolidated
community of the PMC stratum that we
were just talking about who worshiped
the kind of golden calves of the theory
industry and you cannot say anything
vaguely critical of adorno or horkheimer
or zizak or Foucault or the other people
I've criticized
because if you do you will be banished
they're not going to engage with your
argument they're going to slander you
they're going to banish you and that's
it
um that is a very negative response and
it is clearly one of Gatekeepers who are
fond of keeping the game going and they
do not want someone like me pointing out
the nature of this game
I would hope though and I certainly have
had some positive responses in this
regard that an article like this or some
of the other work that I would do would
help Empower other intellectuals and
activists who are oriented in the same
direction to continue to develop a
community of rigorous refreshing
engagements with Marxism and with a
critical analysis of the social to tarot
and so the most positive reactions
honestly have been you know this guy
named Carlos guerrito who reached out to
me and it's like hey could we interview
you on Midwestern marks or other people
like that who are part of communities of
scholarship but also communities of
activism that are really energized and
want to be part of you know this ongoing
Collective process of of elucidating the
world and that's invigorating right it's
not that exciting to me to like prove
that somebody's wrong who I mean I knew
Gtech was wrong when I was like you know
24 like this I've known that for a long
long time and it didn't even need to be
proven
that was much more interesting and
invigorating is it's very clear to me
that there is a very Insurgent
intellectual and political Community
within the world that I operate in that
is no longer simply gonna lay down and
take this and assume that whatever
the kind of rad lib Theory industry said
was hot and cool and right and sexy and
revolutionary is actually that and
that's exactly what we need we need a
lot more class Consciousness we need a
lot more awareness of what's going on
and when you do Empower ourselves
collectively to develop the type of
theory that the theory industry simply
hasn't given us
wonderfully said again
um so uh you've smashed quite a few
Idols now for co uh orchheimer adorno
shishak who else is going to get the
Rock Hill hammer
well this is part of a book project
and the project is focused on an
analysis of the global Theory industry
as a specific element within the
capitalist cultural apparatus
that itself is nested within the
superstructure of the capitalist system
and so the book project
outlines that kind of systemic framework
of analysis and a form of cultural and
intellectual critique
that is the kind of frame if you will
for the book but then within that there
are chapters some of which deal with uh
an expansive number of intellectuals
um in particular there's a chapter that
looks at the
um not the radical recuperators that
we're talking about but the Imperial
intellectuals the people that Hannah
Arendt and fukiyama and the huntingtons
and the people who are like national
state the National Security State
operatives like directly National
Security State operatives who pass
themselves off as intellectuals so
that's one element of it but another is
also a kind of institutional analysis of
a lot of the material forces that are
driving the theory industry and the
cultural uh apparatus in general so I
look very explicitly at the U.S national
security State I look at the British
National Security State I look at the
way in which the capitalist apparatus
and knowledge production functions
there's a lot on the foundations and how
they operate uh Ford and Carnegie and
rockefell and all of their involvement
in the intellectual World War
and then some of the later chapters do
look at the Frankfurt School Foucault um
there is a chapter on the philosophy of
difference that looks at uh derida's
involvement in anti-communist organizing
uh Duluth as well who of course claimed
that all revolutions fail and other such
things there's a section also on
um
well some some of that is a bit I don't
know exactly what form that's uh that's
going to take because there are other
individuals who kind of crop up in
various ways but what I want to really
be is an analysis of the consolidation
of the intellectual compatible left in
the post-world War II era and the impact
that has had intellectually but also of
course politically and practically and
so I mean the title of the book I think
says it clear it's the intellectual
World War meaning the war on the
intellectual World War on Marxism and
the attempt to de-platform it cancel it
discredit delegitimate it and so a big
part of the project also is marshaling
and putting forth the positive elements
from those Traditions so that people
don't just leave the book thinking oh
you know there's all this horrible stuff
and there's nothing to be done about it
no all the horrible stuff is just that's
like the Earth that you have to dig up
and excavate to get to the really good
stuff which has been hidden to a large
extent at least within the academy and
someone publication industry by the
various forces that I'm that I'm talking
about
excellent I I look forward to it
um
folks we have been speaking here with
Gabriel Rock Hill about his article
capitalism's Court Jester
which is linked to the description of
this live stream if you haven't read it
please go ahead and read it it's
wonderfully insightful but even just the
style of writing the images that you use
and there's a few times where you rhyme
I don't know if that was intentional but
when I read that I was like was that
Immortal critique a mortal technique
that just like went in there and and
inserted a few phrases but
um wonderful wonderful article and I
think a wonderful discussion uh you
greatly elaborated on on very important
things is there anything you would like
to plug before we go
um well there's a few projects that are
upcoming that uh people might be
interested in uh the critical theory
Workshop is an educational non-profit
that I run with Jennifer Ponce de Leon
we're doing a book launch for Derek
Ford's book with iskra that's coming up
soon I think even on a week or two check
out criticaltheoryworkshop.com for info
Jennifer Ponce de Leon and I are also
writing the introduction or we finish
the introduction to uh Dominique
lusordo's Western Marxism that's coming
out with 1804 books uh that's housed at
the people's Forum in New York and
that'll be out in the uh in the early
spring I hope and we'll do some book
launches and things like that and we
have our summer school that we do
through the critical theory Workshop
that is both in person in Paris but then
also online
um and we're really dedicated to develop
continuing to develop because we
actually already have a really nice
community of rigorous Scholars who are
dedicated to collectively understanding
the world and so um the doors open you
know and we're really kind of um excited
about continuing to build that community
and continuing to connect with uh our
comrades at Midwestern marks and other
organizations like this because we have
to do it together and we have to have a
lot of different sites of struggle a lot
of different forms of institution
building so those are just a few things
that I'll mention
great well um with that I guess we can
go thanks to everyone who watched and
thank you again Professor Rocco for
being here


## Keywords:
