---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8bYJof8l7FU
---

# Video
Gabriel Rockhill, "Radicalizing Critical Theory"
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8bYJof8l7FU)

## Transcript:
well in that around so I think what I
will do them at the time that we have is
take about 30 minutes to outline some of
the issues that I think are important in
the history of critical theory and
relieve them then to their kind of
contemporary conjuncture and then open
it up for a broad discussion about the
states of critical theory today and how
we might at once understand the history
of these traditions and possibilities or
reinventions of critical area and in
America juncture I should say that as I
mentioned in war this is absolutely a
work in progress and so I'm not going to
read a paper I'm going to talk you
through the argument so there are
certain things that interpolate you at
various points in time don't hesitate to
jump in and we can begin the
conversation earlier the pre circulated
paper that was available online by Max
Horkheimer I think is a helpful point of
departure for understanding at least the
traditional understanding of the history
of Frankfurt School critical theory
insofar as one of the central questions
for Horkheimer of paper that's published
in 1968 obviously a significant flagship
year is what can theory do or perhaps
better what does theory do and in many
ways the argument that Horkheimer
develops and that would be kind of
further developed by Adorno and others
within the critical theory tradition of
the Frankfurt School suggests that
theory at base can strive for or
potentially contribute to the
transformation of the present
socio-economic order through the
overcoming of exploitation and injustice
this is vocabulary for common he often
refers to it as the establishment of the
quote of a great kind of society with
self-aware mankind so there's a notion
of a kind of dialectical self-awareness
that intellectuals might be able to
bring to socio-economic struggles that
could
be conducive to various forms of
liberation Horkheimer also correlates
this too and makes it a team to a
Marxian style revolution I say Marxian
and not Marxist insofar as if you know
the work of Horkheimer and Adorno
obviously they're coming out of the
Marxist heritage one of the original
names but force for the Frankfurt
Institute was the Institute for Mac
seasons or the Marxism Institute they
decided that it might be a bit too
dogmatic or straightforward and instead
went for the Institute for Social
Research but it this example highlights
the centrality of Marxism but by no
means kind of traditional Marxism so
it's Marxian in the sense that it is
akin to certain elements coming out of
the Marxist parentage but wanting to
rework them in significant ways and as
all argue later on in quite significant
ways insofar as there's a lot of
distance taken from the revolutionary
dimensions to the Marxist heritage
already in work on Adorno and then
obviously in Hamas in the new hopper
Bosnians who continue that tradition
today but just to foreground the kind of
conceptual armature that's operative not
only in this essay but I think in many
ways the Essendon Horkheimer Road sums
up a lot of what the really critical
theory is trying to do there is an
attempt to overcome the limitations of
what's referred to as traditional theory
a traditional theory comes about with
descartes according to their
historiography which I personally find
highly problematic and we discussed that
in greater detail but traditional theory
presupposes a whole series of structural
opposition's and one way of
understanding the intellectual
intervention of early or first
generations critical theory is to try to
dialect a sighs those opposition's
subject and object are perhaps first and
foremost but also the opposition between
thought and being as well as that
between understanding
perception it's a subject object thought
being understanding perception more
generally if we use the traditional
gender oriented vocabulary it is man and
world its mind and external reality the
underlying assumption of traditional
theory then is that in eternal logos can
provide us with universal knowledge
concerning the external facts of the
world so that that binary operates in
such a way that an external world can be
perfectly captured by the mind or the
logos that maps that world and one of
the major gestures and this is not only
in a restricted critical area tradition
because they're drawing obviously on
Marx and other resources primarily from
German philosophy but elsewhere as well
is they say that well the subject of
knowledge is always already in an object
of the social world so they invert this
relationship instead of there being a
subject outside of the world that simply
perceives the world and ideally provides
the best possible map of that world
it's inserting the subject within the
world so that intellectual production
itself is understood as the result of
social processes instead of that of the
kind of individualist
invention of creative geniuses for
instance and if this dialectical logic
that allows them at least in principle
to overcome these opposition's of not
only subject and object but then also
thought and being in which thought is
not something that is just simply
abstract and disconnected from the real
material world but instead the plot of
that real material world and the same
goes for understand
and perception in which poor Connor has
excellent lawns on this the active
perception is itself an after judgment
the way we see the world is by carving
it up conceptually
taking a different reference that like
quite like that Thomas Kuhn Kuhn says
you never seen like hitting the retina
all that you see are objects concepts
that are already formatted in such a way
they see a window and you know a curtain
or something like this because there's a
conceptual process that is already
operative within perception itself
there'd be a lot to say about this
particularly relationship with
phenomenology tradition for those of you
familiar with it or coming out of it
because it's also a critique of certain
understandings of phenomenology meaning
that it's not just a subject who
perceives the world but the way we
perceive the world is always already
over determined by the way we're
socialized as beings within particular
worlds so if you perceive the world in
terms of their being black people and
white people for I should say the
critically the traditional critical
theorists weren't great on the present
race but if we extrapolate from this
it's that there is not the nature to
race two races they're not given natural
facts instead they're constituted
elements of the sensorium or of
particular social modes of perception so
we're trained to see white and black for
instance but also aerial other skin
colors or for that matter genders you
can extrapolate this in various ways and
so the argument would be that the way we
perceive the world is already a result
of our processes of socialization
there's no pure perception
in this sense then the critical
theoretical term away from traditional
theory is ultimately an attack on the
auto logic and epistemological binaries
separating mind and work but this is one
way of understanding the core conceptual
in relationship to this I think that we
can point to this tradition as having
been extremely important for rethinking
intellectual practice itself as part of
a broader and deeper social world and
also refashioning structural binaries
like the ones I just mentioned in order
to open up not only different venues for
thought but potentially different
avenues for action and practice and
there's also an insistence in this
tradition of inscribing all of these
elements within history so that there's
a historical dynamic and not just a
social dynamic these things have changed
over time and will continue to change
over time
hence the relationship to a particular
marketing heritage which if in Marx's
writings in the manner of the makers of
history but not in circumstances of
their own choosing
what that means is that the ways in
which we perceive think and act in the
world if they've been produced by social
world they can potentially be reproduced
or reconfigured so that there's no given
absolutes that would precondition the
way
which we should perceive thing or act
but instead there's the potential for a
reconfiguration of the ways in which
we've been fashioned in this regard one
of the core strategies of critical
theory in this traditional sense then is
that a self-awareness that is part of a
reflexive strategy that instead of
simply presuming that one's thoughts
emerge as if from a zero point of
creativity when is always reflecting on
the ways in which one's thoughts actions
and perceptions are formatted by broader
social in storable world in this regard
it strikes me that critical theory as
invested in self-aware reflexivity
invites and even encourages a kind of
critical term what I mean by that is
that if you take reflexivity and these
types of gestures reflexivity just in
the sense of you aspect the question of
the conditions of possibility of one's
knowledge perception cultural production
etc instead of just participating in
particular game or cultural production
knowledge production if that move is one
of the central strategies that would
seem that it would open space for and
even require a kind of critique of
critical reason meaning raising the
question of how this critical
theoretical tradition itself is part of
a larger social historical dynamic and
how we might want to understand the
history of that critical theoretical
trajectory in these broader terms
meaning a shift away from the way in
which a lot of intellectual or
philosophic history is often done and
that is you focus on
their ideas presuming that ideas emerged
from these atomistic sites of creativity
and instead think of it in terms of the
material socio-historical
institutionalized structures that
produce or favor particular ideas at
specific points in time now
one of the reasons that I think that
that is important is for all of the
significant both conceptual and
political work that the early critical
theorist did it's also not only arguable
that I think extremely important to
point out the ways in which they were
completely disconnected from a whole
series of larger global political and
intellectual struggles Edwards ie has
perhaps most poignant ly highlighted the
fact that the early Frankfurt School was
stunningly silent on racist theory and
that imperialist resistance and
oppositional practices to Empire here
he's thinking of Adorno and Horkheimer
and the kind of central core of the
proffered school you could not classify
within this mark Russa Angela Davis and
a different trajectory to critical
theory and one of the things that I'd
like to highlight is the ways in which
the very historiography
of critical theory itself is not over
over not only overladen with but over
determined by political states so the
traditional story of critical theory
that you get in a contemporary
University and
here because I was trained here and know
the institution rather well is that
there were three generations of the
Frankfurt School there been three
generations thus far Adorno and
Horkheimer as the kind of a nugget point
of the first generation which I'll
return to in a moment because marquita
is often held at arm's length the
justification for that is well he was
teaching in California and they went
back to Frankfurt after the war and
things like this but I think that
there's a much deeper reason for that
isn't that is the radical difference in
their politics but the second generation
which already began with four Kaymer and
Adorno is that Apollo's and in the case
of harbor moths
you have Hamas his politics were
actually left of Adorno and Horkheimer
in the early years and that's very
important to note during the student
movement in 1960s Horkheimer was much
closer to I'm sorry how the mouse was
much closer to and in support of the
sixty-eight student which overlapped
with the student here and elsewhere in
the world and that was a movement
against capitalism and the ways in which
institutions of higher learning simply
fear Matic subjects for capitalism
that's their role and so the attack on
the university was an attack on the
vocational ization of education that
produces college for capitalist
machinery how the mosque
early on was actually quite close to in
supportive of the students in very early
parts of the movement but then quite
famously accused them of being leftist
fascists and this term stuff of left
fascism but giorno supported and
defended it the idea being that they
used the tactics of fascists because of
direct action and university occupation
Hamas though as I'm sure you all know in
his political trajectory moved very far
away from the Oerlikon Marxian lineage
and instead became an apologist for
for most of constitutional liberal
modern Western nation states and
inscribes a narrative of water modern
Western nation states within a kind of
very traditional Eurocentric paradigm
modernity and the Enlightenment bringing
reason allowing human beings to emerge
from the darkness and now we need to
spread this Enlightenment reason through
communicative action around the world if
you know anything about the history of
the Enlightenment it's the history of
colonialism imperialism mass genocide
patriarchy in on and on and on so that
image of the Enlightenment I could say a
lot more about this but is not simply a
straw person it is a complete myth but
it's used then to marshal a certain
understanding of reason and reformism as
a way of revamping the critical
theoretical tradition outside of its
Marxian heritage and so habermas in many
ways is the linchpin for the trajectory
of contemporary critical theory because
with referred to as its third generation
Nancy Fraser
Shailja been the axial Hana Rainer force
and a number of others home rose etc is
that they're all know how Moslems they
have some within very restricted
confines critiques upon us but for the
most part they continue the lineage that
identifies the critical theoretical
project with a reformist modality of
liberalism over and against a Marxian
heritage that they explicitly and
regularly identify as having been
exhausted the exhaustion of utopian
and then critique in the third
generation of critical theory largely
this is coming out of our mouths follows
the trajectory of shifting from what
auntie Fraser is famously called the
politics of redistribution class
politics followers to a politics of
recognition in which politics is about
the recognition of minority identities
within the structures of governance of
contemporary liberalism and the
Democratic state the Democratic I put in
enormous care cloaks and that this is
what the critical theoretical project
amounts to it is now I should say of
course particularly in the case of Nancy
Fraser she wants to hold on to a
particular type of politics of
redistribution but she hasn't the most
recent debate with Louboutins be
defended markets and capitalism as being
a necessary attribute of any social work
so it's it's very very far from resolute
Marxist critique of the habit it's not
anti-capitalist in any resolute sense of
the term like others are resolutely into
cabinets now one of the reasons that I
highlight that initely is important is
because this streamline trajectory from
Adorno and Horkheimer through hopper
moths to the third generation of
critical theory is one of a beer to the
right in the sense that it's a bear away
from what's traditionally been defined
as the left and the left is
anti-capitalist and that's how it
emerged in many ways at least in the
19th century laughs and that what falls
out of this is not only mark Ruza who
became the spokesperson for the new left
in many ways even though he rejected
that terminology in that category
because he was resolute man
resolutely anti-imperialist and he has a
you know 800 page FBI file to prove they
were right fire from the University
you've contracted every move because of
his prominence for black radical
movement for the Panthers for the for
the anti-imperialist movement anti-war
movement etc etc out of them they need
you have of course people like Angela
Davis and others and that has been
completely severed mer Cruz is already
liminal because he's too vulgar and
unsophisticated but then the heritage of
Merck uz and critic Theory has been
completely severed and I would encourage
you I mean I'm kind of giving a summary
here but I could go through if you
wanted the kind more boring academic
version of this I can go through all the
footnotes that I have all these two
individual authors and the arguments of
one off but just one example of this is
order fatigue of house who has written
the definitive history it's what 78 page
history the Frankfurt School and in
subtitle is its history theories and
political significance doesn't make a
single mention of Angela Davis and then
Martin Jay who has the most well-known
look in Anglophone circles for on the
history of the Frankfurt School creo
theory makes one reference which is
extremely talented to a black woman
who's an outspoken communist and the
reference is this quote mark uses
controversial former student and
communist party leader so there's a very
clear historiographical delimitation
between what counts intellectual in his
critical theory and what has largely
been diligent mated because it's too far
left in short to be kept within that
particular tradition and I think this is
important because the traditions and
history
that we inherit we often don't see the
politics that is described within them
precisely because they're naturalized
overcome and that when one does call out
the particular politics of you know
individual agents or collectives and
groups like this there's often a concern
within instrumentalizing intellectual as
if you have autonomous intellectual work
which would just be a critical theory or
a philosophical or whatnot and then it's
instrumentalization which would be
raising the question about what were
their politics or whatever they're doing
which of course is dependent upon the
liberal ideology of the separation of
speakers you have the intellectual realm
which is where the university works and
then you have a political realm of the
street which is somehow separate or
governmental bodies and these are two
distinct things they think what we need
to understand or anything anyone who's
serious about understanding intellectual
production has to recognize that
intellectual production takes place in
material conditions and an institutional
network of papper relations that is such
that politics is always already present
it's just that most of the politics of
contemporary institutions is invisible
because it's so consensual and it's that
type of politics that washes over
oneself like the kind of ideological
tidal wave because it doesn't identifies
itself as political right in fact what
it does is that in advise itself as
politically neutral and scientific and
there are a million excellent examples
of this is overlaps with the
contemporary that book that I'm
currently working on one great example
of it
is the reputation of someone with he
appalled you the French sociologist
within the ego says this institution
Campbell will do studied under and was
the assistant to a mountain who's born
the same year is it all stop and they
were friends growing up and then quite
famously stock remained a resolute that
after the war towards the end of the
Second World War and moving forward
first a resident Marxist and a resolute
leftist around right complicated
relationship to the Commons party etc
but a residue outspoken leftist going
and meeting a Castro on the world
political scene Ali was having breakfast
with Henry Kissinger and other members
of the Imperial American elite received
direct funding from the American
corporate democracy in order to publish
and work with the Congress for cultural
freedom which was discovered in 1966 as
a CIA front organization that ran a
whole series of journals where about
mean published his work has work
translated into Japanese and other
languages in fact Japanese translation
but the opium of intellectuals his
famous critique of Marxism was paid for
by the CIA he has it as assistant Cal
Jun who very early on was not involved
in the 68 movement his politics were
much closer to the positivistic
scientistic orientation of Allen and he
knew that he could get funding for doing
social scientific work that was
anti-marxist anti-marxist I should say I
mean Bulger was a complicated figure
it's drifting away from a clear class
determinism where class becomes one
factor but
it was in a larger network with social
determinants if you will and Waldo went
in the 1990s he became then more
radicalized which meant defending the
welfare state against neoliberal ization
one of the resume critiques of this
institution because I was studying with
ward using sociologists here at that
point in time was it he lost his sign to
the greater use in the streets and he
was defending political causes and so
one of the things I think that's very
important to recognize is that it's not
that politics is something you've raised
intellectual endeavors it's that we're
always already instrumentalized
as intellectuals within a political
system of knowledge production and the
real question is what do you do with
them
do you ignore it and just become a
vehicle for the purport of the neutral
political framework that is generating
your doing or do you try to come to
terms with it push back against it find
leverage and racing points in order to
to fight against it and this brings us
back to Martha Horkheimer and Adorno
because one of the major dividing lines
between them is right around the
anti-imperialist 68 and broader than 68
68 is a kind of tournament for 60s and
70s anti global anti imperialist strokes
and more cruz' align himself very
clearly in favor of those types of
imperial struggles where as Adorno and
Horkheimer criticized him resolutely in
their correspondence but nor no has this
fantastic quote that I'll read this is
in response to he's defending habermas
his claim that the student activists
were less fascists and this is in part
I'm sure that
the famous case of Adorno calling the
police on the students when they did not
be patient and didn't allow paparazzi or
another professor to leave he called the
suit but that was only one case among
many many others if you actually look at
Horkheimer and Adorno whose political
positions
Horkheimer defended the war in Vietnam
in order to keep out the Chinese threat
he did that in a lecture that was given
at the america house' which were
cultural institutes that were set up by
the american imperial machine in order
to own western germany in its fight
against communism in the post-war era
but during apartheid a both defended the
British and French invasion of Egypt
when in 1956 when Israel invaded C not
right so they at times
normal is very clear about being
politically hands-off but when it comes
to things like that they were very clear
about their political positions
what Adorno says is corresponds with
Mark Cuza is quote to put it bluntly I
think that you are dead deluding
yourself and being unable to go on
without participating in the student
stunts because of what is occurring in
Vietnam or be awkward you object to
European power masses expression left
fascism calling it a contradictory and
ejector or contradiction in terms but
you are a dialectician argue and if such
contradictions did not exist might not a
movement by the force of its imminent
antinomies transform itself into its
opposite so it's using the logic of
dialectics in order to do a Jetta made
the student movement and maintain the
position of a kind of what was already
in Adorno and Horkheimer a reformist
defense of the the German Republic the
West Germany Adorno was also very
critical the students for referring to
West Germany as fascist when it was an
elected democracy but we know very
clearly from the historical record all
of the major parties include
the CDU which was they were propped up
by and funded by the Americans they
received direct cash payments from the
CIA CIA's admittance
so the idea that somehow this was just a
democratically elected government is is
historical is it's just not animal right
and so in that way what the reason that
I point this out is because if we
understand political positions is not
just those choosing among the kind of
given panoply but instead understanding
how the material conditions that within
which one operates already over
determines the political nature of what
one is doing
it changes the nature of political games
because it requires that will radically
self-reflexive awareness of what are the
material conditions that are producing
you as an intellectual subject and
favoring certain types of intellectual
world and creating the conditions by
which other types of intellectual work
are rendered impossible what this means
then is that one of the things I'm
interested in this long arc of the
history of critical theory is the taming
of the shrew it's actually a fascinating
view into the history of the Western
intelligence he over the last hundred
emus because the critical theory
tradition began the interwar period a
hundred years ago right at the you know
it was after the Russian Revolution and
in the interwar period was probably the
most globally developed leftist moment
in the one
you have the united front you have the
Popular Front you have everything's
going on around world but in the case of
if we even if we just folks could focus
on Europe there's a broad consensus
coming out of the Great Depression and
with the Russian Revolution haven't
happened that capitalism other
destructive force in world and we needed
to dismantle there were different
solutions for how to dismantle it but
what is fascinating
given that 100-year history is that the
political team trajectory from one of
the most revenue we left this moment in
history to our concern contemporary
conjuncture in which in many ways one
could argue that the neoliberal hegemony
has destroyed a lot of the material
conditions for a kind of anti-capitalist
intellectual and cultural production is
that the intellectual traditions have
followed that literature right so that
the shift from a Marx in heritage to a
reformist apology for multicultural
liberalism I don't think can simply be
tied on to individual choices by
particular intellectuals or by a kind of
progress narrative of oh these people a
long time ago didn't think about race
and and gender and they were naive about
these things and now we know about them
and so that we can kind of the the
progress narrative of the the march of
democratic history in which it can be
more and more inclusive but if you think
that then you should revisit material
history and Clara Zetkin conversations
with Lenin the back
that revolution was according to all
major historians of the Russian
Revolution the most feminists social
revolution to date so the idea that
somehow these Kirk you know contemporary
issues is is is misguided and I say that
because then what it would invite us to
do is to think about intellectual
production in this broader social
historical and institutional sense and
take distance from the ways in which
were then just produced as kind of
individuals encouraged to think work in
particular in particular weddings now
they have a lot of notes on the kind of
details of you know how this conversion
mechanism operates meaning conversion
from a Marxian inspired critical theory
that's trying to situate subjects within
history to a more reformist liberal
model in which one becomes simply I mean
in many ways it has been an out there in
the sense that critical theory is now
traditional it's become a tradition that
is inscribed within institutions of
higher education in order to promote the
idea that the only political and
intellectual culturally viable solution
is liberalism then reforms itself by
opening up to broader forms of
representation the attack on capitalism
is not part of that what this I think
trajectory then suggests and I've mainly
focused quite obviously on the negative
critique at this point in time is that
the critique of critical theory I think
that also requires and necessitates a
radicalization of people and I'm not
missing much about this because I have
my eye on a time and I want to kind of
open it up but I'll say a few things the
reason I decided to focus on the
to make sure everybody is aware of some
of these issues and hopefully generate
some powerful discussion but also
because the things I'm going to say just
briefly about what I understand as
radical theory will hopefully then play
themselves out in the coming weeks
meaning that we'll have plenty of
examples and instances of marshaling
strategies that are an attempt to
radicalize critical theory beyond its
dormant neoliberal apologies for the
contemporary status quo or minor
iterations thereof meaning that if any
critical theorist of this school was in
the room today is about many many
arguments with them they take no no no
we're against the system for these
reasons but at the end of the day of you
push them they're not against the state
apparatus in the way in which it
functions in direct complicity with the
imperatives of global capitalism meaning
global periods right meaning the
destruction of the biosphere and like to
know so in this regard then the
radicalization of critical theory as I
understand it would begin this is this
is part of what I'm highlighting here
with rethinking this benyamin Ian
gesture which is such a wonderful quote
resistant perhaps revolution is about
pulling important spray and in
relationship to the contemporary out
payment of traditional critical theory
that's what our if we want to radicalize
critical theory we need to pull the
emergency revolutionary brake on the
trajectory that has left aside Angela
Davis and is more resolute form of
theoretical practice and do it in such a
way that there is that we develop space
for not only different types of
intellectual practice but then also
different modes of discourse in
different ways of relating intellectual
work to practically not that these are
ultimately distinct in any rigorous
sense of the term meaning that if we
understand the process that I've
highlighted at being one is a political
intellectual realignment from say take
1919 or 1918 to 2018 what we've seen as
a political intellectual realignment and
that is a redefinition of politics in
terms of the hard left being lobbed off
at least by consensual politics in the
mass media and the left now being
limited when liberalism is done with it
is never left liberalism in favor of
state and capitalism and it is the
intellectual project that brought us
that wonders is global colonialism
imperialism and these more
contradictions if you know the work of
dominica loose order on the account
history of liberalism these were
inscribed within the project itself the
major thinkers of liberalism all of the
major things of empirical John Locke
wrote it in his hand that Constitution
is to South Carolina in which slavery is
inscribed within that project itself is
not the left as it was understood
traditionally in the 19th century right
so if there's been a historical
realignment I would say that one of the
aspects of radicalizing critical theory
is it once understanding that project of
realignment and trying to develop as
much as possible leverage points
Catholic institutions and counter
practices for reconfiguring that
realignment so that there can actually
be institutional space and support for
the type of resolute anti-capitalist
anti imperialist
anti colonial work that has been cut off
from this particular tradition and I
think there's a lot of different ways
of doing that one is the central
importance of understanding how
intellectual production operates that's
why I've highlighted a lot of what we've
talked about thus far and thinking about
intellectual production in terms of in
many ways a choice between being
instrumentalized intellectual which we
all are as long as you're trained in any
way shape or form it can just be about a
society even not in training institute
you're an instrumental as an
intellectual versus something like
interventions intellectual and an
interventionist intellectual who
wouldn't understand and come to terms
with the formatting that produces
particular modes of intellectual
subjectivity but then also attempt to
reconfigure how those modes of
intellectual work are produced meaning
they would attempt to intervene within
the force field at reactions so that the
gesture of intellectual world is not
simply describing or diagnosing or for
that matter discursive internet but
actually materially and collectively
attempting to seize the intellectual
maintenance of production circulation
and reception because that's what the
corporate powers now generally home
and so in interventionist the project of
being an interventionist intellect was
not an individual project
it's not a purely dispersive project it
is one of trying to harness one's own
intellectual and cultural power in order
to collectively work with others in
order to establish alternative
communities new institutions that begin
to push back as much as possible and
create space for and leverage points and
racing points for a different mode
the intellectual production circulation
intersection and I think that that type
of project in many ways in spite about
all of the critical things that have
said safe ways with this is the last
thing I'll say will kind of open up here
with some of the things that the early
Frankfurt School was attempting to do
they were bringing together
intellectuals from a number of different
disciplines traditions cultural
Heritage's in order to do collective
work to develop an understanding of
contemporary in that time social society
in its totality all of its different
dimensions but not simply for the
reasons of diagnosis a doctor who would
simply give you a diagnosis and just be
like him you know you're really sick and
you probably have died is it as helpful
as a doctor who would say we really say
I'm probably gonna die at some point you
will die at some point but here are some
things that might allow you to prolong
that process or change that process in
various ways and so I think that that
project of the early critical theory was
a very important moment historically for
attempting to do some of these things
and so there are other reform platforms
that we can latch on to the Black
Panthers come to mind there are Indian
movement there are a lot of other
examples but given the credibility of
critical theory within the contemporary
Academy it's also a kind of easy
reference point that is legible to those
who work within the Academy so I think
I'll stop there questions comments
criticisms rebuttals frustrations or
really trendy you know attempts
fun fact which you mentioned Clara
Zetkin
and it's another really cool thing that
you did was during the Scottsboro Boys
trial she liked for Europe and gave
speeches all over the place like to
raise support maybe everybody just say
their name first name first that we can
also measure as ourselves oh yeah you
are give it back neoliberalism has
eroded
in our modern moment and yet I think
it's and then later on the collection is
mentioned that sort of a hard left has
been pushed out of the to mainstream
political spectrum such that we have
liberalism asking them to left and the
right being something else now I think
that's a particularly interesting
statement to make now given that
formerly particularly in the United
States the right wing would have been
liberal right they George HW Bush was
classically liberal or but Bush the
American event of the Reagan George W
Bush right and even hearing it and then
on the right and the current moment you
have the emergence of fascism right even
in the United States and so I find that
there are elements to and this is mr.
Daponte I remember their elders two of
them that are in some ways responding to
popular discontent in ways in which the
hard left also attempt to respond
felt a very short way of any month would
be that given that to some degree the
policy prescriptions of a Bernie Sanders
and Donald Trump in the United States or
even you know loving the bed and put on
to Dunleavy ducktail right we might be
at this moment being a populist
resurgence that actually could create
conditions for reclaiming the intouch I
thought for instance that you know the
first started the first part of the
Mortimer
and was meant to dealt with a
proposition in fact there might be level
and thing the building blocks of
tinytest theory I think at least
community and it is that you can vary
Cleveland I in a large open up a house
search for Alex I think you clearly need
a rejection of sort of facts and
hegemonic knowledge authority Authority
realization knowledge production and I
think I think at the moment I went to
prison and began to reject Authority
knowledge and then Laura did
authoritative lip-reading factoid one
over the face I see yeah I I would say a
few things one is that my understanding
of the current conjuncture is rooted in
a kind of deeply historical account of
the evolution of liberalism
and the emergence of fascism and so by
liberalism I don't mean liberal as an
ideology I mean the mode of political
governance based on the idea that you
would establish a quote-unquote neutral
state apparatus that would be the
guarantor for a set of inheritable
rights of individuals and it would also
protect those rights through a monopoly
on violence in that sense then political
liberalism is the system within which
you have in the United States liberals
conservatives fascists etc there are
certain extreme it depends on the type
of fascism that we're talking about so I
can just leave that aside but this
system as it operates at quote-unquote
constitutional law which is not a
democracy the United States has not
found it as a democracy
it was never changed into a democracy
the entire material institutional and
discursive history of the United States
crystal Cleveland what isn't clear is
the ideological obfuscation that began
in 1830 and continue today and that is
that the founding fathers showed up a
democracy there were hostile to
democracy they said it repeatedly it was
a form of mob rule giving power the
uneducated members of the population
meaning in that sense then liberalism
has set up is a form of the rule
it's in Oliver where you have those who
have
the power meaning the leisure time
usually to be educated to rule over all
others and liberalism has of course
historically emerged hand-in-hand with
the the you know these are slow
processes and they emerge metastatic Lee
but with cabinets and so in that regard
I would say that the current conjuncture
needs to be understood in that broad
history of political liberalism and what
we do have is with referred to as
discount resurgence of fascism I don't
particularly the language of resurgence
just insofar as fascism historically of
course emerging into war period as a way
of governing a body politic under threat
of anti capitalism that's how it was
developed in Italy with black shirts is
that there were workers organizing
unions resolute Marxist the possible
seizure of state power in the wake of
the Russian Revolution what'd he do you
get the corporate elite to mobilize the
populace in order to have them come in
and break up strikes eat people up
etcetera you see this I mean this is
what happened in it happens in France
with the occupations that the fascists
who are brought in to do the dirty work
of the kind of corporate elite and that
mode of governance is I mean it's
historically needed in the sense the
term fascism emerge of that but as it
may see said famously pointed out said
that well you know the world didn't wait
for European fascism this mode of
governance has been the mode of colonial
governance from the beginning of
colonialism and what it is is that you
usually depends on the particular form
but usually you have a corporate elite
that hires some poor people to kill some
other poor people poor it might be a
relative term you know might be
middle-class cops or whatnot but in any
case that's the structural power
relation and the question of populism I
think we have to be very very careful in
this
because it's often segways with a
certain myth surrounding administered
democracies administer democracies are
not popular rule what we have in the
contemporary world is a kind of 62nd
democracy at best in which you know as
Mark said once every four five years you
have the right to go to the urns for 60
seconds then select the member of the
oppressed class who's going to oppress
him for the next four or five years and
that's how the system that's how the
system operates and the populist aspect
I often find is trying to blame fascist
style leaders on the working class if
you look at the Trump phenomenon for
instance he was pulling a zilch in the
primaries the entire primary system is
set up so that you can have these type
of phenomena emerge he was receiving I
don't have the stats in mind but I've
written on this it was what about only
10 percent of registered Republicans
were going to voting in the primaries of
which only about 3% were voting for
Trump and many of the primaries so this
is like a the aspect of a speck of a
speck of dust when it comes to the
population what produced the Trump
phenomenon well
the corporate mass media complex and all
of the mechanisms that go into that like
so many other fans of quote/unquote
populism have developed at a moment at
which it is extremely conducive
particular because you do have a harder
left push back now than you did when for
instance in the 1990s when I was in
college or school and so you and also
you know neoliberal capitalism
running out of literally running out of
oxygen right because of all the
pollution and so on it heals what does
it do well there's a need for these
types of draconian authoritarian moves
in leadership because fascism and
liberalism is I want to understand there
modes of governance liberalism is the
mode of government governance for the
placated members of the middle and upper
classes or the aspire import classes who
want to believe in the American Dream
fascism is the ongoing and constant mode
of governance for poor folk around the
world and for those who push back
against capital and if you don't know
that you can find it out very quickly by
pushing back hard against capitalism and
finding out what happens and so I
actually think that will be the way you
have to understand the history of live I
started to so long but I'm actually
writing a paper on liberalism and
fascism can't be understood as opposites
this is the myth that was produced
coming out of the Second World War right
the people who fought the fascists in
Europe were the Communists and the
anarchists and those who were against
corporate style fascist capitals that's
just a historical fact the United States
was not in support Franco that didn't
get in that they could have been against
Hitler earlier they were not they could
have been against Mussolini earlier they
were not they were kind of putting into
the world and then they generated this
myth of liberalism in the last bulwark
against fascism and fascism is linked
under the ideological concept of
totalitarianism with communism they're
the same thing they're both I think that
against this ideological formatting what
we need to understand is liberalism and
fascism or two modes of governance that
function in complicity with one another
but that are constantly trying to
convince the general population that
they're different because the way they
operate is that liberalism is the good
cop that's going to tell you you have
rights I'm going to protect you the
state is here for you
etc fascism is the bad cop don't follow
the good cop they're gonna bring the bad
cop in to beat you up thirty in jail etc
and that they operate not as polar
opposites but as a form of complicity
for governing under administer
offices yeah of course sorry that was so
long time the motive covered the
apparatus that is liberalism has also
developed to self subscribing to the
degree that subscribe to the degree that
described themselves as not a
and well that's how they were there's a
pretense itself of course but because
what it does is it's into form of
theodicy of sorts which is very powerful
because what it does is it says that the
idea of an all inclusive democracy in
which everyone has rights is so powerful
that regardless of what actually happens
in the real world in which people don't
have rights there is mass incarceration
mass poverty etc these are all just
minor agencies in this teleological
progress narrative leading to the
possible Halcyon idea of the democracy
economy right and that's precisely one
of the ways in which liberal ideology
keeps people ensnared
within it because if you look at the
material history of ableism there is no
I think defensible argument from
somebody who knows the corpus and knows
material history that can be made that
there has been progress in that way the
rights given to that one root they can
weigh from another or often with for
instance the voting rights for African
Americans is a great example because it
was it was a political ploy right on the
part of the party structure it's the
same with with a lot of the
gerrymandering that goes on on other
rights etc and so the that narrative I
think we need to always compare to the
opposite narrative and that is that the
standard mode of analysis of Marxism
today is that well it was good in theory
but it failed - that is the best that
you can possibly get right but notice
the opposite relationship between theory
and practice here in the case of Marxism
it's that the practice failed therefore
the idea forever collapses from the
possibility in the case of liberalism
it's that well the practice might be
kind of bad that the idea shines it's
bright life eternal for all time so the
very relationship between theory and
practice is inverted which reveals as
well
Allah Marx and Engels famous analysis of
the camera obscura of ideology that the
world is upside down from these two
vantage points if we want to take
liberalism seriously which I think we
should do let's analyze its material
history and look at what it's actually
done in the world and continues to do
and then we can bracket this whole
nonsense discussion about an idea of
something to come that well you know
yeah I like that you have this great
line about it to critique of dairy does
the nation of democracy economies like
well it's always too common won't you
come back and tell me about and it shows
up because in the meantime I've got work
to do I mean obviously it's that kind of
start on extinct man on his part but the
idea of some idea to come some very
metaphysical and very otherworldly
rather than actually looking at what it
does now liberalism using the stick on
itself so yeah well then the other thing
is if we go with that mr. geography
which I'm sympathetic to is that we also
have to acknowledge the could eat
failure of the left or exit the organism
not sure it is completely comparable to
sort of the left in as a body of ideas
or this course to organize properly and
we have well for one incompleteness
about what once ISM right it's coming
back now the one the us button very
slowly
we have failures of movements such as
occupy or others which failed mostly to
for instance issues of organization so
there is a complete failure of the
left-wing to seize the means that are
even viable dissimilar to somehow
subvert them in terms of intervention or
in terms of transformation which eats me
to for instance think you know who
doesn't use the words left' anymore he
stopped using it because you know he
doesn't think it's it's a paradigm then
we can look at forms of protest or from
support utilization in question whether
they are the relevant forms to really
transform society or to really bring
about a political change so the question
of the masses is like that here so can
be do we still have the same forms of
masses to organize as we had for
instance in a way can any describe for
others so there's a twice in some sense
the the well extension of liberalism as
the space in which politics takes place
today and then Bernie Sanders is in it
Trump is in it as well that's why I
might well against the
what ilysm as well as the failure of the
left in substance to organize against
this and here we can come back to Mars
in some sense that in his analysis of
capitalism of the modes of organization
somewhat so window for seizing an
opportunity to transform society and so
there's in some sense a recognition
involve not dependent recognition of on
it which well isn't in my opinion
complacent with colonialism because
they're sports
colonialism in which recognition takes
place but you can still kill the other
even if you perfectly recognizing on
paper so I think this history of
critical theory has to be enriched with
in some sense the Israel the failure of
the left and also the disappearance of
the memory of the left for instance in
the US in which well McCarthyism has
pretty much eradicated traces of radical
politics that were there in the twenties
yeah it's quite interesting I have an
approach to kind of political and
cultural history that always presupposes
multi attentional account of social
relations in the sense that in history
is not simply the relationship between
two or three forces but actually an
extremely dense force field of relations
then it's very difficult to say I would
be reticent maybe this is semantics but
for me it's an important point to say
something like the failure at the left
or the success of the right or I mean it
sounds like a kind of world historical
pronouncement the reason I say that is
that there is so much that has happened
over these last hundred two hundred
years that is quintessentially important
one person who makes this argument and
I'm not certain that I completely agree
with it but I think it's a fascinating
argument to think
and grapple with is cornelius
castoriadis and claims that the only way
that global capitalism survives because
global capitalism wants to it destroy
light and make surplus value and that's
its goal
it doesn't matter if there's a place
that what matters is surplus value and
so in principle it is a self-destructive
system that's how it operates and what
castro hadas claims is that the only
reason that capitalism has been able to
perpetuate itself is because there's a
constant constant push up at a million
different levels and so it's like a
death machine that is kept alive
precisely because those who is trying to
destroy are not allowing themselves to
be constantly destroyed and this can be
and many many different levels right at
the level of the individual alienated
labor or it can be at the level of
organize consider now that's a kind of i
think import for me the important
proviso but it doesn't mean that i
disagree with some of the larger issues
and that is the organizational question
i don't think we can simply say oh well
there were these you know we just to
resuscitate the first international and
you know be off to the races with the
proletariat etc i think that in one of
the reasons we have to understand that
material history and it's multi
attentional configuration is precisely
so that we can find resources across a
very broad spectrum radical
anti-colonial struggles anti-capitalist
feminism anti-catholic square boston is
a lot that is going on and i agree that
a lot of those memories have not only
been stole to fide but they've been
destroyed in the academy because it's
it's not only mccarthy it is the broader
intellectual apparatus is pitted against
having those memory
retain so that when you study political
science or political theory for instance
a lot of these things have made
secondary or luminal in various ways and
the intellectuals of these traditions
don't occupy positions of power like the
Black Panthers with what if they were
all you know given university positions
instead of that we have liberals
defending the politics of recognition
and tell it kind of progress narrative
so these are very very different
traditions and modes of relation so all
of that to say like what I really agree
with is the call to organizational
honest right that a big question today
is how can people organize they don't
think there's a simple answer to this I
don't think there's a single group
blueprint I think there's a lot of
fascinating things and I kind of wish
most people other than you are younger
than me here it'd be really exciting to
be in your generation is your generator
or the younger generation fifteen twenty
years and with me it's excited much more
exciting than the doldrums totally and
there's a lot going on today that is
producing possibilities that I think
need to be tapped into and these
organizational questions need to be
not the outcome of it but the fatigue
itself because we all think about
interventionist approaches to how we can
cope with but we always fall back into
theology more in the other foot which
you introduced right now the concept
that says that movements like lead yes
for example or occupy and that
reproducing baptism because their
demands and are being liberal in a sense
because the effort it can attain them
equality universalism which are concepts
that derived from being retracted so
this is where some fears become simple
as others become apologetic and
reformist because they don't see a way
out of the system because we're asking
for it company and it's what I think I'm
knocking or something that is produced
by the system itself so the demands
attend
so yeah

yeah I really like that I think that
this is like such a huge quite important
like one of the most important things to
think about and like people usually are
like a lot of times there's kind of this
distinctively like four minutes and
revolutionary movements and I think it's
very worth kind of not being so strict
about this and being concerned more with
like the way in which particular demands
are pursuit so I wanted to Ray has this
like a bunch of lectures about the kind
of like the difference between
globalization and organization how many
traits totally part Michael
we're like mobilization is sort of like
transient it's like temporarily founded
I guess you could say and so like for
instance with BDS or something like you
can organize a demonstration and
successfully get I don't know like for
instance like the Philadelphia Symphony
is like touring Israel right now and
there was like a lot of effort to like
conference and that's it so you can kind
of pursue these demands in a way so that
like the demands and themselves are like
the final end of what you're doing so
that's kind of like a mobilization and
it's like there's an institutional
memory involved like the individual
people involved might like learn
something about how to organize but
they're not necessarily like I guess so
this is when you haven't come to
organization this is like sort of the
diplom side say like I guess what I
would say is like you can you can pursue
these demands in a way that's more like
a mobilizing kind of like one type one
shot type thing but then on the other
hand like if you have sort of like an
organization and you're building your
organization through pursuing
that's kind of like a different thing
because like a revolutionary
organization for instance but insofar as
that remains revolutionary which it's
it's possible to like kind of pursue
these like short-term demands and still
like have a revolutionary horizon then
you're pursuing these demands like yes
because it's important to like when
whatever conception you're trying to win
but also because you're like sort of
building up this like it's like the
experience of your organization like
you're talking about kind of like this
this needed to have like institutional
memory like learning from our lessons
all different like sort of experience
that that were erased like during the
doldrums of the 90s but yeah just to say
like I think it's it's more that's like
a really important tactical question in
a way because like then the question
becomes like not so much about like what
demand can we formulate because like for
instance if you like get about to enjoy
like a working-class community and your
demand is like revolution right now
everybody's gonna be like that's like
doesn't really speak to like my
experience or whatever but if you're
like hey like I'm a member of this like
revolutionary organization and we're
like fighting to stop this like
addiction from happening in your country
then it's like sort of more than
instance to say like this is why we're
doing this we're not just about stopping
one addiction we're about like stopping
addictions like period and building a
society in which like every everyone has
probably like etc so yeah it's sort of
like I think worth trying to think about
it and like tactical or like strategic
terms and say like because in the end
like Alicia my experience like when
you're formulating a demand to pursue
like in a sort of like organized way
there's this the main concern for us has
always been like how can we come up with
something that's like big enough that
people will be like probably at one that
that's like inspiring to fight for this
but also not so big that it's like
people will feel like it's impossible
like you can never achieve it so they
don't want to like even begin organizing
in the first place do you want to speak
to this maybe I'll just take something
on quickly because I do think that
there's a very widespread discourse that
I generally tend to find amongst people
that I would vocalize academic Marxists
meaning and I would identify during
Horkheimer as academic Marxist both the
insistence on academic meaning that
there's a recognition of the arrival at
epistemological utopia that far
supersedes any political utopia meaning
that they always already know that
everything is destined to fail because
the tentacles of capitalism are ending
up everywhere and anything you do is
recuperated that often has more to say
about occupying a particular social
position of an all-knowing member of the
Academy who then is justified in not
doing anything because they already know
that the very act of doing anything will
be quote unquote recuperated so I find
that the position itself is dubious from
a political point of view because it
doesn't matter if you're an activist
like a militant activist or not you're a
political agent and in doing things with
your agents just by inhabiting the world
and so I think that one has to recognize
that I think it's also important that
recuperation is not a unit dimensional
phenomena if you think of a book like
Capitol it was written circulated people
made money off of that moment people
sell it on Amazon but that book is also
kind of bomb of sorts because it carries
with it an analysis of contemporary or
19th century capitalist power relations
in that sense then
let's not give the enemy too much power
and say oh they're everywhere we can't
do anything all that we can do is
endlessly describe how it can find we
are by the tentacles that encircle is
instead let's say that well we can use
the interest Isis within this system in
order to generate powerful movements
that are tactically anchored in various
ways but that have a strategic kind of
horizons something that is far beyond
they can have very world because it's
also I think an illusion to think that
you can have and this is also a somewhat
widespread position that you can have
that kind of purity of a political
experience that is completely
unadulterated or economic a paralysis
like to drink water or I have to get it
somewhere otherwise I would die and the
system that we work with in that water
emerges only from certain sources and so
in that sense it doesn't mean that all
the sudden all of my agency is
recuperated it means that I'm in Egypt
working within a large or constellation
of agencies and trying to find space
within that to do interesting things
and finally with more I couldn't agree
more that one of the most important
things is connecting with other agencies
because then you can mobilize in such a
way that you can produce space in which
it's not just you doing something but a
collective ethos a movement in
institutions and things like this that
actually have waited for supersedes the
aggregate of its component parts
that's why collectivities are so
interesting I think important if anybody
wants to jump in I don't want to
monopolize the conversation so on this
topic or something else
yes okay perfect
I think that we if we want to make this
kind of illumination of material
conditions of our intellectual
productions we have to work in
institutional communitarian level but
also in a personal level and I think
that phenomenology could give us lots of
sources for making that I think that
always when we relate to the world in a
traditional way and we make some
statements that we consider like
established we can put these statements
in take these statements in a critical
way and that is personal methods that is
what phenomenology give us the personal
attitudes of making critical or being
critical of our personal statements and
if we make that and for example you know
aesthetics can help us for that we can
also make some changes in
communitarians and in institutional
level and in an intellectual level but I
think that we have to work in all levels
and that's why that is the other subject
I think that phenomenology was big
source disturbing optical source for the
first generation but I think that is
also great source for the fourth
generation for example the concept of
ideology of Celica des and royal jelly

implies the concept of the ideology of
Paul Ricard that is a phenomenological
the concept of world disclosure of
completeness also has lots of
superstition of having tried again and I
think that cricket theory right now is a
story of seeing these primitive levels
of our configuration at least analogical
configuration and their relation the
social world but we can't make more of
this in order to develop another kind of
radical theory that's a good point I
mean the phenomenological tradition of
course very complex and there's a lot
that goes into it and so it would be
interesting to kind of take some of the
things that are put out here in the
broad like last hundred years of
critical theory related to the
phenomenological condition because of
course you have Nazi philosophers you
have the power to himself remember
they use which is important to remember
and so phenomenology is also just like
critical theory it's a discourse that
can lend itself to different types of
practices and I think that that is I
think it's just important that identify
where there's everyone's resources at
some very important resources but then
also that new tradition is necessarily
inoculated against politics at least in
in my case I find highly problematic I
can think of other examples like lemme
nasus stance on gender relations or long
arrow questions like this fine not only
highly problematic but like political
retrograde
but basically resources and any sort of
progress that we undergo governance
for the most part

I screwed the reason why we are living
in the Keynesian capitalism of Marx and
Engels is because workers agencies like
the National Maritime Center and the
children buried alive being bombed and
any and more recent movements like the
civil rights movement were massive
movements against state agents that
fought against it and often the other
coming was by means of these movements
taking liberal governance kicking and
screaming into any sort of harm progress
so the question isn't whether techniques
worse in the chair positions
I think that's a good point it's also I
mean it's interesting to see how the
rights discourse in the history of
liberalism operates because it often
also has functioned Jennifer Post anyone
who's going to come into the workshop
leaders that a lot of work on this in
order to siphon off in a radical parts
of social and cultural movements and I
mean you see this in the phenomenon of
how a movement relates to a
representational party I saw this would
put demos you saw in Greece who seen in
elsewhere the Bernie Sanders phenomenon
as well where some people at least will
want to correlate it to other a bunch of
people and occupy they were looking for
someone else and Sanders I felt that
role and that at times then you have the
liberal edifice which is political
reality right it's what is possible then
psyched ins off these more radical
movements often picking up on their
leadership integrating them in various
ways and then ideally from their point
of view destroying the movement itself
and in scribing that destruction of the
movement within other progress narrative
which is well there was this movement
that wanted these things and now look we
have them the civil rights movement has
it's called them that's an excellent
example there of given the standard
historiography it's about charismatic
church leaders from the South who
non-violently requested the state
apparatus give them rights well they had
rights you know rights to segregated
ingrates the segregation those were
those were pets that's how they operated
rights to separate but equal
institutions it's not as if the notion
of rights doesn't have content the thing
is that people forget that rights do
have content and that's and then what
you do is you cut that off from all of
the radical black organizing that was
going on and at that point in time it
was also anti-imperial anti-capitalist
etc in order to tell this very very
simple story
and look we succeeded because blacks can
vote now right and that's a lot of how
that narrative operates meanwhile mass
incarceration massive poverty the
generalization of African American
continues unabated which is an
interesting way but when you plug into
how the magician's of history operate
it's interesting to see kind of behind
the curtain and realize that oh all
those things that I heard about when I
was in school with you if you were
educating the United States about Martin
Luther King you know they cut out all of
his organizing against Vietnam and
poverty and and workers rights and and
the fact that the FBI was involved in
his assassination that usually don't
mention that because it's not a really
important fact you know in that regard I
think that those narratives they
function in many many different laws


as a materials sniffs you can kind of
locate at least in my head in the
nineteen fifties right relate to in the
routines actually in mid-century right
where you were by subscribing to sort of
you know the discipline of available of
discipline of the alarm talking the
discipline of all these things you will
attain this standard of living right
where in you'll be able to have sort of
2.5 kids policy SUV and I wonder if the
kind of Yardley and you react really
called kind of fatigue of the left is
because the lessons so any month and I
think and this is another how urgently
everybody but I think
you're elected that able to sell a
package that is quite independent and
appealing in the imagery of the
collective right though say if we go
back to the community target learning
there was a realization and I I often
wonder if the last so often fails
because it is forced into creating
either very ambiguous kind of long term
goals
I mean communism to come work in social
as you don't get to come and then and
then short term goals on the other they
were ministers all addictions where
we're going to try to read them
not over the furtherance liberalism
itself I think is able to liberal in the
pathetic the political economy and to
market system the global economy so
compellingly able to offer a tourism is
better luck there
yeah under I think that you're saying
that liberalism Auklet that the sort of
difference is this this offered package
I think that may be one way of thinking
about this this package that liberals
offers is is a particular relevance in a
position ality in a particular economy
so you can I don't know how to actually
don't spend a lot of time cashing out
the liberal package but what I'm
thinking about is its to Morris point
and one mobilization efforts a way that
we do think of mobilization efforts also
in terms of the weight of paying you
know any ones that I'm interested in pay
a critical attention to the position a
letís that they're mobilizing so a group
that's interested in calling out the
fictions is probably going to be
speaking to people who are or tenants
and it's asking tenants to mobilize kua
tenants using a particular structure in
which they're involved in which they're
participating and you know I mean this
is evident
yeah yeah so I mean this week's back to
your point as well about algae about you
know visions getting co-op
and how no sort of vision that you put
forward is not gonna be co-opted in its
capitalism it's like well what if you
know I mean in terms of rather student
unionizing like I you know we're we're
speaking to the university as people who
are paid as employees bad that's a
movement that operates the particular
student mobilizes a particular
imposition ality and also uses the
proper identifications like say a term a
term like intellectual community our
university community our academic
community and then points to members of
that community you know we had a student
who was shot by our university police
force a few weeks ago and was shot
because they were living far enough off
campus that they weren't considered a
part of the community so their mental
they were having about like a you know
that's all breakdown and so they're
they're psychotic episode was considered
not a community problem you know and I
think that there's a lot to be said in
terms you know it for you a critical
project in relation to mobilization and
also you know turning back in relation
to what what the happy game offered is
you know in just in terms of you know
one of the ways in which you or a mass
or a collective are being interpolated
or sort of call for and use by different
structures
thing is it pretty much open

the rubber devil's advocate responds
imagine thinking about these things I
thought about requester
and he talks about some variety in the
sense of Louisiana crime versus
prophetic run and he says that struggle
adjusted
oh is this tournament innovating and the
new liberal baptism is we're constantly
waiting for justice to happen it's not
that it's not tomorrow that they after
it's ever gonna happen now while the
prophetic time and so Messianic time has
the judeo-christian tradition prophetic
find that the Islamic tradition where
does this has to be taken in hand right
now and this struggle in reality is a
very relevant struggle I find because of
this more validation that you're talking
shop we start now but it will happen
later and this is also something that is
very productive because the state does
people we will give you reparations but
she will be speechless after and I think
that this look is very important
appearance apply years to write
and the semantics that we're talking
about
community

about how we're constantly in the realm
of ideology because of the words that we
use because of this the fact that
printing and reminiscent by paying money
in and stuff by being in Germany the
best times able to function from
answering what were you these are also
think about me to consider and think
about well I don't you had that's sorry
and place your in relation to
participate in particular yeah yeah
that's really interesting for sure to
think about um I just wanted to clarify
one thing about what I said earlier
which is this like mobilization
organization at least planning
commentary mobilization is like no no
bad and organization is like a good
thing where you know they can kiss it
that was like totally recon said it but
yeah yeah the Messianic kind of thing I
equally like what make that makes me
think about is like I can remember the
exact name for the concept but like
sometimes people think about like
revolutions as like more of an event
where it's like this okay now we're
pretty revolutionary time and then
there's a
and the sort of construction of like for
instance like a socialist state would be
like the post-revolutionary time the
like for instance in Cuba like they just
celebrated 60 years of their own so they
they consider the religion to be like
I'm going this way and like I like I
said I can't remember the exact name but
there's some kind of concept in like
kind of early 20th century socialist
thought where it's like this kind of
idea that like if in the moment like you
can be acting in like either a
revolutionary or like a contribution
anyway and that it's like not so much
this like huge climax of like everything
like coming to fruition the like that
like actually small things like maybe
the way that you like regard something
for not like you can kind of act like in
a more or less revolutionary way also
like in the house early exactly like

we think about small things and not big
things one of the great 1991 and well
was a huge great

they're talking about and he says that
the fact that's where our demands are so
small by the - quality and justice long
really important for our

just very quickly a lot of anarchist
temporalities based on the idea that the
revolution is now on to the teachers and
the presence so I actually read what you
were saying is being more in line with a
lot of anarchists and activism and
thought you don't have a Messianic
temporality you begin making the new
world in the shell of the old but you
want to it might be our last comment is
that when you think of great because it
just started raining I don't know
whether I should start this because I
feel like I'm opening a can of worms
because but that's what what I like I
like what you said about what capitalism
is it's a sound destructive system but
if we continuing we read them itself and
and we regroup and but but with all
ideas and like the comments we when you
talk you said I would say really
becoming them actually be worse than a
wheel fall of communism or is it if we
appear itself under the behind no
capitalism in the sense look at Russia
and the United States
but what is it hidden in there between
customers of and communism and cap and
on top imperialism so and on the other
point of I would like to take this in
when we talk about individuals we have
to solve that how individual is where we
are which is I felt in the school in the
purest its system
I felt as an official I am trapped in
this capital capital concept that is
everywhere we not talk about this money
we not pop up but you talk about the
concept of cooperation with a university
so we are talking like it I think a very
them are very can create example with
university professors they have a system
of point that it's very widespread so
you have if you have to run after it and
so it keeps you into the system you have
to write certain number of art both have
to be published and some places and then
in order to earn the points to make to
get the money to live yourself up the
ladder of university levels and how you
get your article published it's how you
need to come part of the heels of the
journals are the words that you publish
in order to be able to sell so the
calculus concept is so in that in so
many level that so many individuals
including
so in order to get a job how do you how
do you navigate this system
capitalist system in order to be a part
of it despite William outside of it
great point to conclude on that because
we have some wine I make sure they and I
think the wine will help us solve that
problem


## Keywords:
