---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1DVAFRuAtI
---

# Video
Game of Chicken / Hawk-Dove in Game Theory
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1DVAFRuAtI)

## Transcript:
what is the game of chicken in Game
Theory
because this is actually one of the
classic games that economists like to
teach not because the particular
scenario associated with it is super
common but rather Because the actual
setup of payoffs is something you see
all the time like especially in
situations where there's one aggressor
and one person who's
um sort of stuck submitting to that
aggressor like any scenario that has
that trait you should at least think
about does that scenario have a game of
chicken sort of Game Theory setup so let
me give you the story of the classic
version and sort of pull out what are
the traits of this game
um the story is that you have two
teenage boys who are driving at each
other at full speed and whoever swerves
first is a chicken like everybody's
gonna call them a chicken at school for
the rest of the year
um and whoever continues without
swerving
um they're sort of the winner their King
of the Hill whatever
and of course if neither of them swerve
they're going to crash into each other
and like get disabled it's not going to
be a good situation and if they both
swerve they're going to regret missing
out on the opportunity to be king of the
hill so here are the payoffs in the
table if they both stay
um they crash and therefore the payoff
for both is negative two if one of them
stays and the other swerves whoever
stayed gets to be king of the hill and
they have a payoff of one whereas the
one who swerved is called chicken all
year that's really embarrassing they get
a payoff of negative one and the reverse
is true over here you know whoever
swerves gets the gets called chicken and
then if both swerve there's just no
payoff nothing has changed nobody gets a
name that they're called at school
all right so if you solve this for Nash
equilibrium you're going to get two Nash
equilibria
with these two Nash equilibria there's
going to be a winner and a loser in each
box obviously the two Nash equilibria
are both situations where one person's
King of the Hill and the other is
chicken
um so there's a winner and a loser but
it's not that the loser wants to switch
because of course the person who swerved
they're being called chicken but at
least they didn't die or at least they
didn't crash so they don't look back on
the situation and say man I really wish
I would have stayed straight given that
the other person stayed straight
um they're like yeah I'm glad I did what
I did like that's what Nash equilibrium
is it's a no regrets equilibrium but I
don't like this particular outcome
so let me write down the traits of a
game of chicken because in some ways
there's some similarities with the
Battle of the Sexes game but there's
also some key differences
four basic traits here first there's two
Nash equilibrium obviously the second
one is that each player has a different
preferred Nash equilibrium which
essentially means there's a winner and a
loser at each Nash equilibrium
now
um these two top rules are not enough to
specify something as a game of chicken
because the Battle of the Sexes actually
is another Classic Game Theory game that
meets both of these top two criteria it
has two Nash equilibriums and both
players have a preferred different Nash
equilibrium so whenever you have these
two top characteristics there's an
interesting thing going on with
competition and cooperation because
there's a Cooperative element to this
but also a competitive one competing
between the two different Nash so how do
we know it's not a battle of the sexes
well we know that because with the game
of chicken one of the off equilibrium is
worse for both players and that's of
course the two cars crashing the other
off equilibrium is actually better for
the loser of the game of chicken like
they'd much rather have the zero than
the negative one it's just they can't
change that with their behavior the
other player would have to change their
behavior to achieve this one so um yeah
that's these last two criteria they're
they're about the traits of the off
equilibria and of course off equilibria
can make a difference when we're talking
about mixed strategies where you're
mixing back and forth between the
different strategies so that really does
matter the off equilibrium sometimes now
this is also referred to as the hawk
Dove game and that's because biologists
use this when they're modeling the
behavior of different animals and how
that behavior evolves over time
and you can also model it in human
scenarios where there's a hawk someone
who's a little bit aggressive and is
going to come in and be the aggressor
and a dove which is someone who is
relenting to the aggressor so any
situation that has that characteristic
might be a situation you can map onto
this and of course we get that situation
with animals where some animals are
aggressors some animals are you know lay
down and let the aggressor have their
way and people of course and Nations
that scenario happens all the time
as you might expect the hawk scenario is
going to be associated with the stay
strategy the aggressive strategy there
and the dove scenario is associated with
the swerve or the chicken scenario and
of course if both players are hawks like
let's say this is two Nations and they
both go to war they're going to lose a
lot of Army and lives and money and
people through that war
um so that's of course the worst
scenario on the board if one of them is
a hawk one of them is kind of aggressive
and the other lays down and takes it
then the aggressor whoever chose the
hawk strategy gets a positive benefit
from that the the party that lays down
loses but maybe they don't lose as much
as they would if they went to war it's
just now they they have to lay down and
take it for a while
if both of them are doves there's no
change nobody benefits from being the
aggressor as the powerful one and nobody
is harmed by being the submissive one
and of course the scenario up here is
flipped from this one so the scenario
Maps really well onto a lot of
situations that are strategic in how
aggressive to be and that's the game of
chicken


## Keywords:
