---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iVh-5y6V2iE
---

# Video
Gerald Horne - Around The Horne! Student Uprising; Brown Decision; So. Africa, Niger, New Caledonia
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iVh-5y6V2iE)

## Transcript:

you're now watching Around the Horn The
Weekly internationalist News update with
author and historian Gerald
horn okay today is May 15 2024 welcome
everyone to the weekly series entitled
Around the Horn which is an
internationalist news update with Gerald
horn Gerald horn currently holds the
mois professorship of history and
African-American studies at the
University of Houston Gerald horn is an
activist scholar researcher archivist
author historian attorney and much much
more Dr horn has
written at least 47 books and Dr Horn's
forthcoming book is entitled arm
struggle uh
Panthers and Communists black
nationalists and liberals in Southern
California through the 60s and 70s which
is now available for pre-order on the
international Publishers website and a
link can be found in the description of
this video um Dr horn is also a
permanent guest on the radio show the
horn report which airs on black Power 96
Radio on Sundays at 330m Eastern time
and Dr horn also hosts a radio show
entitled Freedom now which airs on kpfk
9.7 FM on Saturdays at 11: a.m. Pacific
and replays of both shows can be be
found on the activist News Network well
Dr horn thank you for coming on the show
and welcome back to Around the Horn
thank you for inviting me well before we
go around the horn I wanted to strongly
encourage our audience to support our
comrades at Bina books and the Thomas
Sanara Center we're hosting an
incredible African Liberation Day event
from May 24th to the 26 in Burkina Faso
they are raising funds to support this
year's African liberation day which will
feature three days of exchange between
Africans from Niger Mali Bina Faso the
DRC and Haiti um so we ask you to please
stand in solidarity and support with
Bina books and at Thomas San cars Center
by donating to them um we placed links
in the description of this video um they
also have merchandise which they're
selling this is a t-shirt of theirs um
I'm not I'm not wearing it because this
is the back of the t-shirt and the front
of the T-shirt says Africa unite um but
please do support the work of Bina books
um and their African Liberation day and
the Thomas S Sanara Center anyway Dr
horn as we go Around the Horn uh for a
fourth week in a row we wanted to get
your thoughts about the ongoing student
activism and Uprising against us
sponsored and funded Israeli genocide of
Palestine we continue to salute the
student uh students organization
discipline strategy and overall
thoughtfulness and to help frame the
question today as we've noticed in past
episodes past shows there's a long
history in the US of student activism
and of violent State repression today
May 15th marks the anniversary of the
Jackson State killings in
1970 where in law enforcement open fired
uh open fire shortly after midnight on
students and a passer by at Jackson
State College in Mississippi during the
student protest against the US invasion
of Cambodia and the Vietnam War 12
students were wounded and two
21-year-old student Philip L at Gibbs
and 17-year-old high school student
James Earl green were
killed and similarly today uh we
continue to see intense and severe
repression from the state including huge
militarized violence on the part of law
enforcement and on the part of pro
Israeli genocide counter
protesters in addition we are seeing
increasingly terrifying and repressive
legislation being proposed in Congress
including proposals to deport and
essentially kill student activists and
equally concerning our polls that
suggests that there is an increasing
opposition to student protesters from
the electorate highlighting the ongoing
role of class collaboration in the US
and Akin to your research um which was
outlined in your book The the
counterrevolution of 1836 Texas slavery
and Jim Crow and the roots of American
fascism wherein you discussed the fact
that there was one wing of the settlers
that wanted to liquidate the indigenous
and another Wing that wanted to put them
on
reservations um it seems as you
suggested in an interview yesterday Dr
horn that in the US there is a Zionist
wing and a Noto Zionist wing
again as as always I put a lot on the
table but what are your thoughts
regarding everything that we're seeing
unfolding in real times of in terms of
student activist and state repression
well first of all a footnote um Jackson
State of course is an HBCU historic
League black College University the New
York Times of late has tried to suggest
that hbcus are not part of the
encampment movement around Palestine
which is one of the purported reasons
that President Biden chose to speak at
morouse
rather shortly the AL Mo of Dr King
Spike Lee Samuel L Jackson at all but I
think that he's in for rude surprise
because we know that at Xavier
University of New Orleans another HBCU
Linda Thomas Greenfield the Biden
Ambassador to United Nations was forced
to move away from accepting or from
speaking there because of student
protest now part of the good news that's
taking place this week is that those who
were joining South Africa with regard to
its case in the international court of
justice in the Haag charging Israel with
a plausible case of genocide against
Palestinians Egypt has now joined the
growing list of Nations and that is
critical because Egypt has had for
decades a so-called peace treaty with
Israel obviously Egypt is upset with
what's happening on their border with
regard to Rafa they have not received
adequate notice with regard to Israeli
incursions and of course their economy
is suffering as a result of the yemenis
attacking ships going through the sus
Canal from which Egypt helps to gain and
Garner a significant amount of Revenue
Ireland also has joined this South
Africa case of the
icj Ireland is expected to Accord
diplomatic recognition to the emerging
Palestinian State rather shortly to be
joined by Spain which as you know has a
long history as their foreign minister
put it with the Arab world recall that
for about 700 years up until
1492 a good deal of the Iberian
Peninsula was under Arab heimy Hera
suzar likewise you see that in Ireland
Trinity College which I think we
mentioned last week in duin has voted to
divest from Cor corporations that in
turn are invested in Israeli War making
in other words Trinity College in Duplin
has accomplished what students in the
United States at least many of them are
being arrested for that is to say
protesting uh Israeli War making in
college endowments turkey has joined the
icj case as well and so you you see the
slow motion creation of a pariah State
speaking of Israel which is increasingly
being isolated
and I could have mentioned of course the
fact that
Slovenia the homeland of Milani and
Trump and Luca donic the star of the
Dallas Mavericks basketball team they're
expected to svenia expected to Accord
diplomatic recognition to the emerging
uh Palestinian State and as you
mentioned uh what's happening is that
there is a split a riff developing
between the zist wing and the Nao
Zionist wing and I would warn the
Zionist Wing to be very careful because
even though some of them are
billionaires uh we know that history
teaches us that wealth does not
necessarily protect one from reactionary
politics when need only look at the rise
of fascism in the 1930s and in any case
the welcoming of Zionist into the US
ruling class was dependent upon many uh
joining in helping to Route Progressive
movements prior to Zionism helping to
Route indigenous enslave Africans Etc
but uh enslavement ended in
1865 and uh that particular kind of Duty
is not as necessary today particularly
given the fact that the Zionist Wing is
preventing the non-zionist wing from
pursuing its overall strategic ambition
of focusing on the People's Republic of
China like a laser and in that regard
we're going to talk in the context of
Brown versus Board of Education the US
Supreme Court decision from
1954 ruling that Jim Crow us apartate
was unconstitutional we're going to
discuss the uh rise of China in the
Putin X Summit which will be
interestingly enough taking place on May
17th
2024 70 years after Brown versus Board
of Education and trying to connect those
dots but in any case the United States
wants to focus on China because China as
we've said more than once is in the
passing Lane it's the Juggernaut uh it's
the country that Mr Biden has been
forced to slap 100% tariffs on some of
their exports with Secretary of Treasury
Janet Yellen going with her begging Bowl
in in one hand and her handkerchief and
the other for handkerchief head politics
uh demanding that China stop exporting
so much overc capacity is what they call
it which was a blatant interference in
the so-called free market which of
course we should be accustomed to
because with China and the passing Lane
the United States finds in order to
compete with China it has to imitate
China and so just like the Chinese
Communist party and the government play
a role in terms of directing Capital to
different strategic sectors like
electric vehicles and solar panels and
Quantum Computing for example you see
with the chips acts the so-called
inflation reduction act that the United
States is doing the same thing uh that
is to say with the US Administration
directing Capital into various sectors
and so you see these multi-billion
dollar chip plants being constructed in
Arizona for example artificial
intelligence facility in Wisconsin all
at the behalf
of the US Administration which is
passing our tax dollars on to these
private corporations now what's also
happening is that Mr Biden is not only
seeking to imitate the People's Republic
of China he's also with regard to his
tariff policies imitating the Republican
competitor Donald J Trump and there
hangs a tale because if you look at the
New York Times website you'll see an
intriguing column by their well-known
column was David Brooks where after the
New York Times had a poll this week that
suggested that Mr Trump was ahead in a
number of Swing States significantly
ahead in Nevada which is interesting
because uh that here to for has had a
very strong Democratic party
turnout you see that David Brooks has
said that the electorate at least the
prot Trump electorate and speaking of
the TR prot Trump electorate just this
past Sunday he had a rally in New Jersey
Wildwood New Jersey now I I I find this
hard to believe but the Press reported
there were 100,000 people at this rally
I find that hard to believe but that's
what was in the Press but in any case
David Brooks says that that wing of the
electorate they want change but they
want reactionary change now there are
two ways to look at that on the one hand
you can say that instead of voting for
Mr Bon that wing of the electorate
decides that they want the real thing
not the inauthentic Democratic party
version with regard to say policy
towards China so they're voting for Mr
Trump another way to look at it is of
course looking at the history of settler
colonialism uh which oftentimes involved
reactionary change or what else can you
call the routing and genocide against
the indigenous population of mass
enslavement of the Africans and so to
that extent that you can see that uh is
consistent with what Mr David Brooks is
saying now I should also mention that
with regard to these uh campus
encampments it's a very significant
story that's unfolding uh a significant
aspect is that the United Auto Workers
has organized on a number of campuses
and with the Ascension of the new
leadership with Shan Fain organizing
Auto plants throughout the South for
example they're pushing back strongly
against the administrations of these
campuses and that's something we're
going to have to keep our eye on for
example and particularly because as we
said before some of the things that have
been going on have been quite remarkable
in terms of UCLA April 30th where you
had counter
protesters with Pikes and sticks and
earlier that week they released mice
into the encampment Mounted Police
University of Texas at Austin uh
Dartmouth College uh professors Ruff
House ditto for Emery University
for example and one of the things we
need to keep in mind is that some of us
have been saying for quite a while that
it was not tenable it was not
sustainable for the United States to be
sponsoring repression abroad without
that repression coming back home and we
saw a glimpse of that more than a decade
ago when you saw that after the invasion
and overthrow of Saddam Hussein in Iraq
the Pentagon began shipping military
person
armed personel carriers for example to
Ferguson Missour which were then used
against protesters protesting the
killing of black
teenager Michael Brown and so you have a
militarization of police departments the
police departments historically in this
country have been infused with
reactionary politics right-wing populism
and of course many of them get a thrill
and a charge out of going onto campuses
and bashing the heads of what they
perceive to be Progressive
students Washington is also suffering
reputational damage which is something
that the Zionist wing of the US ruling
clients needs to think about even
president erdogan of turkia or turkey
who has noted has joined the South
Africa case against Israel and has
broken all trade relations with Israel
has criticized the United States
hypocrisy which then brings us to South
Africa which is the lead party in terms
of this case uh South Africa is
undergoing elections in a few weeks it's
no secret that the United States would
like to see the aler of thec African
National Congress government in
particular their allies in the South
African Communist Party speaking of the
latter you have anglo-american which is
a major mining Corporation controlling a
good deal of the goal in South Africa
but the government has a say over the
fate of that Corporation and a leader of
the South African Communist Party who's
the minister of Minds gu mon matachi is
blocking a maneuver by BHP a mining
conglomerate from Australia to buy and
swallow
anglo-american which is seen as part of
the effort by the United States and its
allies to get more of a foothold in
South African resources in order to
confront China uh that has not gone down
very well that say what Mr manachi is
doing South Africa is a part of bricks
Brazil Russia India China South Africa
South Africa as noted has brought the
case before the icj and so what we're
going to have to keep an eye on is what
the United States is trying to do in the
neighborhood interestingly enough to the
north and east of South Africa in mosm
Beque you have the eruption of a
religious Insurgency uh by so-called
Muslim fundamentalists uh it is
spreading I'm afraid to say uh you have
Washington upset with South Africa
backing or at least not opposing Theus
effort that's the northern neighbor of
South Africa Northwest neighbor which is
pressing a case for reparations against
Germany which committed genocide the
first genocide of the 20th century
against the Nam Herrero people beginning
in 1904 and of course the United States
expected South Africa to join the
campaign against Zimbabwe which it did
not and so I I would close this
particular segment by returning the
audience to the vote of the United
Nations which upgraded the position of
the Palestinians at the UN and of course
the United States oppos this this was in
the general assembly not the security
Council which has a smaller membership
the general assembly is the entire
193 um uh member State body and
interestingly enough
abstaining with regard to this vote were
such us allies as Germany Italy the
Netherlands Sweden Switzerland even the
UK uh even uh Ukraine believe it or not
and so that gives you an idea which way
the winds are blowing it gives you an
idea of how Israel is increasingly
isolated and dragging the United States
along with it uh pay attention to the
news that has erupted right before we
went on air about the interesan conflict
within the Israeli War cabinet between
Mr Galant
the chief civilian military man and
prime minister Netanyahu I expect more
of those kinds of eruptions going
forward so all I can say in closing is
that uh is to Echo what you've said in
terms of saluting the students who could
take a good deal of the responsibility
and the credit for the events that have
unfolded in recent weeks where you see
increasingly Israel isolated Palestinian
status at the United Nations upgraded
and the case at the international court
of justice attracting uh more parties
including as noted Egypt Ireland and
Tura just to mention a
few thank you Dr horn and and last week
you also essentially predicted that that
Biden's pause of sending weapons to
Israel would be shortlived um under
pressure from Netanyahu and the
Republicans it came out within the past
24 hours that Biden is sending another 1
billion of weapons to Israel including
ammunition for tanks mortar rounds and
tactical Vehicles necessary for the
ground invasion in Rafa but and you had
sort of hedged our next topic um which
is May 17th marks the 70th anniversary
of the brown V Board of Education
decision in
1954 which was a landmarked decision of
the US Supreme Court ruling that racial
seg segregation in public schools is
unconstitutional
while in no uncertain terms am I
suggesting that the Supreme Court or any
Court in the US is some sort of
institution of Freedom Liberation or
even Justice particularly considering
the fact that schools in the US are just
as segregated today and in some
instances more segregated than in
1954 I did want to ask you Dr horn what
is the historic and ongoing significance
of the brown decision well the brown
decision in an indirect manner is one of
the reasons we're doing this program
because it's no accident that the case
ruling that us apartate once
unconstitutional erupts in the context
of a cold war with the United States
having difficulty preing and posturing
on the global stage as a paragon of
Human Rights virtue and its ideological
contestation with the Socialist Camp
Soviet Union and their contest for
hearts and Minds amongst the global
majority how could the United States
purport to do so as long as there was a
part reigning in this country so that
creates extern pressure which Supreme
Court Justice Earl Warren actually
mentions in his majority opinion his
nine to nothing decision and I think
that part of the problem with what
unfolded at that particular moment is
that it did not come without cost that
is to say the tradeoff was the tossing
overboard of our most internationally
minded leaders starting with the late
great Paul Robson uh actor radical
linguist ER anti- apartate activists
Etc and as as often been said the many
of us received the right to check into a
hotel because of the falling of Jim Crow
barriers but with the attack on leftwing
unions for example the national Maritime
Union which I wrote an entire book about
then you see that we don't have the
money to pay the bill and so that was
the trade-off and I'm afraid to say that
the NAACP which is still with us went
along with that trade-off it was one of
the organizations that castigated and
denounced Paul Robeson they kicked him
when he was down and I think that the
wider point is that in a country like
the United States a settler Colonial
regime built on class
collaboration of workingclass settlers
and ruling Elite settlers going back to
the first settlements in what they call
North Carolina in the 1580s will then
inevitably those who are facing
oppression under that kind of system
need international support and so by
destabilizing robon and those like him
and there are a number of organizations
that I could cite including the Civil
Rights Congress which filed a petition
at the United Nations charging United
States with genocide with Robison taking
the lead with the destabilization of
those organizations we were left Flying
Blind and it's not just with regard to
Jim Crow If you look at the demise of
slavery you cannot disconnect the demise
of bondage human bondage from the
Haitian revolution 1791 to 1804 which
ignited a general crisis of the entire
slave system which can only be resolved
with this collapse and of course my book
confronting Jack Black Jackin deals with
that at some L and so that's one of the
problems we face today that is to say
that there is a dir of
internationalism in our community even
on the US left there's not necessarily
Clarity with regard to many
of these in global issues which brings
us to the X Putin Summit which
serendipitously enough is taking place
this week and as I understand it on May
17 2024 indeed and this Summit is an
Exemplar of what appears to be a shift
in the global cor correlation of forces
against the United States of America and
it's North Atlantic allies we've already
talked about the Chinese economy as a
juggernaut and I could have mentioned in
that context how the United States is
falling behind China in terms of
building all kinds of vessels from
cruise ships to ships for the Navy for
example and this leads us to a number of
possible outcomes both globally and
domestically if we posit that there's
this shift in the global correlation of
forces uh number one ner which where
we've talked about how the United States
and France were ousted Russia and China
were welcomed in with Russia assisting
the Nigerians in fighting religious
zealots China providing a check for $400
million for nerian oil that'll be piped
to Bine on the Atlantic coast and ship
uh to China in the Washington Post today
there's an article on the front page
about how the Nigerians were very upset
when US representatives came to neame
the capital and instructed them like
they were some sort of neoc colony that
they should not sell their uranium to
Iran that they should continue sending
it to France for pittance which
accelerated the aler of US troops from
that Sahel
State and ner might be a case study as
to what will happen amongst the global
majority
as you see the eclipsing of the North
Atlantic powers and they're being
supplanted in a material sense by the
Russia China
Alliance however
before we begin to uncor the champagne
bottles let me mention that uh I'm old
enough to remember the
1970s with the Portuguese revolution of
1974 which led directly to the
liberation of mosumi and Angola in
1975 which led to the independence of
Zimbabwe in 1980 Namibia 1990 the big
anchel of South Africa by 1994 we
thought we were on a rooll but of course
uh in a sense we were because in
1979 you had the the Iranian Revolution
the Nicaraguan Revolution Etc but by
1989 of course the Imperial imperialists
have made a stunning comeback so let's
not uh count uh our chickens before the
eggs are hatched uh but having said that
uh there's another point that we should
contemplate which is that if us
imperialism is in Decline the question
may become we in the US working class
the US black community the US poor
paying an even stiffer price because of
the ruling class not being able to
extract as much wealth from the global
majority as they have become accustomed
to and so they'll take it out of our
Heights particularly when you consider
that for example to take the bellweather
union the United Auto Workers as noted
they've done a bang up job under Shan
feain but still you you have uh us
workers only about 11% of the unionized
labor force which is rather poultry uh
and in any case if you look at the
history of the UAW interestingly enough
it was UAW Leonard UAW leader Leonard w
Who was appointed ambassador to China
sheering the movement of us
manufacturing across the Pacific to
China and that Legacy has yet to be
intin extinguished and so we're going to
have to be careful to ensure that our
movement and our class and our group are
not forced to pay a heavy and stiffer
price as a result of the decline of us
imperialism and then of course there's
the ultimate danger which is war do not
expect us imperialism to give up without
a bitter struggle you already see
jousting in the South China Sea not only
with us vessels but Philippines vessels
even Germany which is trying to carry
favor with China has sent vessels to the
South China Sea and uh we cannot rule
out the
possibility of some sort of Titanic
military conflict which of course we
should strive with every fiber fiber in
our body to make sure it does not
happen thank you Dr horn I guess we're
essentially out of time as we only we
have less than a minute left I did want
to note for the audience uh since we're
out of time to please pay attention to
what's going on in new Cal new calonia
there's a crisis of French imperialism
as Dr horn suggested in the Sahel with
Niger and other countries but also in
new calonia as the settler colonialist
French there um you know are pushing
back against the kanui people and the
kanui people are having an uprising
that's going on in real time so I do
recommend to our internationalist
audience if you're not to please pay
attention and figure out ways to stand
in support and solidarity to the to the
Kenucky people in New calonia well Dr
horn um we're out of time I thank you
again for coming back on the show and
thank you to the audience for tuning in
and for your excellent questions that we
will keep adding to our list that helps
frame each of our each of our shows
thank you Dr horn and thank you to again
to the audience thank
you all right


## Keywords:
