---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NOC5bhiUS_E
---

# Video
Gramsci's Theory Of Hegemony & Counter Hegemonic Strategy
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NOC5bhiUS_E)

## Transcript:

why is it that in our time really across
the 20th century there hasn't been a
systemic working class uprising why is
it that so many institutions replicate
power and mera dominant narratives
including on the Left look at so many of
the narratives that you see embraced by
neoliberal Xand even some that identify
on the left as an example about the
quote-unquote white working-class of
course categorically understand and are
very clear about what the Trump and
Republican base is in terms of toxic
wrote s identity politics but that isn't
the only thing going on narratives like
JD Vance's are a far more sort of broad
damning and culturalist condemnation of
entire classes and geographies of people
including many whom are apolitical and
some of whom may have left politics both
and in both senses I should say left
politics as in the kind of politics we
identify with or left politics because
of absolute hopelessness why is it that
narratives of blaming the poor and
deserving and undeserving poor pop up in
so many different ways in so many
different contexts well partially it's
because without understanding hegemonic
narratives we will recreate them and
reaffirm them even unwittingly in a
variety of different contexts and spaces
and not have a real counter hegemonic
politics so what is that what is
hegemony
how did Antonio Gramsci conceive it it's
a term that's thrown around a lot we're
gonna try to define it for you the
dominance of culture value politics and
politics by the ruling class and how it
works is that Gramsci argued that in
order for capitalists to maintain
control of the workplace in the
political system they needed to be able
to control the working class not just
physically but culturally and
ideologically this reading could be
achieved through coercion
also through creating consent notice the
echo in Chomsky inherent in a Hearn
scenes critique of the media and
manufacturing consent that's a hegemonic
project if workers believe that the
capitalist mode of production is just
the way things are then there's little
use in trying to fight the natural order
there's the you know the fists of the
strike breaking Uncle Sam but then
there's also the sort of like arms
folded of Tina there is no other way
Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan
being the sort of core exemplars of this
sort of rhetoric but echoed across all
parties and mainstream politicians
across the global neoliberal system
ideas of the natural order of capitalism
were reinforced through media in popular
film television music art the legal
system and education all of these in the
Gramsci and narrative are extensions of
an economic base but it's a refinement
the older sort of understanding of you
have a base in a superstructure and
basically the base kind of engines the
economy and that's where the action is
and then the superstructure sprouts up
around that now I following David Harvey
think that in the United States context
because we're so devoid of any real
analysis of base we could use it
sometimes to adopt that framework that
the base is driving everything because
it might help clarify some things
however we know that this relationship
between economics culture hegemony is
much more dynamic and interdependent and
much more fluid and Gramsci was the sort
of key identifier of that of that
feedback loop between base and
superstructure all of these systems
create what he called an organic
ideology that United different groups of
society to accept a cultural order
Fredric Jameson echoed it in the sort of
infamous quote of modernity that it's
easier to imagine the end of the world
than the end of capitalism media
resistance to Bernie Sanders campaigns
another example of an ideological
project trying to present
very reasonable and moderate changes to
our society as impossible not serious
angry or even somehow reactionary lastly
it's important to note that the system
is developed by the most ideological
agents are not acting on some sort of
conspiracy
for example MSNBC pundits rather than a
kind of general resistance to socialism
we see the media is the embodiment of
the hegemony there might be Network
memos there certainly can be guidance on
guests the relationship between
companies of media companies literally
owned by conglomerates and arms
manufacturers of course have a power and
an influence but there's also something
to the fact that if you actually stand
outside of that hegemonic framework you
are not in the trajectory to be in those
positions to begin with that again is
echoed in manufacturing consent in the
Chomsky work so the real question is how
do we build counter hegemonic projects
and part of it is that we have to
counter hegemonic narratives and
generate profoundly different ones what
does it actually mean to act in
solidarity in a context where every
single impulse of the modern world
atomizes us and pushes us against it
against solidarity this is why pushing
back against the toxicity of canceled
culture and the vampire castle is so
important because what does it actually
mean to have a generative discourse to
have evolution to have change to have
Redemption how do we broaden how we
actually understand who we are and by
the way if we can't sort of move in that
direction how are we gonna take on like
the much broader actual ambitions of say
something like prison abolition you know
some people discourse that in a very
long-term utopian way but then there's a
disconnect in the shorter term hegemonic
discourses how do we actually
synchronize those things these are the
kind of questions that we actually have
to be asking ourselves and we want to be
aware that we're not echoing the
projects of the right or Neo liberals
there's also practical and material
questions here the future is not set
when he's not permanent a self-aware
left can challenge not only the
political and economic domination but
also the cultural domination by creating
alternative institutions and challenging
the power and already index existing
ones the working class can create our
own intellectuals and cultural figures
that challenge the hegemonic terrain of
the ruling class and the narrative that
the current order is natural look at
that incredible crowd-sourced ad on the
reality of Bernie on the campaign trail
versus the grotesque disgusting and
petty discourse about him and his
supporters in mainstream media and on
the cable networks the expansion and
creation of new political and cultural
institutions that are anti-capitalist is
encouraging this development and we need
to be wary that they did not fall into
the trap of reproducing capitalist
hegemony itself it's a base and
superstructure process I would argue
that in the broadest sense of the word
it's actually a spiritual process and
it's an interdependent multi variable
one but we need to understand what
terrain we're fighting in and how to
genuinely reproduce different things do
you guys have anything you want to add
to them well I just wanted to give a
quick example to sort of hit on like
what the idea of the Germany is I don't
know if you guys are familiar with
televangelist of joel osteen you know
sure like any he promotes this idea
called the gospel of prosperity and it
basically gives an excuse for the fact
that he makes fifty million dollars a
year and gets a fire on a private jet
but that's a really good a lot of
tax-exempt way right yeah yeah but you
know it yeah and that's the whole thing
as well but you know taking something
like Christianity that has so many
different variants and then seeing the
form that it's taking in American
culture primarily in the Protestant
South where you do have such large
wealth inequality amongst people and
then you take you know theology and you
try to warp it in a way that sort of
gives an excuse for the current social
order and that gives like Christians
style
power of positive thinking oh absolutely
you know can transcend your material
circumstances by like a visualization
yeah
and God rewards you materially for your
you know for your righteousness which is
the most you know important thing so
that's the hegemonic yeah social
Darwinist order yeah exactly so you know
under capitalism you know we see how
this sort of affects the way that we
take a religion that's you know two
thousand years old and how it can affect
it so for us to be able to build counter
hegemonic institutions is certainly
important that we're able to recognize
that you know all of these cultural
fields right are up for grabs and that
we have to battle for them instead of
just thinking that everything is just
you know politics like winning elections
particularly or you know building you
know some kind of like socialist
political organizations within our
communities it's also recognizing that
lean or activities or cultural
activities music we listen to all of
those are part of reproducing a certain
ideology and actually work doing the
work that like the really difficult work
but the important work of actually
challenging narratives that sort of you
know reproduce you know capitalism as
the natural order within our communities
and different cultures that were part of
yeah and then you see like the Joel
Osteen's of DC which is basically the
American Enterprise Institute and all
those people okay they'd get together
and decide how to make these look
impressive to people with college
degrees right but it's the same story
it's the same narrative structure you
really should look to try to find you
know again JD Vance's book about
rednecks is the same narrative structure
as Charles Murray's falling behind is
graft on to the bell curve which in
addition to being a profoundly racist
tract is a naturalization of class
hierarchy that's actually the smuggled
argument in and then they flip in
between are we saying that when we're
racializing it they love to go in the IQ
uh you know the IQ trash and try to make
you know try to do this coal measurement
17th century stuff or is it the Moynihan
report for actually lower-class white or
people of color Oh their culture is so
bad and then you notice that as the just
utter gutting of America expands from
the periphery right that that
you catch hell from capitalism people in
the peripheries always catch it first
people of color inner cities and then
like deep in Appalachia and then these
things expand out and all of a sudden
you have a much broader experience of
serious and stability in poverty and so
that might correlate with addiction
divorce because you know what when
people are stressed out of their minds
and totally deprived that affects what's
happening in their lives and then what
do we have to do then of course it's the
next discourse of blaming and policing
the poor and you know you can see though
in some liberal discourse they that
that's this is the fine line of
recognizing very true things versus
grafting on a liberal version of the
same 90s discourses just put on to a
different set of targets we need to be
genuinely counter hegemonic and build a
bottom-up socialist enterprise that
delivers for everyone period you just
watched a Michael Brooks show video
subscribe to get them all why wouldn't
you don't be foolish click subscribe
below and become a patron as well
patreon.com slash TMDs thanks everybody


## Keywords:
