---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pKF7PMogF9A
---

# Video
HAMAS "Mass Rape" UN Report: NO EVIDENCE (w/ Ali Abunimah)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pKF7PMogF9A)

## Transcript:
I'm I'm on record as saying that my red
line was drawn much far short of actual
genocide um I'm happy to see many of the
people who argued with me about voting
for Biden in 2020 now on board because
of this genocide I wish it didn't take a
genocide for us to hold our elected
leaders accountable to addressing the
substantive needs of people suffering in
America in an addition to the rest of
the world but I am glad we're all here
now together and I'm very interested to
see what Biden says tonight in the state
of the union and uh whether or not
there's any more substantive movement on
this issue as it becomes increasingly
clear that he very well may lose the
presidency over this and it would be
very deserved in my humble opinion but
look I've had here already for half an
hour and we have not gotten to this
question of the most recent round of
reporting on the allegations of sexual
assault on October 7th now I want to
start by asking the question why uh and
you alluded to this a little bit when we
first started but why it is that this
particular claim given there's many
other frankly human tragedies that you
can point point to on October 7th
atrocities uh were committed as how um
Norm finlin puts it without having to
fabricate anything or embellish anything
at all but I think we got some insight
into this with this poll uh that came
out from Frank Lun about what kind of
messaging is actually most influential
to uh the observing ear the American ear
did you did you see this I did
yes so uh the the question that was
asked was which bothers you more that
Hamas and then there's a bunch of
options raped civilians massacred
civilians bound and burned civilians
slaughtered civilians butchered
civilians murdered civilians executed
civilians Etc and the number one at 31%
is raped
civilians yeah I
mean it seems pretty clear that there's
there is a a an investment a messaging
directive and and point pointing to a
specific kind of aggression that is
alleged to have happened on October 7th
instead of the other kinds which are
much more easy to substantiate
obviously yeah I mean
it's uh remember right after October 7th
they started pushing this line Hamas
equals Isis and Hamas is not Isis and
not like Isis and Hamas and Isis are
enemies uh and ideologically complete
different um you know it's like saying
that uh that uh you know Jerry fwell and
the Quakers are the same because or
Jerry fwell and I don't know what uh are
the same because they all fall within
the broad realm of of of you know
Christianity I mean maybe that's not a
Perfect Analogy the the
Quakers don't use armed struggle whereas
the the Hamas does but the point I'm
making is the there
uh they're uh uh working on an idea that
oh these are all Muslims and they're all
equally bad and that's the sort of the
the the already uh Prime the the US
population they think is already primed
for this message and so you need
something truly heinous and remember the
historical context here that this this
charge of rape has always been used
against black people against against
brown people against colonized people
what was the accusation against EMT till
that he he looked at a white woman and
we know that uh uh claims that settler
women or white women were raped was
often the pretext for
lynching and we saw this also in a part
South Africa and so it it's a very old
Trope in settler colonies and in um uh
Colonial
situations it has that power and that's
and it and it's based on and it's
convincing to a population which is
already primed with the idea that these
people are brutes these people are
savages they're not like us they're a
danger to us so that's the context for
this claim and yeah it is a powerful
claim in Israel's from Israel's
perspective because it's rooted in that
number one which is an old racist
Colonial sensibility but they also hope
to root it in a more sort of
contemporary and Progressive sensibility
about you know quote unquote believe
women and so we've actually seen them
trying to promote the hashtag believe
Israeli women except the problem here is
there are no Israeli women to believe
because to this day not a single person
has come forward and said I was a victim
of this and not a single
person uh who was killed on October 7th
was has been positively identified as a
victim of this and remember their claim
is a very big one they're not saying oh
there were a couple of sexual assaults
or rapes on October 7th that's not the
claim the claim is this was systematic
it was a weapon of War as Hillary
Clinton has put it it was an order that
they should go out and rape as many
people as possible women and
men and yet remarkably Israel claims
they have a 100,000 something like a
100,000 video clips from October 7th
that includes uh surveillance footage it
includes cell phone videos from people
it includes overhead uh video from
drones and helicopters it includes uh
GoPro videos from from uh Palestinian
Fighters some of whom were wearing
cameras and would have been killed or
captured that day and Israel does not
claim that a single video clip shows one
of these sexual assaults that was
supposedly systematic taking place and
even the UN report that just came out
which by the way did not do any original
research or investigation and is largely
a regurgitation of the same old claims
repackaged under a un logo
they say we We
examined uh video evidence uh and
photographic evidence and could not
substantiate a single claim of rape so
so let's get into that report in some
more detail I'm sorry I didn't mean to
cut you off no no that's yeah okay so
this this report um that was conducted
by prila Patent she's an under Secretary
General she was appointed as United
Nations special representative of the
Secretary General on sexual violence and
conflict conflict this report is what
spurred this new round of coverage in
this new New York Times story it was uh
initially this is one of those
situations where the New York Times had
to walk back its headline and it usually
used the word uh evidence suggesting
that there was new evidence of sexual
assault on October 7th it revised the
headline to say un team finds grounds to
support reports of sexual violence uh
and Hamas attack and basically I read
the full report and what she claims to
have done is to visited uh Israel with a
small team including some uh more
specialized experts and over about a two
week period have conversations with some
people some of whom I think are
completely irrelevant like heads of
state members of government that have no
firsthand knowledge of what actually
happened uh but then also speak to um
Aid uh
suppliers uh um what you what you call
them um doctors and and other first resp
responders and this sort of thing yeah
right and the the people at the
mortuaries where bodies were taken
things like that but very notably and
you already point this pointed this out
she emphasizes in the report the
difficulty she had getting in contact
with alleged surviving members of sexual
assault yeah and that nobody has has has
positively uh being able to determine
that there's a single such person and
again remember we're talking about what
they claim is a systematic campaign of
rape as a weapon of War not that there
was an occasional sexual assault but
that this was systematic and widespread
that's the claim that's why we're
supposed to C so much right and so in
this report it's it's fascinating
because the New York Times Obviously ran
with this aspect where they said there
was um there they they believe that
there was sexual violence I'm like okay
right so let me keep reading clearly
you're going going to show me where I'm
interested to know I have no investment
in their not being sexual violence
because as you've pointed out even if
there did emerge some proof that sexual
violence occurred it is not the story of
widespread sexual violence which was
used to justify this enormously
disproportionate Siege on Gaza over the
last five months okay what's interesting
about the report is that it emphasizes
um uh the team it did not meet uh with
any Survivor victim of sexual violence
from October 7th despite concerted
efforts encouraging them to come forward
the rationale presented was that they
are extremely traumatized I have no
doubt that victims of sexual assault are
extremely traumatized but that even
under the condition of anonymity they
were unwilling to talk to a un special
representative now they also allude to
the fact that there is distrust of the
UN because of the alleged indifference
they've had to investigating these
claims of course Israel blocked a un
investigation of the sexual assault
claims and to the extent that there is
quote unquote disinterest or a lack of
Investigation into substantiating them
it is largely because Israel has and
seems to continue to be keeping the SE
the Survivor the alleged survivors of
sexual assault away
from not just the public I'm not asking
them to come publicly but even to a
trusted trained individual who's trained
in having sensitive conversations about
sexual
violence yeah uh and and so it's that
that was a novel excuse that Israelis
don't trust the UN but do Israelis not
trust any of their National institutions
because none of them have been able to
positively confirm that that there are
any victims there have been vague claims
and this is repeated in the UN report
that oh there are some victims being
treated but they're too traumatized to
come forward but in the press conference
prila Patton wouldn't say where that
information came from that same claim uh
appeared in the New York Times in the
Jeffrey Gman piece in December and it
came from the Israeli government uh and
they they in that case they said oh that
yeah there's a couple of victims but
they have refused to come forward
physically for treatment which was odd
phrasing which suggest that nobody has
actually laid eyes on them or knows that
they exist but if I can just step back
and and and make a couple of points
about this un report that I think are
important you as you pointed out the New
York Times walked back its initial
headline which talked about evidence
they walk that back they also in their
original write up of the report just
told an outright lie they misquoted the
report uh this is something that I
documented I tweeted it at the time and
I also of course archived it but they
claimed that the report used the term
clear and convincing evidence that and
that phrase does not appear in the UN
report and they removed it from The New
York Times article it uses instead the
strange phrase clear and convincing
information well what is that that
doesn't mean anything have you ever
heard of clear and convincing
information and it says the report
states that most of the
information clear and convincing or not
came from Israeli National Institution
so we're talking about the mil milary
the police the government and it came
from so-called First Responders in the
photos that Israel
released of prila Patton touring a
community in the South she was
accompanied by Yosi land who is Yosi
land he's a senior figure in this Jewish
extremist group called zaka which has
been misrepresented in the New York
Times as First Responders what they do
is they actually go to crime scenes and
they pick up they collect Jewish bodies
and body parts for burial which is you
know of course that's important people
should be buried according to their
tradition but this is a an extremist
group that has been responsible for some
of the most grotesque lies Yosi L
himself uh was responsible for a lie
that has been thoroughly debunked even
in the Israeli press of a pregnant
pregnant woman who belly was sliced open
and the fetus taken out and stabbed
classic atrocity propaganda that came
from yosi's own mouth and he was the
person taking promila Patton the UN
official on a tour around uh one of
these communities
the uh uh uh kibs and another crucial
thing about this un report it's being
presented even in the walked back
version as bolstering the claims in the
New York Times and in the Jeffrey
gettleman piece but it actually debunks
the the Jeffrey gatlan article even more
and I'm going to be very specific about
this Jeffrey Gelman States in his uh
Infamous piece written with anat Schwarz
and Adam cell about a case again this
this story was widely repeated in the
media of two teenage girls found shot
and murdered together in a bedroom in
kibot another one of the settler
colonies near Gaza and that you know I'm
I'm going to use the graphic language
that was reported that they that they
were found you know undressed and with
seen on on their
bodies this the UN
report that we're talking about as
flawed as it is is and as much as it
tries to bolster Israel's uh narrative
States explicitly that this the claims
of sexual violence in kibot beeri are
unfounded and this particular claim was
debunked back on December 30th excuse me
December 1st so we're talking December
1st in a really excellent article in
mwise by a collective of Palestinian
journalists and The
Intercept did its own reporting that
came out just a few days ago that
also uh quotes officials from kib saying
there is not one single uh founded
report of sexual assault in kibot Bari
and I'll also note that in December a
few days before the Jeffrey Gelman
article came out alleging these uh rapes
including in kibuts Berry the New York
Times published its own extensive
article like a deep dive into what
happened in kibutz Berry and it doesn't
mention a single allegation of sexual
assault when they went to kibutz Berry
the New York Times nobody told them
about sexual assaults there isn't a
single claim there so actually this un
report as flawed as it
is undermines even further the New York
times is reporting and that's an
important point to make the couple of
other quick points on the UN report that
premila Patton says they have no
investigative mandate they did no
interviews with with survivors uh or
alleged uh victims they relied almost
entirely on information from so-called
Israeli National institutions uh so this
is simply largely a recycling and re
regurgitation of the same claims that we
have seen again and again including in
the New York Times and other media and I
think it's also important for uh
listeners to know you know when you say
un report that sounds very
authoritative uh but there's un reports
and there's un reports
and uh premila Patton is a political
appointee of the Secretary General
that's in her title she's the special
representative of the SEC Secretary
General that that's one category of un
uh employee that is attached to the
Secretary General and a political
appointee they are not independent
people on the other hand you have
independent commissions of inquiry and
independent human rights expert
so-called special raor people like
Franchesca albanesi I don't know if
you've had her on but you really should
try to get not not yet I'm working on it
yeah terrific so
Francesca albanesi is um a special raor
who has given her mandate by the Human
Rights Council the Human Rights Council
can also appoint a special Commission of
inquiry that is completely independent
they usually will appoint uh really
prominent International figures for
example former heads of Supreme Courts
from various countries or very prominent
people and every time Israel has gone on
one of its its spasms of psychotic
violence in Gaza in 2008 and 2012 and
2014 in 2021 and so on after the great
March of return the UN Human Rights
Council has appointed an independent
Commission of inquiry and Israel has
utterly refused to cooperate with it so
what I would support is an independent
Comm Commission of inquiry to look into
these allegations and in fact to look
into everything that happened on October
7th but of course we're not hearing
calls for that from the White House or
from Israel and of course if it was
appointed Israel would not cooperate
with it because they never have so this
so just because it says a un report
people have to understand where this is
coming from this is not an independent
uh office with real investigative powers
and um accountability to uh the uh Human
Rights Council where it can be examined
and voted on and
adopted yeah I think that your points
are all excellent I but I really want to
focus on the idea that reading this
report actually the things it does
conclusively is disprove a number of
allegations and to the extent that it
holds itself out as substantiating
others it offers no evidence which is
why it had to be removed from the title
of that New York Times article it offers
no evidence it doesn't use the word
evidence they're careful not to use to
to say we see evidence they say we see
information and what is information what
is that exactly and when you're reading
it they don't even cite who the alleged
Witnesses are so part of what enabled
you and Max and others to start to poke
holes in that December New York Times
article was that they were saying you
know they had Direct quotes from
Witnesses who then you could go and look
at their social media and find out that
they were laughing and joking during the
time when they were supposed to have
been witnessing a gang rape um you could
uh find out that they to the St CH St
Chang constantly so I mean just to give
you one example that was in the New York
Times Jeffrey gettelman piece they talk
about this woman called sapir they just
give her first name who they claim
witnessed a gang rape uh she says that
uh she was she was shot she was hiding
in the bushes this was at that Rave that
that uh happened and she says she sees a
a group of men and they get out of a van
and they're raping you know horrific
stuff that they they say that uh they
gang rape a woman and then they shoot
her and they gang raped several other
women five women and they they cut off
the heads of three of them and they're
dancing around with the heads she claims
to have seen this with her own eyes
and you can't this is a horrifying story
that happened
supposedly within Israeli territory this
wasn't in Gaza it wasn't somewhere
unreachable where are the bodies where
are the Headless bodies where where are
the heads where are the seven heads
where are all the blood stains on the
ground where is the DNA none of that the
the New York Times and this person this
sapir she had been telling the same same
story since she was introduced at an
Israeli police press conference in I
think it was in October or early
November I think it was in mid October
actually where she didn't herself appear
at the press conference the Israeli
police played a video of her telling
this story with her uh appearance
disguised yeah and she also told the
story of the the seven heads which most
of the media did not report because I
think they knew that this so undermined
her credibility now in the New York
Times
piece there's a second witness a man
called Ura Caroll who is supposedly
hiding in the same ditch as
sapir and in the New York Times it says
he lifted his head and he saw the rapes
going on and he's quoted in the New York
Times as an eyewitness there's a problem
with this though uh which is that this
same supposed eyewitness was quoted in
Israeli media weeks earlier saying I
didn't see any of this sapir told me she
saw it but I didn't see it right so what
what we did is we simply went back and
looked at the accounts that change over
time and then so and then there's
another incident in the New York Times
so they they claim three incidents of
rape in the New York Times three
specific incidents the one I just talked
about which is totally lacking in
credibility and for which there's no
corroborating evidence
whatsoever um a second incident where
the
witnesses a guy called Raz Cohen and
there's another another guy who story
changed constantly and that that that
was some of the guys who were smiling
and taking selfies and so youed to but
again no bodies no victims no nothing
just their everchanging accounts and
then the central quote unquote victim of
that story was a woman called gal abdou
in the New York Times story who they
claimed there was a video they call it
the video of the woman in the black
dress which does not show and the New
York Times does not claim that it shows
gal ABD being SE assaulted they claim it
shows her after she was killed uh in a
position that suggests she might have
been sexually assaulted the problem is
that as soon as the New York Times
published this story her own family came
out her Israeli family her sister miral
alter came out and said that there is
absolutely no evidence she was raped
we've never seen any evidence the police
have never shown us any evidence she was
raped and we did not know the New York
Times was going to allege any of this
and if we had known we wouldn't have
cooperated with the story we were
deceived by the New York Times and they
are now abusing gal abdou uh to to to
make these uh false claims and right
that that's so there's nothing left of
the New York Times story and yet they
are continuing to defend it and stand by
it and they have blood on their hands
because this atrocity propaganda is
being used to justify the ongoing uh
extermination campaign in Gaza hey
YouTube thanks for watching just a
reminder that this is a podcast you can
catch an extra premium episode every
Monday for $5 a month at patreon.com
bfaith podcast that's
patreon.com podcast for $5 a month an
extra episode every week additionally
please do consider liking this video
subscribing to this channel it helps us
out it helps Independent Media beat the
algorithm we appreciate you and as
always keep the

faith


## Keywords:
