---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zTxoajpeWtI
---

# Video
Hasan Interviews Yanis Varoufakis
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zTxoajpeWtI)

## Transcript:
resistance to that wall to that bued
wire bringing it down is not only a
right of the Palestinians who are
encased inside that bed wire it is a
duty in the same way that prisoners of
War according to the Geneva Convention
have not only a right but a duty to try
to escape the 2.2 million gazin have a
duty to themselves to resist and bring
down tear down that Bloody wall all
right what an honor what an honor ladies
and gentlemen we got Yannis VAR fakas in
the building well not in the building uh
I are do you mind that I call you the
Greek Freak do you know what that is the
real Greek
Freak yeah the other yanis with two
ends well yeah well this is uh well he's
um he's a basketball player as well
there's a basketball player they call
The Greek Freak his okay all right well
I I say you're the real Greek Freak
Yannis vxus for those of you who don't
know former finance minister of Greece
uh one of the founders of uh of dm25
right you're one of the founders of
dm25 and also fun fact that many people
might actually really appreciate in our
community uh used to work at valve and
was responsible for valve economy I
don't know if people are going to like
that about you or maybe hate you for it
but that is something that you uh
participated in back when um I guess
valve was a co-op as well I don't know
if it still is it might still be a
Cooperative Corporation
um not really uh Val today is very
different to when I was there in 2011
2012 uh I studied the economy and I had
a great deal of fun doing that uh but uh
you know as it so often happens uh the
best intentions often evolve into lesser
outcomes more corporate outcomes so I
don't recognize that place the way it
was back then
all right um yeah no I mean that's
that's just uh that's the the corrosive
nature of capitalism I suspect even
though um even though you know we're hot
and cold on
gabin um that's what we call him here
we're hot and cold on him we're hot on
him when he uh decided to
um change the prices of uh video games
internationally uh and adjust them to uh
Market rates and and uh currency
fluctuations in in their respective
countries Turks love him a lot for that
reason uh but then I think he's changed
uh on that front as well I myself do
love the steam deck I I ride for it I
use it on a daily basis my daily driver
I don't know if you know what that is
the steam deck is a piece of Hardware
that valve
created of course
um what's up can you say that again no
of course I know what it is and I have
to say that Gabe Gabe because I know him
personally is a super smart person and a
very sensitive person and a person
whether you agree with his moves or
disagree with his moves um his soul does
not come from the United States it's an
anaros syndicalist soul that has emerged
from the black and red movement in Spain
without him even knowing that but then
of course you know when you're embedded
in a multi billion doll
Enterprise uh as I said the best
intentions over evolve into pretty
terrible outcomes if you know what I
mean um but we won't talk too
extensively on valve of course uh today
uh we are unfortunately talking about uh
something a little bit more serious than
that uh although we can get back to that
and I'll have you on as long as you want
to be on I'm a big fan of yours for many
many years uh I I uh oftentimes will
paraphrase some of your quot like uh one
of my favorite ones when you say borders
are a a scar on the face of the Earth
uh I love that one I I uh I value your
perspective quite a bit uh I loved when
you were talking about bricks Nations
I'm going to try to not be as big as a
fanboy here uh about you in particular
even though just so this community
understands you guys in the chat
understand like I mean I I think that uh
yeah Giannis is a is a Legend um
so uh let's talk about it you were uh
you were slated to speak in Germany
recently at uh in Berlin at a uh
Palestinian Congress right uh it was a
conference for to speak out uh about the
atrocities that are happening uh that
Israel is is perpetrating in uh in in
Gaza and uh the police the Berlin police
came in and uh quickly uh in a very
Gusto like way uh dealt with that uh
they refused entry into the country for
a uh I think it was uh Abu gasan who is
a uh a British Palestinian Doctor Who
was uh early on in the Gaza Strip
operating in the Gaza Strip uh as a as a
healthc care professional um and uh they
refused entry uh uh into the country for
him and then they quickly and swiftly
dealt with the conference what do you
what do you think about what's going on
in Germany spiritually holistically what
the hell is happening over there to
begin with um thank you so much for the
kind words uh I don't want fans I want
comrades this is a struggle this is not
lifestyle this is not show business this
is a major struggle for the spirit of
humanity and uh Germany is a
Battleground because once again a proud
Nation a proud people the German people
are being dragged by their political
regime not just the government but the
whole of the spectrum of the political
Personnel including their media of
course they're being dragged into yet
another genocide in their name with
their complicity uh as if the genocide
of the Palestinians rivers of
Palestinian blood can wash off the guilt
over the Holocaust it count and this is
why uh months
ago together with uh the very brave
comrades in Germany of the Jewish voice
for peace for a just peace uh with whom
we have worked to organize the Palestine
Congress uh along with Palestinian
organizations uh NOS
uh you Progressive people who are are
not uh loued into Silence by fear or
propaganda uh we put together that
Palestinian Congress and since we are
not in a great hurry let me give you the
background because I think the
background is is important well before
last week's uh gestapo like German
police
intervention I the first time I knew
that it was there was there was going to
be a problem with this Congress which I
was going to be a speaker but I was also
one of the organizers was about a month
ago because I received a very weird
email from my German publisher a very
good Publishing House called kman uh who
have published six seven books of mine
in the past been very supportive even in
difficult times when I was a finance
minister of Greece and I was clashing
with the German government so you know
decent people decent people sending him
an email uh which was completely out of
character for them essentially they were
telling me telling me as my Publishers
in Germany to stay away from this
Palestine Congress that's a month before
it happened and it was weird because as
I've said it was out of character and
secondly why would they be doing this
how would they know about it we had not
even publicized it yet you can imagine
why because the police and the security
forces had actually gotten to them and
they said you if you if you want to sell
Yan's books in Germany you have you
better persuade him to stay away from
this at the time I didn't know that I
was simply peeved with my Publishers and
I simply discontinued my relationship
with them because when I said to them
hang going said you feel confident
enough to tell me where to speak and
where not to speak and they came back
with a second very aggressive email
saying if you if you want your new book
which is coming out in September in
Germany to do well you you've got to
stay away from this Congress doesn't
matter what the Congress is about just
stay away and I just told them to f off
essentially and I knew then that that
Congress would not go well now at around
the same time I hope I'm not boring you
with that just
interrup if I'm going on for too long um
British uh philosopher and fil maker rul
Martinez has made a a six-part
documentary on the economic crisis and
from the rise of fascism on Need for
internationalism and it features me I'm
the center of that documentary why am I
saying that because R martinz booked the
great Babylon theater in the center of
Berlin to have the launch of the movie
of the documentary and I was
invited that was around the same time
that my publisher were warning me
against the Palestine Congress of last
week and to my astonishment I found out
when I arrived in Berlin that the police
had threatened threatened the proprietor
of the Babylon theater that if he
doesn't cancel
event uh then all sorts of horrible
things would happen because yanis is an
anti-semite and a lot of antisemites are
going to to gather and you know
thankfully the proprietor of Babylon is
a Jew and the Jew who takes no
and he told the police to get you know
to stuff their their advice and their
threats and we we had the reg the the
the launch of the of so I knew that
something was a foot in Germany and
then there were lots of attempts to
cancel our event the bank account of the
Jewish voice for peace in Germany which
is a German organization in German
German Jews their account was frozen by
the state so here is the German State
confiscating the money of Jews again in
the name of fighting
anti-Semitism yeah um around the same
time you may have heard of a wonderful
woman lives in in Berlin her name is
Iris
Heitz she's a psych analyst an Israeli
Jew who lives in Berlin she's a comrade
of ours she staged a protest a one woman
protest I don't know whether you heard
about that uh it was a remarkable moment
she was walking down the street on her
own and she had the plard simply she had
written herself and said as a Israeli
and as a Jew stopped the genocide in
Gaza and a white arean German policeman
arrested her for anti-Semitism just like
with URI right uh who who was also was I
don't know if it was the same cop but it
is it is uh the the Optics of it as well
and I know liberals care about Optics
more than anything else uh the Optics of
it as well were very shocking to see
this like blonde Donald Trump looking
German o uh arresting a Jewish man with
a with a y
on as well and you know they just they
they don't really care about it at all I
guess yeah they it's it's just absurd I
think I think they're digging their own
hole now the German system the the
German regime and they don't even
realize it uh but that's another
question so so me let me end the the
long story as briefly as I can so on the
day of the Palestinian Congress as you
said the vice Chancellor of glasow
University who a British Palestinian
surgeon not just a British Palestinian
surgeon who has spent 45 days in the
trenches in the hospitals uh operating
on on you know amputating people and so
on but also he is the vice Chancellor
the president in American terms of the
University of Glasgow one of the most
renowned universities so he was um
essentially deported back to Britain uh
that day was worse than death in my
opinion yes
and and you know our little Congress
venue was surrounded by two and a half
thousand German police two and a half
thousand German police for 500 of of my
colleagues uh most of them were harassed
they were not allowed to get in one of
the young Jewish protesters who had his
own little blackard which read Jews
against genocide was upper handed at
that point because he is a humor full
guy he said to them would it have been
okay if it had Jews in favor of genocide
at which point they hit him because they
got annoyed with him and he he ended up
in a prison cell
um in the end the Congress gets uh
underway at some point the
police in they grabb the microphones
they tear them apart they another small
but telling detail if this was a movie
it would have been a good scene uh they
tried to get into the the room where the
technicians room where the servers were
supporting the live streaming and one of
our organizers was actually giving them
the key to get into that room and they
diffused it and they used uh Force to
break down the door instead even though
we were giving them the key in other
words this was a declaration that they
wanted Force they wanted violence they
wanted to create a climate of fear
anyway that happened about 30 minutes
before I was due to speak over Zoom I
was in here in Greece uh and of course I
couldn't because the live stream was
discontinued so what I did was as I'm
sitting here talking to you I recorded
my speech on my computer I uploaded it
on my blog and clearly the authorities
were not particularly pleased by that so
the next day there was a demonstration
by our organizers and a police
Constable approaches our organizers and
warns them against my voice being heard
over the loudspeakers of the organizers
because they
was uh an order by the ministry of the
Interior to ban me not only from
entering the country but also from
entering the country
digitally or through audio files even if
they were pre-recorded which you know
the Mind
boggles absolutely boggles since then um
the the government has managed to lie to
the German people to the public
generally to me in writing at least
three or four times first they denied
that it was a ban on me then they said
it was a ban on me then they said they
were going to give me in writing the
reasons for the ban because I've never
been presented with anything in writing
explaining the ban and now today I
received a letter from the German police
the National Security Department which
is Eerie the moment you hear the
National Security Department of the
German police right this your hair
stands on end even though I don't have
much um
and it it read that uh yes we told you
that we would give you the reasons for
your ban but we're not going to because
uh doing so would jeopardize the
capacity of the German state to
coordinate with other security and
intelligence services in order to
prevent National Security threats to the
Federal Republic of Germany so this is
where we
are yeah um uh similar thing has
occurred here in the United States of
America and has occurred time and time
again maybe not to the same severity as
the German government because we do at
least have like freedom of speech which
uh the way that people advocate for it
is often times for uh opening up spaces
to more reactionary thinking and more
reactionary thoughts but in in some
respects there's a little bit more of an
allowance for um I guess radical outside
of the box thinkers uh under normal
circumstances like criticism of Israel
do not get met with uh in normal
circumstances at least do not get met
with uh criminal liability criminal
punishments however um our universities
which are supposed to be Battlegrounds
for free speech and and ideas to to test
their metal in the marketplace of ideas
have uh seemingly shut off one type of
information from public discourse pretty
desperately an example I uh obviously
would bring would like to bring up now
is Columbia University I don't know if
you're familiar with what's going on
with the student protesters out there
student um they disbanded uh a lot of
the groups including Jewish voice for
peas and they suspended a bunch of
students including uh uh overnight
taking away uh their their access into
residential Halls leaving them stranded
in the middle of New York and also on
top of that mass arrested a bunch of uh
campus uh demonstrators there's another
example from USC with the valedictorian
who uh in almost uh
an incredibly ironic way a valedictorian
who uh minored in and this is the USC's
own terminology for it uh resisting
genocide studies because at the USC uh
they don't it's not just called genocide
studies is called resisting genocide
studies which she had minored in uh a
hijabi student uh was
denied uh her uh right to do a valid
dictorian speech as is customary uh
under normal circumstances denied for
security concerns similar to what the
German government told you uh of course
this is the very same USC campus that
has been a hotbed of conversation about
how Milo anopolis has to come on campus
and and he did Ben Shapiro has come on
campus and deliver speeches uh with
police protection mind you but of course
when it's a valedictorian who is going
to maybe mention Palestine well that's
too much of a security uh breach for uh
the USC campus for uh I guess USC donors
in general and the alumni uh that they
had to cancel their speech so the the
obvious hypocrisy was always uh uh
pretty apparent to those who have been
paying attention to the plight of
Palestinians for uh you know many many
decades uh I've routinely brought this
up as a Counterpoint to the likes of
Barry Weiss who fancy themselves to be
Champions who have uh champions of free
speech who have tailored their entire
right-wing uh uh commentary around even
when they were at the New York Times
around how they are advocates for free
speech and that's why we have to allow
these like super far-right speakers on
campus who
also uh
personally uh would do everything in
their power and Ben Shapiro as well do
everything in their power to to stop any
kind of uh student activism from ever
happening on college campuses even
before uh this new post October 7
environment that we're in uh going as
far as collaborating with uh Canary
Mission which is a doxing operation uh
and and uh you know
utilizing uh the Deans and and utilizing
uh University administrators to to
basically suppress any kind of uh Pro
Palestinian sentiment um so you know the
situation has been really bad for a very
long time however I guess one thing I
wanted to talk to you about
was uh maybe maybe pulling ourselves out
of uh this conversation for a second and
thinking about a broader picture here
because things have been very different
since October 8 uh now we're in we're in
the seventh month of the uh seemingly
endless ethnic cleansing campaign in
Gaza but public sentiment has shifted
dramatically uh in the direction of of
recognizing Palestinians as humans and
also even there I say V ating for
Palestinian
emancipation um what do you think about
all of
this to say that
um the 7th of October even though it uh
triggered massive death and suffering
and that includes the 1200 uh Israelis
but now we have you know 35,000
Palestinians uh whose life has been
snuffed out and we have in particular
you know the the thousands and thousands
of of uh uh Palestinian injured children
no surviving parents that idea you know
of uh kids surviving in the rubble on
their own buing their siblings with
their the rotting cor corpses of their
parents in the vicinity that that
simply surpasses anything that the human
Spirit can sustain
nevertheless as somebody who has been to
Gaza in previous decades has been to the
West Bank who has seen the Ironclad apar
heide state in all its brutality even
when nobody gets killed just watching a
queue a line of people trying to cross
um a checkpoint in near caladia or Amala
in order to go to the hospital in order
to go to their work and to sustain
the ritual humiliation of the Agents of
the apar heide state which is which has
been established now for
decades before the 7th of October let us
not forget 60% of children in Gaza were
malnourished that's before the
seventh uh the ethnic cleansing of
Palestinians in East Jerusalem was uh
running at a very fast pace similarly in
the West Bank the settlers
were constantly constantly eradicating
whole Villages under the idf's
supervision and
assistance the Arab states the Arab
states that had sold their soul to the
devil long long time ago and here I mean
the United Arab Emirates and Saudi
Arabia Jordan and so
on Western capitalist Imperials
interests in the region specifically
America totally in the pockets of uh
of of American Capital not even European
Capital uh and you know they they were
quite happy to allow the Palestinian
people to be ethnically cleansed as long
as there was peace and quiet uh you you
saw that the United Arab Emirates
established de de uh diplomatic
relationships with uh with Israel uh no
conditions attached regarding even a
discussion of the so-called two-state
solution Saudi Arabia was coming next at
least
now the blood of so many people has
given rise to exactly as you put it a
change of heart especially amongst the
youth in the United States and
everywhere else and to allude to
something you were saying earlier to the
restrictions in free speech and
generally uh in in a in a the capacity
of the American people to discuss
sensibly and with a modicum of um
mindfulness the question of Universal
human rights from The River To The Sea
he reminded me as you were speaking of
the Great Edward Sade who once commented
that unless the Palestinians are
liberated it is the Americans who will
remain in a state of pseudo
democracy that's interesting um I think
that I mean I do think that America is
in a state of pseudo democracy even uh
outside of the the Palestinian question
um I think it's a it's it's very preent
the golden meire quote that I bring up
quite a bit I think is uh flipped on its
head uh do you know the one I'm talking
about where she says something along the
lines of like um Palestinians will never
know peace until they learn to love
their children more than they hate Jews
and I think that that is much like many
of the things that uh zionists uh have
said time and time again about like both
the Inception of the state of Israel and
the defenses for why Israel must
maintain an apar tide um has always been
a case of pure projection like I've
never seen something so perfectly uh
devoid of of of any kind of logic and
just like almost entirely flipped on its
head where I think that there's truth to
what goldem Meer is saying as long as
you flip the script flip the narrative
and and talk about how Israel will never
know peace until they learn to love
their own children and want to protect
them more than they want to kill Arabs
and Palestinians as a whole and I think
that uh what you brought up as far as uh
6% of children uh facing
malnourishment uh that predates October
7 and the the subsequent siege that
occurred and is still ongoing is a
perfect demonstration of why October 7
happened to begin with this does not
make it right this does not make it good
it is still a tragedy there were still
acts that uh certainly can be clarified
as of Terror considering that uh you
know there were civilians who were
targeted and killed in the process um
however um it was while it was
unprecedented it was not unexpected in
any uh sense of the word you cannot push
people into a corner back them jail them
humiliate them for 75 years and and
expect them to be surval and expect them
to not want to resist it's a very normal
human condition um something that gets
lost in this conversation I think having
said that however um I want to move on
to I guess now that we've discussed uh
the the changing of the narrative
especially amongst the youth um some of
the ways in which our um are some of the
ways in which our organs of propaganda
are are reacting to that change and I do
feel like there's a sense of desperation
here especially as it pertains to like
the Tik Tock ban the Tik Tok band has
been been a very pressing point of
conversation they've uh they've brought
it up in numerous occasions now APAC is
also involved themselves in trying to
get uh Tik Tock banned uh there was a
leaked audio of of uh the the president
ADL uh which for those of you who don't
know is the Anti-Defamation League but I
like to call it the apartheid Defense
League um had had uh been talking
warning about how Tik Tok was
brainwashing the youth into repeating
Hamas and Iran and propaganda as he said
those were the words he used and now
American Congress both uh for financial
gain and also now as a matter of in
their opinion National Security want to
move the ownership of Tik Tok away from
bite dance and and give it to the hands
of a trusted American capitalist instead
um do you think that that will uh do you
think that there's any chance that that
something like this would pass I mean
what does that say about American
hypocrisy as far as free speech uh what
are your thoughts on that of course
there is a very strong chance it will
pass I'll be surprised if it doesn't
pass but H allow me I need to make a
point regarding the storming of the wall
of the Wall of Shame around Gaza on the
7th of October yeah because uh one of
the reasons why I'm being vilified and
disinvited and demonized here in Europe
at least is because on the 8th of
October I made a
very uh
staunch
separation um between two separate
issues one is the atrocities that were
committed by members of Hamas against
civilians I condemn every single
atrocity whomever the perpetrator might
be or the victim but I've separated that
strictly and stly from the resistance
the armed resistance to an uper heide
system designed as part of a slow
burning inexorable ethnic cleansing
program which involves creating back in
1948 the open concentration camp which
is the Gaza
Strip resistance to that wall to that
bed wire bringing it down armed
resistance to that is not only a right
of the Palestinians who are encased
inside that bed wire it is a duty in the
same way that prisoners of War according
to the Geneva Convention have not only a
right but a duty to try to escape the
2.2 million gazin have a duty to
themselves to resist and bring down tear
down that Bloody wall that is a separate
issue from the condemnation of attacks
on civilians I need to be very clear on
this let's go back to tick Tok no well
you and I are both uh uh on the exact
same page I I always uh make this
separation that like although though
terrorism is a political designation for
non-state actors regardless of ideology
regardless of what they causes whether
it's moral or immoral just or unjust um
ultimately the way I classify our
understanding of uh what it means to do
terrorism colloquially I classify that
as targeting civilian populations
regardless of uh you know devoid of
political ideology I think that that is
the line that must be drawn in these
circumstances es and uh so I do agree
with you on what you said as well that
was something I said something similar
on October 8th as well didn't stop
everybody from still pouncing and saying
that uh I love decapitating babies and
and that I am Hamas saabi me also being
from a Muslim background as a Turkish
person by the way sorry um I am I am
Turkish I don't know if you know that
but know that I appreciate that
listen you and I are post otoman that's
what we are we share our post otoman
identity it's true my my grandparents
are uh on my father's side are from
salonic and uh cre actually so although
I've never been to Greece we had a very
good example of ethnic
cleansing uh the ethnically cleanse the
Turks and the Turks ethnically cleans
cleanse the the Greeks and the result we
are both poorer for this yeah well I
mean but also we do have a lot of shared
history and shared culture I always joke
about how like it's impossible to
distinguish between Greek Villages and
Turkish Villages the only major
distinction is like language and
religion which seemingly are big
barriers for a lot of people it's a
hang-up for many people even though we
are obviously aligned as uh we're
obviously aligned on class interest more
so than anything else uh as you and I
both understand and recognize um even
culturally I think Greek people and
Turkish people are very similar food
similar people look the same people have
similar Vibes in general we are the same
we are the same and I have to tell you
that that my Turkish comrades in turkey
and I have a lot of them uh who are
fighting for the same causes that we are
fighting here in Greece you're fighting
in the United States and sometimes under
harsher conditions are the people that I
admire the most and unless we managed to
uh join
Hands Across the AGC neither Greece nor
turkey will be free yeah agreed um but
yeah going back to the Tik Tok band
let's talk about that let me tell you
about what I what I believe about and
and this is something which is very
close to my heart because I've recently
the United States published let me plug
my recent book called techn Fidelis what
killed capitalism uh in it I um I delve
into what I consider to be the most
interesting economic and socioeconomic
uh transformation of the last 10 years
we have a new form Capital which are
called Cloud Capital it's what lives in
your phone Tik Tok is one example but so
is Google and so on and so forth my
hypothesis Hassan is that um this is a a
unique form of capital capital so far up
until we had uh you know algorithmic
capital or Cloud Capital as I call it
they what was Capital it was produced
means of production things that you
create in order to build other stuff
like you know you have a tractor in
order to produce corn you have a steam
engine in order to produce textiles but
with what lives inside Tik Tok what
lives
inside YouTube or Facebook or amazon.com
for that matter it's a produced means of
behavior modification not of producing
anything you know Jeff basos is not
producing anything he's just produced
the capital with which he has created a
fom in which he
encases buyers and sellers he doesn't
produce anything himself but he charges
40% rent on the produ on
the deals that are struck by buyers and
sellers and anyone who owns that cloud
capital is immensely powerful they have
a remarkable new powers to extract value
from others whether they are
proletarians bis even small scale
oldfashioned capitalists why am I
telling you all this because if you
think about it there are two locations
on the planet where Cloud capital is
concentrated Europe doesn't have any
India doesn't have any Africa doesn't
have any it's the United States and
China why did Donald Trump start the
Cold War the new cold war between the
United States and China it's not Taiwan
this is a very boring a very lazy exp
explanation China's position in Taiwan
never changed it's not that the fact
that the Chinese are spying on the
Americans as if the Americans are not
spying on everyone H it's not the
military builtup of China until I see
military Naval vessels of the
Chinese uh Navy patrolling California or
you know the just outside uh
Virginia it's really unbelievable that
they are worried about the Chinese
military prowess no it's because the
Chinese have developed their own Tech
and they have an advantage over the
American big Tech and let me tell you
what my hypothesis is to the nature of
that advantage in the United States you
have Silicon Valley big Tech and you
have Wall Street two centers of massive
power Wall Street extracts huge
financial rents from the rest of the
world primarily of course in the United
States and big Tech extracts what I call
Cloud rents algorithmic rents call them
if you want right the two of them though
have not merged because Wall Street will
never allow Apple or Google to take over
its capacity know Goldman Sachs or JB
Morgan's capacity to extract Financial
rents so Cloud capital and financial
capital in the United States are divided
and in in a kind of rivalry in China
they have merged under the Communist
party they are Cloud capital and the fin
Financial system have been merged there
is this app called WeChat before we go
to Tik Tok
which provides free banking to everyone
Free banking to everyone you can make
transactions to anybody dep
independently of where where they are
banking imagine that the United States W
would never allow that well El mus
wanted to do that I'm just kidding he's
not but but Goldman Sachs will not allow
him before Goldman Sachs I think his own
incompetence will never allow him but
that's besides the point well yes indeed
even if you had the most competent
version of mask w would would would
murder him would find a way of
annihilating whereas in in in China they
have merged add to that the fact that
the Chinese Central Bank is is now
providing did you know that it it's
providing free digital wallets to
everyone want them even you you can have
one you don't have to be Chinese and
with that you have three transactions in
one of course now so far this is not a
threat or hasn't been a threat to the
preponderance of the power of the
American dollar because the Chinese
capitalist themselves want dollars and
they want the dollar system they do not
want the one but the war in Ukraine by
confiscating 400 billion dollars of
Russian money the United States and the
European Union it has created a lot of
interest in Saudi Arabia in the United
Arab Emirates in Indonesia amongst
oligarchs Russian oligarchs of course
but some Ukrainian oligarchs too too in
putting their money in the Chinese
system you know as a hedge in case the
Americans get pissed off with them and
confiscate their money in the way they
They confiscated the Russian money
so that capacity of Chinese Cloud
capital and Cloud Finance to create a
clear and present danger to the Monopoly
of the international payment system
based on the dollar theft is what you're
talking about right like I mean the the
financial transactions being made on the
dollar yes and don't let anyone tell you
that Swift is European it is formally
European it's completely controlled by
the United States Donald Trump switched
it off like that against Iran when he he
felt like it against the the the the
advice and the wishes of angle americ
and the whole of the European Union oh
yeah so the reason I'm saying that is
because it Donald Trump started a new
Cold War because the people around him
not himself the Donald can't think
strategically to save his life but the
people around him and they're not all
dumb uh it's a big mistake to think that
they were dumb they could see that the
Chinese glomeration of cloud capital and
financial Capital was presenting a clear
and present danger to the Monopoly of
the dollar which is the only reason why
the United States can have huge deficits
and still increases hemony around the
world the American dollar and its
Monopoly you could see that the Chinese
were about to create a super highway
digital Super Highway of payments that
was competing with the American dollar
and they started what with Banning
Huawei then zde remember then
um these very quite large tariffs on
Chinese exports and then Joe Biden comes
in and turbocharges the new Cold War by
Banning micro Advanced microchips from
going to China why in order to slow down
the development of this super highway
digital Highway of the of of Chinese
financial and big Tech Capital Tik
Tok is was always going to be one you
know Donald Trump has been talking about
Tik Tok a long time because it's part of
this attempt to bring down Chinese big
Tech because as I said it is only
Chinese big Tech which has a you know a
very able um competitor to Google to
Facebook to Instagram to all that nobody
else does so Tik Tok was always going to
be targeted then comes Gaza and I'm sure
you have experienced that my tweets on
Gaza are not seen by by anyone I have
1.2 million followers um almost no one
sees my tweets because the algorithm
owned by Elon Musk makes sure that when
I tweet something about Gaza you know me
and my dog only hear it or or hear the
tweeting sounds but Tik Tok is very
different because they cannot control it
so they already had a reason to ban or
take over
Americanized Tik Tok and now they have
an even greater one and and they never
let a little crisis like Gaza go to
waste when they have a long-term new
cold war program for defanging Chinese
big Tech but I don't think they will
manage to do it even if they take over
Tik Tok in the United States even if
they ban it I think the United States
establishment is on a losing streak yeah
um no I I absolutely agree I think one
of the reasons for that um is
because and I guess I hate to admit this
but like U the the denus Gambit as I
like to call it uh is a very successful
one because um the greatest
weakness that uh Western liberal
capitalist
democracies uh presents is their actual
biggest strength uh the strength of of
like social Liberty civil liberties to a
certain degree of course but more
importantly treats the treat economy as
uh Matt Chrisman used to call it of troo
Trap House the idea that like um we love
treats and that is a that has a sedating
effect on on all Americans all people
living in the western world that like
there you know government interference
with our treats can can uh never happen
that we will get very upset especially
here in America like a big part of the
covid lockdown protest originally were
not on the virtue of like oh we can't
get money we can't work but it was
actually about like not being able to
get a hair cut not being able to go to
Applebees and while it seems really
silly I think that our appetite for that
sort of thing was uh very very usefully
uh weaponized I guess in some respects
by uh the the uh by the dangus
government at the time uh and and that
paired up with obviously the interests
of capitalist that were consistantly in
the face of of profit rates uh declining
uh wanted to sque squeeze out as much
profits as possible by Outsourcing labor
to China which was going to be very
cheap so that I think was uh was was
obviously very successful in in bringing
about this uh incredibly prosperous
Chinese development over the course of
the past couple of decades and I think a
very similar Dynamic exists within Tik
Tok as well obviously social media is
heavily regulated internally in China
Tik Tok doesn't exist in China they have
Doan they have a different uh version of
Tik Tok in China um and
yet they have a very valuable Western
facing product that America only makes
up I think like 10% of the market share
on which or or the user base on I'm sure
that like they probably generate a lot
more value from the American Market in
general but um overall it's uh it has
been phenomenally successful because it
offers in the simplest terms what
Americans want to see it's very good
giving you exactly what you want to see
it's very good at being addictive the
the lack of restriction and the lack of
Regulation that is at the core of I
guess like American identity American
individualism um is what is inevitably
causing our own downfall in many
respects if you were to think about Tik
Tok as though it's like a is a very
successful uh product a successful
product that does not exist in China and
the the uh the very same product exists
very differently in China as a matter of
fact does that make sense absolutely
absolutely the small meres in Western
life that you describe as streets uh
have always been uh marketized and
commodified superbly by American
conglomerates whether this was Coca-Cola
or McDonald's or hersh's or whatever
we've seen this in Madmen with Don
Draper doing a fantastic job at
commodifying all this you know
commodifying Nostalgia commodifying the
need for escapism and all
that meanwhile
the the deal between the United States
and China that Washington understood as
the backbone for the great friendship
the the Lain between Washington and
Beijing beginning with Nixon in
Beijing the Americans the
American authorities thought of it as a
straightforward oldfashioned trade thing
you know aluminium is produced no long
longer in the United States produced in
Shanghai it's shipped over it goes
through the process of the the customs
Office uh the American government can
control the tariffs it can control uh
how much aluminium goes in they can slow
down the degree to you know the speed at
which aluminium is going into the into
the United States in other words it's
done under the terms of the United
States uh the Chinese capitalists
producing the aluminium depend on the
dollar they keep their money in Wall
Street they buy real estate in Miami so
they are
controlled they they are forced
essentially because they have no other
alternative to buy us treasury bills
essentially the
Chinese profits become a fund uh a slash
fund for the American government to run
large deficits it's it's it's a
beautiful deal for the United States and
it's not just the Chinese profits though
it's this exists for every uh citizen as
long as they're rich capitalist like uh
and and the reason why I mentioned that
is because there's a lot of xenophobia
in America and like the
Chinese uh the Chinese Investments are
still I think like 17 on that long list
of other nations that like buy land or
other nations that buy capital in
general in
America there is very heavily restricted
on what they can buy by the United
States they they they have to keep their
money in the dollar system but they you
know if if they try to buy Google they
will not be allowed even the Japanese
now are not allowed to buy you know
Steel company yeah uh so but here is the
great contrast between aluminium which I
use as an example I could have used cars
I could have used uh clothes textiles
whatever Tik Tok is very different
because Tik Tok is not produced in China
Tik Tok is produced by you guys in the
United States because you know the the
capital that is necessary to create Tik
Tok is Tiny you know of course by your
standards in mine is large all the
service and the stuff but in terms of
you know the greater scheme of things
there's not that much yeah it was a very
clever algorithm but how much did it
cost a minuscule amount in comparison to
how much it takes to to produce
aluminium and send it over to the United
States and so on right and who is the
real producer of the Capital stock of
Tik Tok you you are every time you
upload a video on Tik Tok you are adding
to the cloud capital of Tik Tok and that
madens the American authorities because
here you have a business model a Chinese
business model which operates in the
United States it doesn't have a produ
productive base in China but it amasses
monies which in a manner through a
process which is not under the control
of the customs Office of the IRS of uh
the trade Department of the United
States of the FDC of of the Federal
Reserve and and that to them is anathema
they would love to have it in
China H but they are load to allow the
Chinese to have it in the United
States yeah we get you can't make our
citizens your digital surfs only we get
to do that is what you're saying yeah
absolutely as a surf myself because I I
am very much a part of obvious techn
feudalism uh my rent Seeker being Jeff
Bezos here on Twitch because this is
Amazon owned platform uh I am
consistently giving uh a percentage fee
for being able to operate on the
internet in the way that I do uh back to
Twitch and by way of twitch back to
Amazon back to Jeff uh Jeffrey Bezos um
yeah I I I see the point that you're
you're making um I agree with you I
don't know if Tik Tok will be be banned
though because I think that like I said
it is a very powerful the only tool of
resistance that the Americans
successfully ever deploy against uh uh
centers of power is when their treats
are taken away like because this entire
project relies on you having
unrestricted unfeathered access to said
treats including uh uh Tik Tok including
but not limited to Tik Tok and once
those things get taken away people get
very very
upset um so I I don't
know that's why bance the owner the
Chinese owner of American Tik Tok would
be mad to divest they should uh throw
the ball in the court of the United
States authorities and say if you want
to ban us ban us we're not
selling yeah I mean that's why would
they it's a very powerful tool in
general I don't think they're going to I
don't think they're going to sell I I
think that they're going to yeah they're
going to they're going to force the
American government to make a very
unpopular decision that uh many not just
like random people that enjoy Tik Tok
but also many small business owners are
going to be frustrated by because the
reality
is um that there are a ton of small
business owners because it's like one of
the only viable uh uh economic forms of
upward social Mobility which is
basically just a forgotten dream for
many Americans but that it's small
business ownership in the form of uh uh
in the digital space like selling
T-shirts and whatnot this is like one of
the last bastions of the of being able
to realize some semblance of the
American dream uh one of the last
Avenues where you can do that you're
absolutely right and at the same time
let's not forget what my friend Cory Doo
says about Amazon and American
conglomerates in the big Tech space uh
here's a fantastic word I'm sure you
know it the process of eni ification
so Amazon began and Facebook began by
being nice both to users and to to
sellers to Publishers for instance
people like yourself or newspapers or
small businesses until they became
absolutely these small businesses and
Publishers and users became completely
uh beholden to the platform utterly
dependent on it and then they started
piling on them and essentially
blackmailing them uh you will not appear
in the first 20 um even if people want
to see you unless you pay us uh and Tik
Tok hasn't done that at least not yet so
I'm reinforcing your point that small
businesses that have been completely
exploited and they hear the word Amazon
and they freak out uh if you take away
Tik Tok from them them uh given that
it's their last resort they will be
particularly paved but then again the
United States authorities have shown in
the past a remarkable
capacity to you know treat Americans
like fer and then not to pay the price
for it because the fer simply stays at
home privatizes Their Fear licks their
wounds and accepts their
circumstances yeah uh the the thing that
you're mentioning is also a byproduct of
monopolization I feel like all matter of
tech especially because it's like a new
frontier to some or was a new frontier
when the uh when the the uh when Silicon
Valley was expanding I guess uh that uh
they did the exact same thing that our
Barons our Oil Barons and our steel
Barons did and tried to very quickly
seize up as much territory expand uh
vertically and horizontally and mon ize
as quickly as possible and it's like
it's not even really a secret uh it is
very much the uh stated goal of every
single one of these Silicon Valley
unicorn companies such as Uber the
entire goal is that you know we're a
tech company we're going to go get we're
going to get into the market we're going
to bring a a valuable disruptive product
and that disruption is only in the form
usually of like a little bit of new um
technological uh advancements but a lot
of disruption to the uh labor regulatory
process which is already very anemic
here in the United States of America
because like what did Uber actually do I
mean it disrupted The Medallion
structure it disrupted regulations for
cab drivers and uh and and it took
advantage of a new class of gig economy
workers that were desperately looking to
make extra money uh so they could uh
keep up with uh the increasing prices
and and worsening living conditions um
and and their overarch their their
overall state of goal was to monopolize
and once you reach uh Market Monopoly or
at least like you're a a valid enough
oligopoly or duopoly or an
oligopoly then you can get away with
slowly but surely ruining exactly what
made you so disruptive and so successful
in the first place uh by slowly but
surely lowering the quality
of uh of the delivery mechanism like
when we're talking about Amazon uh or
you know consistently trying to uh
further uh erode labor protections and
consistently and and very
successfully uh you know raising the
prices of the product that you're
delivering still the same product but
now it's more expensive so slowly we
surely just like moving the dial uh year
over-ear and making the the process more
shitty for the consumer and definitely
way more shitty for uh the the uh
workers every step of the way that uh
produce whatever the products that we're
talking
about indeed and the there's a direct
correspondence between the time one
passes inside one of those platforms the
more you stay in that platform and the
more you transact in that platform the
higher your switching costs
cost of switching to another platform uh
so you know if you're on Twitter and you
you interact a lot you get you get more
followers like you with twitch you have
more and more followers every follower
that is added to your list makes it more
expensive for you okay uh to move to
another platform because you lose the
capital you've built up Social Capital
right so as your your switching costs
increase you the the degree of
exploitation that you suffer from the
owner of that cloud capital is increased
because he can do it or she can do it
without fearing that you will switch
because your switching costs have
increased this is the business model
this is why I call this a fdom it's
these are not it's worse than
monopolis you know take you know Ford
Motor Company right I mean Henry Ford
try to monopolize the car business and
to a large extent he succeeded with
maybe competing only against General
Motors and a little bit with Chrysler in
the good old days uh but he was
firstly he was building the bloody car
that he was selling you number one right
he had he had skin in the in the product
so to speak secondly um he didn't sell
you an oven as well he didn't sell you a
book or an electric bicycle at the same
time and moreover and the that's the
most important thing the capital he used
to produce the Model T was not
simultaneously messing with your brain
because amazon.com to give an example or
Uber it doesn't matter which one we take
as an example the same algorithm that
trains you to train it to train you to
train it to put a Desir into your head
sells you the as well and extracts
40% from the capitalist who sold it to
you and it is the same algorithm that
runs like automata the workers of Amazon
in the warehouses and it is the same AI
algorithm exactly the same algorithm
that
predicts with very high probability of
success in which Warehouse there is a
probability an increased probability of
un unionization and then shuts that
warehouse down or fires everybody that
is not a monopoly this is why I say you
know welcome to techn feudalism this is
feudalism this not even capitalism it's
not a monopoly
with with additional uh with with so
many more resources that previous
overlords could not have even imagined
though the capacity to mess with your
brain yeah you know hry for the best hry
for could do is come up with a good ad
that within make you want to buy a Ford
uh B of Alexa Alexa is a dream come true
for the KGB if the KGB had
Alexa wouldn't need to kill people you
know if the the gos plan Ministry of
planning in the Soviet Union had uh the
algorithm of Amazon capable of matching
individual consumers to individual
producers Central planning would have
been a fantastic success I was just to
say that yes exactly but so that
actually is a really interesting point
that you just brought up because don't
you think that the uh don't you think
that like if we magically had these
exact same tools at our disposal but
somehow um not even through Clash
strugle let's say I'm uh I'm a leftcom
or something all of a sudden and I think
that magically the contradictions uh
caused capitalism to collapse and
everyone is a socialist now like these
obviously ridiculous but um let's say
that uh in in a situation such as that
one where we had the exact same tools at
our disposal techn feudalism could very
quickly uh or techn feudalism and all of
the surveillance capabilities AI
algorithms would actually make um would
actually make Central planning
incredibly efficient and very successful
it would be like uh I mean isn't it
isn't this like the the early uh
assessment before the technology
actually caught up to this idea but this
wasn't this like the the attitude in
Chile as well uh what was the the thing
that they were working on the the pro
Central programming CS yeah the
cybernetics C
yeah uh absolutely and they did a
remarkably good job even though the
machines were very Antiquated yeah not
particularly capable look you're
absolutely right um this is a good time
to be a socialist who actually believes
in uh in central planning but but but
Progressive Central planning CER
planning which is uh very capable of
homing in to individual desires not
treating everybody like a gray mass of
human beings as the did uh a Libertarian
Star Wars like communism is now possible
given the AI programs that are being
developed the problem is that because AI
is owned by the
0.001% it is being used in order to
create something closer to Star Wars
than Star Trek you know a kind of Empire
striking back and and creat creating one
war after the other both within our
communities and between our societies so
the old
Lefty vision of um grabbing the
ownership of the means of production but
now it's not just the means of
production or distribution or exchange
but it's also the means of
communication what I call Cloud Capital
socializing Cloud capital is the only
way that the liberal individual can live
it again it is the only way that we can
be free you know otherwise our mind
change Will Keep Us enslaved uh uh in
the interest of the Jeff bases and the
mark zberg of the world and once we have
reclaimed our minds through socializing
Cloud Capital we can put it to work to
create a new Cloud Capital Commons so
imagine instead of the algorithm of uber
uh being used to exploit drivers and
users and our data and all that imagine
if it was in the service of a
Cooperative uh which owns the cloud
capital and which operates on the basis
on the basis of you know one worker or
one driver one share one vote and
imagine that that was the case in every
Enterprise in every sector then we would
have libertarian liberal capitalism
sorry
communism when you say when you say
libertarian though it's important to
understand the the distinction between
you using the term libertarianism and
what Americans understand I don't think
you're using it in the American anarcho
capitalist uh way you mean libertarian
like the political Theory I I use it in
the oldfashioned anarchos syndicalist
fashion where you see the problem with
anarcho capitalists is that there's
nothing anarchic about them yeah no it's
it's built upon an unjustifiable
hierarchy obviously the class Dynamic
there is like nobody can suppos
supposedly supposedly they believe in
Freedom uh but the only Freedom they
truly believe in is the freedom of
conglomerates to enslave everyone that's
that's what the the Millay of the world
and the American Libertarians but for me
you see I I do believe in libertarian
communism in the sense that it sounds
like a contradiction it isn't a
contradiction I mean KL Marx was clear
he in in his hatred of the state he said
that in under communism the state would
wither he use the state order to bring
about something like a
decentralized uh Commons in which Cloud
capital and all other kinds of capital
are utilized for the purposes of
enhancing cooperation and shared
Prosperity well I mean I guess we we
deviate a little bit on that front
because um I do believe that this state
is a necessity at least in the early
stages of of transitioning into
socialism but um don't I agree I agree
with you okay of course we do yeah I'm
talking about I'm talking I'm talking
about the asymptotic case of where we
want to get that yeah um so you brought
up melee and I have a lot of questions
uh from that I fielded from my Discord
uh and there are a lot of fans of yours
in my community and they have actually
surprisingly come up with really good
questions uh unexpectedly so I'm going
to read one of them to you um uh this
person says considering your experience
with the IMF and international debt
negotiation I had a few questions for
you regarding the current state of
Argentina under Malay Administration by
the way uh before we get into that also
if you could elaborate on your
experience with IMF for those of you who
don't know that could be uh interesting
as well um just briefly uh what do you
think future negotiations with IMF will
look like under this new government in
Argentina how do you think the IMF will
utilize their leverage considering this
administration's willingness to
cooperate with their demands what do you
think a future admin ation plan to
tackle this debt should look like
personally my experience I was elected
uh in 2015 Finance Minister of Greece at
a time when Greece was uh well still is
but it it had already began back then
absolutely bankrupt we were the most
bankrupt uh European country uh and uh I
there was already uh an IMF driven
program of massive
massive inhuman austerity for the many
and largess for the oligarchs in Greece
uh and the oligarchs outside of Greece
so my job was to negotiate with the IMF
the European Central Bank uh and I only
had one objective and the my own
objective was to haircut to delete a
large part of the Greek debt because if
you in debt bondage then you simply have
no sovereignty and you just don't exist
so
that's my background mle uh what's his
negotiation with the IMF like well it is
a negative negotiation it is the
opposite of a negotiation the IMF are
complaining and I have spoken to people
in the IMF with whom I still have some
contacts they are complaining that he is
doing too much of what they had asked
for so it's a bit like you know me and
you negotiating I I want to buy the
house and and you're asking 500,000 and
I'm offering you a million that's me lay
the IMF the IMF asked for a little bit
of austerity he got them three times
more austerity so essentially he's in a
slash and burn mode uh of essentially
increasing the poverty rate to
80% uh destroying all
social and economic opposition to the
very few people that he serves uh and
and
essentially turning Argentina
into Haven for hedge funds for um those
who will plunder the country they will
dollarize the assets that they will
plunder and the people will be treated
like um you know Surplus to
requirements uh a lot of them will have
to
migrate that is that that that is that
is what mle judging by his actions seems
to be interested in now what should
Argentina do Argentina should default on
its debts and it was a previous
administration which uh or two
administrations before that that had
absolutely
inexcusably after it was all over after
the original default by Argentina had
been accepted by almost everyone
including hedge
funds uh that cretinous government who
the name of the president escapes who is
now supporting melee essentially uh went
to the IMF to borrow tens of billions of
dollars in order to repay creditors who
had lost hope that they would get their
money back and the only reason he did
that he didn't have to do that the only
reason he did it was because debt is
power the rich he wanted his own
government to be even more indebted in
order to have an excuse for imposing
more austerity on his people people
because austerity for the many increases
the bargaining power of the
oligarchs won't this inevitably I mean
the thing is although it is uh kept up
by uh International interests Western
interests in general Western Capitals in
general but like doesn't this only
accelerate the demise I mean one thing
that I see is that uh under I guess like
neoliberal regimes all around the world
one thing that we see is that like the
contradictions become as the
contradictions become more apparent to
those in the working class given I guess
like a almost a century of Red Scare
propaganda and also concert efforts uh
from the capital owners completely
gutting any kind of like labor
solidarity that could have existed or
any form that does exist I feel like
there is no
counterbalance uh in in any of these
countries with respect to um class
solidarity and and also uh a genuine
push in the right direction where I feel
like we are slowly uh
decaying uh as capitalism inevitably
decays we are slowly decaying alongside
it and uh in Prior instances I guess
given the way that the division of labor
work given the assembly line structure
that uh made it more permissible to do
some kind of organizing to unite
alongside uh our our relations to the
means of
production I don't see a very positive
outcome in all of this Beyond uh our our
at first creeping uh walk towards
fascism and now you know bouldering
towards fascism that will inevitably
restore order in the
Decay do you feel like I'm wrong is
there a sense of is there something to
hold out hope for the same page we are
on the same page there is no guarantee
whatever that the immiseration of the
working class is going to create class
solidarity and a rebound of progressive
politics I was young when uh Margaret
thater was doing her thing in the in the
United Kingdom even before Ronald
Reagan started imitating her in the
United States I lived in the United
Kingdom we used to say I remember when
unemployment Rose from 700,000 to 4 and
a half million in a year and a half
700,000 to 4 and a half million in a
year and a half uh leftists like myself
were saying oh well you know that will
teach the working class in Britain a
lesson now they will have to respond no
no they did not respond they became more
right-wing in the end you know they
ended up becoming more nationalist more
xenophobic uh or
disenfranchised yeah or divide or uh
betrayed by their own political
Representatives labor party in the
United Kingdom the de the Democrats in
the United States similarly here uh our
people here in 2015 was when I was
Finance Minister put up a remarkable
fight and I have to say that uh I'm
still moved to Tears by the manner in
which they embraced us when we were
doing battle against the oligarchs
against the IMF against the
representatives of financial Capital uh
six months into our office my comrade
who was prime minister essentially
betrayed them uh did a u-turn over threw
the people as I say and uh signed the
deal with the IMF and with the
arest and I was hoping truly as I did in
1981 when I lived under Thatcher that
the Greek people the Betrayed Greek
people who had shown such immense
courage would uh overthrow him in return
it didn't as I said before to use the
same expression in that I used in a
different context they privatized their
fears they privatized their despair pure
despair they were depoliticized they
stopped
voting and um in the end when they voted
again it was only
between two evils choosing the Lesser
one in terms of who would give them a
100 bucks more a month in in the form of
some kind of
humiliating benefit uh that is why there
is no substitute Democratic politics to
organizing never accept acting defeat
there is no final defeat there is no
final Victory there are no
guarantees uh we may lose forever and
you know in any case we're facing a
climate catastrophe but as I keep
telling my friends and my comrades I
know I'm going to die that is no reason
for me to wake up in the morning and not
to have you know vivacity and energy and
try to make a good day of it yeah um one
thing powerful words one thing that I
wanted to tie this into uh was also
brought up by some of the questioners in
the Discord was um anti-immigration uh
anti-immigration is is an issue that you
and I uh align on uh we're both
internationalists uh or I guess maybe
even globalists I don't know whatever
whatever people consider
internationalism is different than
globalism yes it's not about the
extraction of of uh natural uh resources
from the global South and exploiting
them for uh you know developing cheap
Commodities but instead about Rising
everyone uh up but um anti-immigration
is unfortunately incredibly
successful um even though uh I mean yeah
it's just incredibly successful we saw
Hillary Clinton look at even after she
lost uh the election uh she should she
didn't stop talking about this issue uh
and uh and and I remember her saying
something along the lines like Europe
needs to cave and capitulate to the
right a little bit uh on their
xenophobic sentiment in order to stay in
power now at the time that was a message
that was idiotic in my opinion and still
is idiotic however uh I guess you know
four five six 7 now eight years later
that message is that message has been
heard by neoliberals who are Center left
or portray themselves a center left but
are actually center right uh Emanuel
macron has pushed a lot of xenophobic
sentiment very anti-islam Islam is seen
as like the new villains uh in Europe
even though they were I guess the old
villains the sick man of Europe the
Ottoman Empire and the like and
um it's it's
creating uh ample ground for genuinely
openly ideological fascist to to say see
they agree with us that these immigrants
are actually a problem and that we are
the solution to that problem these guys
are fake they're never going to be as
cruel and as brutal as we are to the
immigrants we will be however and I
think that that xenophobia now is has
led the Democratic party to also take a
similar stance I don't know if you're
familiar but Joe Biden uh has been
advocating in the most idiotic ways
possible for Donald Trump's own border
wall a a comprehensive uh White nativist
anti-immigration
legislation and trying to use that as
like a a political tool and I think that
the only lesson that Americans learn who
are not super tuned into what's going on
is that like yeah immigration is a
problem and if immigration is a problem
of course the right is always going to
be the ones who have the real solution
because the Democrats are supposed to be
a counterbalance to that uh in our in
our duopoly and in what looks like a
Dapo and even parliamentary systems now
like with the uh labor party in the UK
and and I feel like this is creating
ample ground for uh the rise of genuine
fascist parties and I I do I I do fear
that um I I don't know how we push back
against this this question is how can we
both push back against the notion that
refugees are economically damaging while
not falling into the Trap of analyzing
the world in purely capitalistic
economic terms um uh because to fight
this talking point on Purely economic
grounds is the seed ground of the
capitals of human beings must have
economic value to find a place in
society start Hillary Clinton's advice
to the center left in Europe was not
only
unethical and ideologically purile but
it was also stupid from an efficacy
point of view because let's face it
racism
light never beat full-blooded
racism you will never win against
racists by presenting racism light so
what Joe Biden is doing now yeah you
know being Trump light when it comes to
the US uh Mexican border
uh is is a sure MPE for defeat even if
you look at it cynically right that's
Point number one point number two is
that um look Hassan I've been worried
about this since the mid
2000s because as an economist I could
see that
the wall street collapse which happened
2008 was inevitable and that's when I
got really really scared because I could
see that was going to happen in Wall
Street was another 1929 Our Generations
my Generations
1929 and what would follow would
be
again the monetary policy that was
effectively socialism for the very few
for big business combined with harsh
austerity for the
many I could see that the left and that
includes me you know so it's
self-critical as well we would
fail would all probably fail to put
together a program that excites people
and gives them
hope credible in their eyes and the
inevitable result of the
discontent austerity for the many and
socialism for the big big finances and
the big business would create would be
xenophobia just like in the mid War
period I wasn't sure whether it would be
the Jews or the Muslims or the Greeks or
the Germans that would be the target of
the new racists or all of them together
you sometimes you know the Greeks hate
the Germans the Germans hate the Greeks
um everybody has a French uh
anti-Semitism is always on their
eyes hating the
French yes
inde I'm Jing of course
right and and you know this is exactly
what is happening now my third point and
this is a source of great pain for me
personally I've had um massive Rouse
with with comrades former comrades on
the
left who for instance uh
embraced an
anti-migration argument an argument in
favor of walls of electrified fences of
impediments to migration I think I know
who you're talking about but I won't
say let's not say let's not mention her
name uh but it's not just one person I I
was thinking of a him but okay go on all
all right so let's not mention persons
go on and and and and you
know and sometimes they often try to
couch this in Marxist terms they even uh
quote letter that um Marx had sent to
somebody in New York deploring the fact
that Irish
workers coming to the United States to
New Jersey in particular and to New York
City
they were suppressing the wages of the
local proletarian and they use this as
an as a reason for creating walls for
stopping migration but they never quote
an second part of the letter by KL Marx
in which he is very explicit what he
says is of course the solution is not to
stop the migrants from trying to find a
place where they can make ends meat the
solution is
unionization of the domestic workers
along with the migrants yeah right but
my leftwing comrades a lot of them
across Europe and the United States
you'll find it it's very hard to
convince even members of the D DSA
Community with whom I have a very uh
good relationship and I think very
highly of them it's very difficult
they're scared of coming out and say you
mentioned before you know once when
I I don't remember in in some interview
I said that uh borders are a scar on the
face of the Earth it is very hard them
to say that they feel that they are
going to be very severely
punished because they think you're not
realistic when you say that that's what
it is it's a it's I I think that's where
it comes from it's like the fear of
coming across as like an idealist and
not a realist uh and falling into that
same in my opinion sorry to call you off
but falling into that same like
capitalist trap of capitalist thinking
of like oh well this is a part of human
nature uh just like greed is a part of
human nature but also uh a little bit of
xenop phobia is also a part of human
nature so like in order to gain more
allies like we're we need to be more
pragmatic and uh and and they find
themselves unironically advocating for
right-wing attitudes reactionary
thinking in the throws of reactionary
thinking except I don't I think this is
a very lazy form of of realism and it's
not a very good and efficient form of
pragmatism because as I said by being
racist light you don't win if you come
from the left you just lose you lose
whatever ethical
uh grounds you were standing on yeah
that's the more the more calculating
criticism but more generally uh we of
the left have to understand that the
only way we are going to succeed in
changing hearts and Minds is if we say
what we believe in and believe in what
we say I have a lot of comrs from me
from my party met 25 here in Greece we
are running now in the European
Parliament elections and some of them
say you know who are who believe like
you and me that
uh you know walls are electrified fences
are are are are just an Abomination and
need come down they do believe it but
they come to me seriously now
in our meetings our coms meetings and so
on they say but y look try not to talk
about migration because this is this is
our soft underbelly this is where you
know we lose points when you speak out
against the fence between Greece and
Turkey right there's a big electrified
fence now between Greece and Turkey
which didn't exist until a few years ago
don't talk about too much and I say no I
will talk about it a lot because this is
how you distinguish yourself from the
rest and yes even if what happened to
our to to our notion of investment now
what is investment it is a capacity to
suffer a cost today in order to gain
something tomorrow see if even if if I
lose half of my votes because I I say
what is right this is how you educate
the public and this is how you invest in
a future in which the public is not
scared to say the right thing yeah you
you show them that uh you give them uh I
think uh uh the the permission to to be
brave uh when you when you lead by
example in that regard when you show
them that you're unafraid to say these
things uh many people will hear you will
listen to your reason will also have
that same shred of empathy and will be
courageous enough to also speak on these
matters in a similar
way indeed indeed and we need to do this
when we are at our lowest E when we are
losing because if we don't do it when
we're losing that is when you have to
build the foundation your moral and
ideological
Foundation that's when you you need to
show
that I'm not in it for the office the
salary that comes with being minister or
being um Secretary of State or whatever
I'm here because this is what is right
now we need to do this a lot more of
this and I'm really appalled that the
left has become more
scared and more frightened into
submission to a narrative that it
doesn't believe in and people sense that
you know they not they may not be able
to put their finger exactly on it but
they can sense it so on the one hand you
have the powerful believe in what they
say and they say what they believe in
they say you know migrants are scum
we're going to shoot them on site and
they do they believe it they yeah so
there is this combination of power and
conviction on the right and what we have
on the left kind kind of bemon where we
are you know semis scared defeated not
much power we're not attracted to people
it's about time we stiffen our
lip yeah um so one thing one I I feel
like uh you and I somewhat agree on the
dynamic now in the most reductive terms
being very similar the political
environment being very similar to the
early rise of fascism after World War I
um internationally uh we talked about
the rise of fasc IST parties the old
fascist parties as a matter of fact with
the exact same ideas uh coming into
power in places like Italy uh and and
growing its numbers in even places like
Spain and uh and obviously afd's rise
the prominence in
Germany uh the the uh reactionary right
uh growing or or I guess like the
factless attitude from uh the left
alternative uh in the form of the labor
party in the UK um
in that environment in the early stages
of the development of fascism as we
understand it uh I fear I mean I feel as
though and and same with France as well
I feel like there was at least a
counterbalance in the form of trade
unionism and militant labor activism um
and beyond that there was also obviously
the USSR for all of its failures right
and there were plenty um there was also
um there was also a I guess almost and
this is going to be undi not
undialectical but
globally and I I fear that no such
counterbalance exists now um or do you
think that China is the counterbalance I
don't personally think so I mean I don't
know uh but but uh do you feel like
there's a there's a difference here uh
where there is no such alternative no
such state power to facilitate or even
to prove that there is a there's a
counter to the way that things have
existed under capitalism in the Western
World for the past 100
years entirely with you the emise of the
Soviet Union was a catastrophe for the
west and for the working classes of the
West and for the middle classes of the
West even even if they didn't realize it
because let's face it why why was there
a National Health Service in Britain why
was there the New Deal in the United
States yeah why was there free education
for children only because the Bazi the
ruling class in the west was absolutely
terrified that communism was coming so
they were these were uh acts of
retreating in certain regard regards so
as not to lose power and the moment you
saw that the moment the N you know the
red flag uh came down from the krablin
in 1991 all those were taken away
suddenly there was a rush to take away
whatever benefits and public goods had
been made available in order to prevent
communism from coming to the West so
this is an interesting
dialectical and a very delicious
dialectical contradiction uh the west by
the capitalist West by invading the
Soviet Union its very early days it
created a realm of fear and Terror
inside the the Soviet Union that led to
the rise of Stalin to the gulag and so
on so the West caused the the Soviet
Union to become barbaric a very large EX
the Soviet Union civilized the West
that's that's my way of thinking about
this but let me talk about fascism here
the fascism of the mid War period
compared to the fascism today because
there are many similarities I made the
point that our 1929 2008 paved the
ground for the rise of the fascists that
you refer to the orans the melonis the
leens the alternative for dut land the
right-wing brexiteers Donald Trump Modi
in India Golden Dawn and the new
democracy here in Greece and so on and
so forth but there is a fundamental
difference one you mentioned there was a
strong trades union movement in the
1920s and 30s which doesn't exist today
that you mention I don't I need to
mention myself but there was also
something else the fascist parties
because of the strong union movement and
the strong leftwing Social Democratic
communist parties anarchists in uh uh in
Spain and so on uh because of that the
industrial capitalists the
industrialists Finance directly the
fascists so musolini and Hitler would
never have gotten into Power if it was
not for the Big Business Industrial
capitalists that actually saw in the
fascists a way a Bull workk against
the left can what can I can I interject
here as well uh because this is a this
is a complimentary point to the to the
Testament of the strength of militant
Labor uh movements that the early
fascist before they uh completely openly
uh subscribe to Fascism also portrayed
themselves as socialists or well not
real socialists but like they used the
the very the very yeah the very popular
agenda of of uh economic socialism I
guess without actually ever subscribing
to it of course but they still use that
as a as a as a means to to Galvanize
their base or to bring more people onto
their base something that I think Tucker
Carlson has utilized as well as a matter
of fact in like in American propaganda
where sometimes he'll say things where
you're like you're you're confused by
like he he sees the writing on the wall
and will regularly use leftist thinking
economic populism Donald Trump did this
as well as a matter of fact um like true
economic populism in order to to develop
a base of support without ever actually
giving that base the things that he
promised and just uh you know only
hyperfocusing on the nationalistic
components as a means of control indeed
indeed let's not forget that musolini
started Life as a socialist yeah and he
was the first political leader in Europe
to introduce a fully fledged pension
system um non-contributory pension
system uh if you read and I had
spent uh prior to writing a book what 15
years ago about Europe I had spent a a
large and very
painful uh part of my life reading
everything that um
gbls had written between 1920 and
1933 uh it was fascinating they were all
everything everything he had written was
four pages everything was four pages it
had a four-page format the first two
pages I could have written the first two
pages were a critique of capitalism of
financial capitalism of Bankers of you
know the way the exploitation of workers
uh the the cultural
aspects of commodification I could have
written I wish I had written it and then
suddenly so what we do we kill the Jews
right that's the second the bottom of
the second page or into the third and
the fourth one okay similarly uh musini
if you read his speeches especially just
before he took over power what was the
deal
the Covenant that he was presenting the
Italian people it was you have been
treated like
there are these rich bastards the
industrialist the bankers the this that
and the other that selling out the
country and you in
particular and I'm offering you the
following deal you will give me absolute
power forget democracy trade unions
voice representation and all that
rubbish you give me absolute power and I
will look after you and he did he looked
after them he gave them pensions he
tripled the minimum wages what Orban has
done made the trains run on time right
that's what they say yeah but more than
that he actually gave money in like in
the same way that Victor Orban did in
Hungary he Tre trebled the minimum wage
first day what what social democratic
government do you know that has done
that none ever ever okay so you're
absolutely right but the the the
trade-off is no voice no democracy no
representation and then what he these
fascist used to do is then take the
masses that owed them for having been
looked after by them and sell them to
the
industrialists essentially do a deal a
corporatist deal now that was then in
the mid War period after the Our
Generations 1929 2008 that didn't
happen and it didn't happen for the
reasons that you have outlined firstly
we don't have the strong trade unionist
we don't have a strong left the bring
class are not worried about the left so
they don't have to do any of this but
there's something else as well the power
has shifted away from industrial Capital
the industrialists were no longer in
control of capitalism after the end of
Breton Woods in
1971 and by the time Ronald Reagan had
taken over under the stewardship of the
Federal Reserve by um Paul
vuler power has shifted from the
industrial sector to the financial
sector to Wall Street in the United
States but also in Europe
increasingly so even if I made you
president or prime minister in the 1980s
and 90s you couldn't do a deal between
the working class and the industrialist
because the industrialist didn't have
the power they didn't have the money it
was the bankers that did and it's
impossible to cut a deal between the
financiers and the workers or today the
cloud capitalist or Cloud as I call how
imagine a a government sitting down Jeff
Bezos on the one hand and the precariat
on the other and say we'll cut a deal
between you it's just simply impossible
possible phys physically it's not
possible because of the way that
production exchange and distribution has
been uh uh evolving due to technological
change so instead the fascists put all
their eggs in the in in the basket of
xenophobia okay they cannot promise you
to look after you I mean Donald Trump
promised it and didn't
deliver and in the end the only thing
that really happens the dynamic is
this they whip up
discontent through the language of
Carson of uh Trump of meloney in Italy
they win power in order supposedly to
serve the people and then they deliver
tax cuts to the very rich especially to
the financiers and then at that point
they get blunted their own power so
meloney remains in power Italy only
because she's got a deal with the
establishment essentially not to be
different at all to the previous regime
to the Mario drag government which is
really interesting because it's a bit
like what happened to the government in
which I was Minister after I
left uh the my former comad that
remained in government who had agreed
they had effectively surrendered to the
powers that be
fully um they also did exactly what
right-wing governments would have done
only with a leftwing tinge a little bit
of pink somewhere you know uh and of
course at that point the system spits
them out vomits them out and I think
that these fascist will also be vomited
out by the system that incorporates them
because there is no industrial Capital
there no trade unions and no government
anymore has the capacity to cut a deal
whether it is a national socialist Nazi
deal or a Social Democratic deal so I
think we we're done with all that now we
have the radical Center we simply have a
kind of
feudalism it's the
mediocracy the media
autocracy
and know people that are fragmented the
fragmented precariat Cloud serves I call
them Cloud PRS the
precariat uh as far as China is
concerned because you mentioned China
before let me say that I think that
China is remarkable experiment uh it's a
work in progress I don't think we can
say China is like this whatever we say
after China is is wrong because China is
many things uh from some personal
experience I have there are remarkable
left-wing voices in the Chinese
Communist Party very very astute minds
and very Progressive people who with
whom you you know you would find a lot
in common not everything but a lot in
common uh and they represent and workers
cooperatives uh prefectures and so on
but in the same Communist Party Central
Committee you have representatives of
big business the aluminium producers
that I Wasing talking about before you
know the cloud capitalists the more more
billionaires than any other party on the
planet sitting active party
members but but that's what I'm saying
the class struggle in China is happening
within the Central Committee of the
Communist party and of course is
completely behind closed doors it's
totally opaque to us to know what what
is going on that is a great disadvantage
because opacity is never um a friend of
progress but it is an interesting uh
experiment let me give you another
example at some point president X
decided that the cloud cloud elist as I
call them the owners of cloud capita the
big Tech of China became too rich and
too
powerful so he slapped them down
yeah he got rid of them he said no no no
no no no we've given you the right to
get rich but not that rich so Jack Ma
you can be a billionaire back it off
you're out of
Alibaba you know this is this is
interesting I wish we could have a
system where instead of the auto the
autocrat who occupies the position of
the General Secretary of the Communist
party you know we could have a Citizens
assembly or you know representatives of
worker
playing that role of slapping down those
who acquire too
much capital and therefore too much
power to
extract okay that's I mean I I I agree
with what you're saying maybe I also
like the uh the visually I like the idea
of like um the Central Committee having
closed door Mau struggle sessions
internally where they're they're
humiliating the
counterrevolutionary billionaires
potentially um for for engaging in
counterrevolutionary sentiment um I just
I we have no way of understanding what
uh the Chinese government is going to
look like in the next 10 years I don't
think and I that's why it's so funny
when people always say like oh China's
slated to collapse like tomorrow uh not
understanding that like uh it's it's
that well you you scoff at this as an
economist but the the sentiment of those
who uh at least like care to follow
China even from a negative perspective
is almost always what I'm describing to
you if you go on YouTube and you search
China there are a million essays if you
go on foreign policy magazine even
though their attitude has shifted
recently following the party line they
are following the Party Line This is the
Washington consensus the Washington
party line at some point the it's
amazing we don't need in the United
States a KGB we don't need a Communist
party or a capitalist party reaction
party because it operates as if there is
one you don't actually do it for free am
there is a party line suddenly they all
become anti-chinese all the analysts who
were Pro proclaiming China as the great
capitalist success story suddenly they
are dumping on it all of them together
yeah that is not because something
changed in China that's because there's
a new line a new party line yeah it's
it's very interesting to see that I mean
that that can be talked about in every
respect of even left this organizing
something as like a even when you look
at the microcosm um of of like left
disorganizing uh in the past we needed
uh the American government needed coel
Pro right that was a thing that uh that
the the federal government openly
utilized Espionage to infiltrate leftist
groups to subvert them and to cause
Division and to either take over or
eliminate them right and to spy on them
and surveil on them and yet nowadays
like I don't think there is espionage of
that sort I don't think that the
intelligence communities are engaging in
that because people do it to themselves
anyway people have adopted those
Aesthetics so firmly that like uh there
is genuine momentum from those who
consider themselves to be like leftists
who or consider themselves to be uh
socialists of of different varieties
constantly infighting and and finding
new methods of of sewing uh division
Wrecking in the old party
terminology we we are engaging and
Wrecking behavior all the time without
even recognizing that we're doing
it MH we're
volunteering our um views uh to the
owners but at the same time I have to
tell you that as somebody who has uh and
that is official this is not my it's not
hea and it's not my allegation I've got
an three threo NSA tap on me because of
my relationship with Julian
Assan that has been established in
Madrid Court in Spain um I have to say
that
um the National Security apparatus of
the United
States even though you and I are
volunteering our data through Amazon
through Google and so on uh
they do not rely on big Tech they have
their own equipment they have their own
systems because they understand better
than anyone that their own power with
within the honic space that the United
States has created over the last 70
years depends on large scale Capital
belonging to them they believe in state
ownership of cloud Capital with them at
the controls they understand that but
they're still operating at the behest of
capital owners though right like I I
feel like in the most reductive terms
like the Chinese government owns the
corporations whereas in America America
and in Western Capital Nations the
corporations still own the government so
all the decision making from the states
usually in the western world are done to
advance the interest of the capital
owning class as a
whole but don't don't deny agency to the
agents they have some agent let me give
you an example uh in the
1960s the American car industry was in
the process of being wrecked by by
Japanese Imports oh
yeah and the United States could easily
have slapped tariffs to prevent Toyotas
and mazas and Hondas from coming into
the country right they didn't and it
that wasn't because they believed in
free trade but because they had a plan
plan for using Japan as
a proxy for United States power in East
Asia and they wanted a very strong
industrial pylon
supporting the American dollar in East
Asia and they understood that fully well
I've read transcripts in the senate
committee hearings and so on and so
forth and because they had failed in
securing China as a vital space where
the CH the Japanese cars would be
sold they had to absorb them in the
United States so they actually went to
General Motors and they went to Ford and
said okay listen we are going to let
them in that will decimate you but don't
worry we will give you huge defense
contracts and other ways of
financializing your so you ended up with
General Motors becoming a financial
company and not a car company but so
that's what I mean they serve the
interest of corporate Capital but
sometimes they go against what corporate
Capital instructs them to do because
some of the smarter people in Washington
know the interests of corporate America
better than Corporate America does oh
yeah no it still serves because what you
just described is still obviously
imperialism which I believe is a
necessity under capitalism so I think
that it served the interest of American
imperialism even in the short term if it
did not serve the interest of uh
American capitalist at least in certain
sectors Marx had put it beautifully in
the 18th bremier when he said that the
state which is the organ of the bisi
nevertheless has to wield the democ sort
over the heads of the Bui in the baz's
interests yeah they they they do the
they do the the hard stuff sometimes
even if uh even if people don't see it
even if they don't have the
understanding of an agenda which by the
way is yet another argument uh for uh
you know the state uh operating in some
way uh that's why I I think it's
laughable to say that like the American
state is is disorganized or rather there
is no Central planning of some sort uh
after all our agricultural industry
would not exist without severe subsidies
and that's a deliberate uh mechanism of
the state to continue pushing in certain
directions whether it be our our
interest in fossil fuels uh in the way
that we subsidize uh our uh our energy
sector I believe uh up until maybe like
2016 2017 85% of subsidies were still
going to fossil fuel uh providers so
that's like I think that our state is
still operating at the beest of
Corporations even when it doesn't seem
like it uh in the in the short term and
some of those I think some of those
decisions some of those gambles that
we're making are shortsighted in
comparison to how the Chinese State
operates as they uh very quickly seized
on renewable energy as the as as a as an
important sector uh and as a growing as
a as a growing sector um partially they
probably couldn't uh engage in the same
level of control over fossil fuel the
fossil fuel sector even though they had
I guess coal but they they couldn't do
that for for oil so they maybe moved in
a pragmatic fashion towards um working
with uh like the re the countries that
are very resource dense as far as you
know lithium and many of the minerals
that we desperately need for both um
both batteries and and uh and the like
but I feel like they are making the
right gamble uh as a state whereas the
western states are making the wrong
Gamble and are maybe uh maybe too far
gone to recognize that does that make
sense yes absolutely look if if you want
to take an even you know even a quite
right-wing perspective on this uh you
come to the same conclusion that the
Chinese Communist party needs
development of its people in order to
maintain its
legitimacy the United States system
doesn't need that it simply seeks the
reproduction of uh the capital of the
corporate sector that's all they need uh
they get their
uh capacity to reproduce themselves
politically through this fall democracy
this pretend democracy with periodic
elections that um are designed to make
sure that the Deus is never allowed into
the American and democracy uh and at the
same time they extract uh about 70% of
the rest of the world's capitalist
profits which is recycled through Wall
Street so the
Chinese simply looked around and they
try to imagine what the next fuel is
it's not going to be oil it's going to
be solar and it will be wind and it will
be fishion and they're investing like
hell on that uh so so you know the
Americans the only thing that keeps the
United States system going is the
Monopoly of the dollar system they
understand that that's why they will you
know this is they will nuke anyone who
tries
to to to subsume or to subvert the power
of the dollar that we must
remember so speaking of dollarization I
guess I have heard uh some of the things
you've said about bricks
which I I think is is uh hailed up as a
as an alliance that will inevitably
destroy American currency and and the
power that it holds I I don't I am not
as big as a bricks believer uh as I feel
like you aren't either uh especially
considering that like this Allegiance is
not held by any ideological underpinning
these are these are countries that are
even ironically at uh in conflict with
one another at least the I and the C are
in conflict with one another uh with
regular frequency um so what do you have
to say to the to the bricks Defenders
like what is your assessment for those
of you who don't know uh in the chat
about uh the development of bricks while
you also answer that I'm going to run to
the bathroom real quick if you don't
mind go ahead I will talk to our
audience go ahead yeah there's there's
25,000 people listening to what you have
to say oh hello for 5,000
people okay so I think that commentators
establishment commentators on the right
underestimate the importance of the
bricks and my left-wing comrades
overestimate the importance of the
bricks they have we have I mean I would
like to see that happening except that I
don't believe it will happen we would
like to see uh an
alternative poll of Soo economic power
and geopolitical power emerging in order
to counterbalance American imperialism
and you know those who who still yearn
after the Soviet Union who are nostalgic
about the Soviet Union with all its
faults as Assan
said and they thought that you know
quite rightly so that it was a
counterbalance for United States power
and they would like to say okay well
bricks is the new USSR well it isn't and
I think Hassan mentioned some of the
reasons why it isn't uh there is no uh
common political economy what is the
relationship between the political
economy of South Africa Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia which is now entering the
bricks um Russia India and China they
are just completely different uh kettles
of fish they are in conflict with one
another the most important aspect
however of bricks
is the common cause they have and that
is the fear of what I was saying before
the power of the United States
bestowed upon it upon the the United
States by the Monopoly of international
payments so if you want to make
international payments you're stuck with
the dollar these days uh the Chinese
again as I was alluding to before the
Chinese have created a new super highway
for international payments which Indian
oligarchs Saudi Arabian oligarchs
Russian oligarchs Indonesian oligarchs
Malaysian oligarchs of course people
from you know the shakes from the United
Arab Emirates they would like to have
access to just in case this is hedging
their beds they don't want to put all
their eggs into the dollar system that
is what if you look at the Bricks now
what is the interesting part of what the
bricks do it is the bricks payment
system which is an alternative to Swift
it's an alternative to Dollar system H
that's very
interesting uh what else are they doing
which is interesting they're creating uh
an alternative to the
IMF uh for the purposes of lending
before mle was elected in
Argentina uh one of the uh
the uh bonds that uh was maturing by
Argentina and Argentina had to pay to
the IMF was paid for by a loan
granted by the Chinese government to the
Argentinian government in Argentinian
Pesos which meant essentially that the
Chinese who knew of course that the
Argentinian PES would depreciate
relative to the dollar essentially they
were taking the risk of the dollar of
the Argentinian PES in repaying part of
the debt of Argentina to the IMF now why
would the Chinese do that they it's not
philanthropy it's an attempt to bolster
this alternative payment and banking
system alternative to the dollar that is
what they have in common now people say
oh yanis does this mean that this going
to be a common currency no they can
never a common currency to have a common
currency you need to have a capacity to
tax a common capacity to borrow so for
me for me the bricks is an interesting
experiment whereby the sea China creates
the financial system and the B the r the
I the S and all the other letters
representing countries that have not
entered the bricks yet but are in the
process of entering including Sai so on
will be using that system now that
friends on the left must understand is
not an
alternative ideological block like the
USSR was it has very interesting
repercussions regarding the Monopoly of
the dollar and therefore the American
capacity to project geopolitical power
around the world uh
but it is work in
progress uh their interesting aspects to
it but there's no guarantee that working
people are going to benefit from it
because let's face it all these
capitalists in the bricks countries
still have most of their money in the
dollar system and they want to keep it
in the dollar system because if you are
a producer of byd cars in the united in
China one of your investors is Warren
Buffett you want to sell them to the
Americans why would you sell them to the
Americans because the Americans have a
great trade deficit so the trade deficit
of the United States is like a vacuum
cleaner sucking yd cards in the United
States and what do you get you get
dollars right so the bricks payment
system and so on for you is a backup
mechanism even if you're a Chinese
capitalist this is what my friends that
is yes this is what my so unless the
working class of
China appropriates control of the bricks
payment system it's good that the bricks
payment system will be created but then
we need this NE Second Step the working
class of China of India of South Africa
and so on
to appropriate this bricks payment
system and make it work for them not for
the
capitalists yeah I mean maybe with the
this this there in lies the the question
of of whether there is a genuine
ideological commitment to socialism
presented by
China where uh they would allow such a
thing to happen if there's only if
there's one country that in my opinion
has the capacity to do such a thing it
would be China it definitely I don't
think it would be India um no India I
feel like is depends on how the class
war plays out in
China okay it will depend who wins the
class War in
China so yeah uh what do you what do you
think about
um this is not necessarily an argument
but it's just like something I think
about a little bit uh with respect to
comparing India development to to
China's development and how differently
things have played out they're both in
to different uh degrees uh postc
Colonial countries in some respects that
have been harmed by uh Western Colonial
interests and yet uh one country
seemingly is in the throws of fascism
and is very much in favor uh by the
Western capitalists as like as they
present India not only as a Emerging
Market but also as like a beacon of of I
guess capitalist development uh they are
I feel like they're they're definitely
seen as like an ally by Western
capitalists in a way that now China is
not China is presented as a threat and
yet when you look at the even
development in China in comparison to uh
no such uh even development in India I
feel like ideology plays a role there no
I mean or I guess like the interest of
the government plays a little bit of a
role
there but it does of course it does uh
look India is a also a work in progress
uh but you're right the fundamental
difference is that it's not Incorporated
in the
International Recycling system a system
of recycling surpluses and
deficits India is um a deficit country
without a huge deficit a lot of
poverty uh there is industrialization
but at the same time there is so much
cronyism and Allis power which is
unchecked by government is a weak
government it's a government that only
manages to to to gain such large
percentages by
essentially um
fermenting ethnic rivalries and uh
oppression of one ethnic group by
another ethnic group this is not how the
Chinese Communist party did its
uh accomplished it its own management of
the social economy of China
already you see that before there was
substantial development in India the
degree to which you have cartels forming
that are extracting huge quantities of
value from middle class in the petty and
taking the money out of
India for instance you know buying the
government of the United Kingdom as well
as it's
industry you know Jaguar belongs to the
Indians now um and and diversifying
around the world before not like the
Chinese who created a very strong
industrial Matrix with all sorts of
products becoming uh uh very competitive
across the world and then extending its
power or spreading its wing outside of
China you have few oligarchs in India
who are already taking their money out
of India and using the um IC government
of Modi in order to keep everybody under
elit so the developmental power of India
which is
great uh is not being harnessed not yet
and the political game and the way it
plays out is going to be essential in
determining the chances of India of the
Indian working classes for
u a modum of shared Prosperity which the
Chinese have succeeded in
isn't this a testament that or isn't
this a lesson for uh Western Nations to
pay attention to as far as and it's it's
one that I uh hear being channeled by uh
the European Union as a matter of fact I
uh that that um State controlled
economies are are impossible to combat
through uh impossible to combat in the
global Marketplace especially if they
reach a level of development where they
can compete with like uh where they I
guess can compete with American
interests and and Western interest in
general uh that that it is uh
virtually impossible to to go up against
them because of how much control they
have over their industrial output um
like they are not as they're not as weak
uh and and susceptible to the the boom
and bus cycle that uh capital forms of
governance are um one example I'll use I
guess is the like you mentioned the byd
uh cars right the electric vehicles are
just far too cheap for uh European uh
industry to compete with and this is
become such a obvious uh this has become
such an obvious issue for uh Europe
possibly led by the uh German
industrialist interest here uh to to put
an end to the the almost invasion of of
uh very cheap very affordable Chinese
electric vehicles um I remember I mean I
think well someone in the chat just
linked this uh uh as well uh Janet yelen
talking about China's overproduction of
clean energy Goods need to be
mitigated um and I think the EU said
something along the lines of uh we have
to do something about like subsidizing
Chinese EV development because they are
absolutely gutting our
uh like gutting the space that we had
assigned for European car
manufacturers okay let me add to what
you said and then take a position before
2009 2008 2009 the line across Europe
the party line into a very large extent
in the United States was that China can
never be a threat because even even
though they are very good at copying
what we do in our
Technologies uh you know it's a good
place
to subcontract our second rate
production lines because um you know
they they can produce on mass older
Technologies because they are a
centrally planned communist Le
government they can never
innovate and then they innovate it and
then they change their tune yeah but uh
beyond that it's not that the Chinese
innovated after the 2008 financial
crash when we had in April of 2009 the
Great and the good of the G7 presidents
and prime ministers and Central Bankers
gathering in London under the
chairmanship of Gordon Brown who was the
Prime Minister of Britain then in order
to to to decide to agree amongst
themselves the great bailout of the bank
ERS they printed $35
trillion between 2009
2020 and they handed it over to the
financiers and at the same time they
practiced austerity so if let's say you
are Volkswagen in
Germany uh the phone rings and it's
Deutsche Bank we just been given a few
billion from the European Central Bank
just that day to dispers to to lend your
Volkswagen and this your bank is giving
this money away to you for free take
billions billions take it now billions
no interest State why would Doja Bank
give it away for no interest rate
because it was getting it from the
European Central Bank at negative
interest rates so Deutsche Bank was
making money by giving away money
billions for free to Volkswagen right
but the people in Volkswagen who are not
stupid right they looked at people
around Europe who were struck by hit by
austerity and had they were impecunious
they said yeah as if we're going to to
you know to invest in new EV Vehicles
like you equivalent of Tesla or fancy
new cars products whatever these people
won't be able to buy it so they took the
money from Deutsche Bank because it was
free and they took it to the frankfur
stock exchange and they bought
Volkswagen shares that's s investment so
to cut a long story short Hassan between
2009 and 2022 there was no investment in
in Germany zero the the the thing that
you to mention is a product I mean is a
is a financial tool that I here in the
United States of America I'm of course
very familiar with uh considering that
that has been the the
entire uh the the entire financial
transaction for virtually every single
mass of American corporation since the
Reagan Era the process that you
described being illegal before the
Reagan Era stock
BuyBacks yeah that's what they did so
they didn't invest meanwhile the Chinese
were investing as if there's no
they boosted their cross Capital
formation the actual percentage of
income invested from an already
outrageously High 30% to 50% they built
about 22,000 miles of super fast trains
you know they invested massively in
Battery Technology right so today they
can produce a remarkable car that is
nicer than better than Tesla you know
for $30,000 not saying much
sucks sorry
right Volkswagen who has no access to
rare Earths no access to Battery
Technology they have to buy all that
from China they cannot compete and then
they're kicking and screaming and they
screaming blue murder that the Chinese
are are practicing you know they're
using unfair Trade Practices rubbish
they haven't been investing for two
decades while you were asleep at the
wheel doing share by h no absolutely um
yeah these this is very interesting to
to think about um okay I I've had you
here for uh two hours now two hours plus
and uh thank you so much for uh all the
time you gave this community uh I have a
couple last questions let me think uh
there was another thing I wanted to
bring up
here um I think it was about not about
investment but um
the conversation about stock
BuyBacks just like broke my brain a
little
bit people want me to ask you about loot
boxes and what you think about there's a
lot of there's a lot of uh steam valve
uh interest in this community for
understandable reasons this is a you
know we are this is a gaming platform
that we're on
primarily um us is economic allies no
that's not what it is uh yeah okay what
do what do you think about loot boxes
know much about because you see I I cut
my My Links since I left there uh my job
let me tell you what it was my job was
to study their economy uh they had no
idea of how that economy worked it had
spontaneously emerged they had never
planned it they never designed it it was
just a perfect example of what haek
referred to as spontaneous order and I
went there I tried to to study the
Dynamics of price
formation uh of uh the probability of
bubbles uh inflating and then deflating
very suddenly and creating damage to the
player commun
community uh how the trading rooms
should work in order to minimize the
costs of um subterfuge by people who
were living and going to Ebay that you
know I spent there one year that's what
I learned then I moved on then I you
know then I had
um to negotiate with the IMF as the
failed Finance Minister of the most
bankrupt European state
uh okay let me ask you this is a silly
questions now uh what do you have to say
to those uh I personally think this is a
very uh reactionary uh uh response to
anyone and everyone that is even like
remotely presenting of like Progressive
causes but one thing that we see in the
United States of America is this notion
that socialism implies that you have to
live a very aesthetic lifestyle uh that
socialism and success are not aligned uh
with one another you brought up uh
something inadvertently without even
probably realizing but you said uh what
if I'm selling you a house for 500,000
you're selling me a house for $500,000
and I'm offering you $1
million um I
for you probably don't know this but I
am an owner of a house I'm living inside
of it right now this is seen as a uh an
unimaginable sin by those who have no
understanding of socialism what do you
think about the the notion that
socialism and and uh and being uh
successful or being affluent cannot
coexist well you
see the whole point about being a
socialist is wanting everybody to be
well off and not not wanting anyone
anyone to be a victim of exploitation
now that in my case I have a very nice
house here where I am uh wonderful
kitchen a very nice place especially if
you saw the view during the day outside
I am um you know my privilege is
bordering on the
sinful um the question is are you
prepared if if needs be are you prepared
to downsize to give it up so as to live
under circumstances of shared prosperity
and the the answer must be yes yeah and
it is yes uh do I feel guilty that my
income is above the median income no
because I don't think socialis would be
uh promoted if um if I fell below the
median if it were to be promoted I would
do it and one final point we marxists we
are not against the products of
capitalism of the production line we
against we are against the social
relations of production
which confine ownership of those
machines to the
0.001% and the rest becomes slaves of
that
0.0 I'm not going to to to smash my
phone because you know it is an
instrument for J PES and I'm not going
to smash my motorcycle particularly my
motorcycle with which I'm in love uh
because it was produced by Yamaha there
I plugged Yamaha as well
um and one final point if I
may when we fought for uh equal civil
rights in the Deep South The United
States we did some of us or against apar
heide in South Africa or against what's
happening now in Gaza we were
privileged well you know what it takes a
little bit of privilege to have the time
and the capacity to dedicate yourself to
that struggle because if I were an Uber
driver you know driving 15 hours a day
in order to put food at the table for my
children I wouldn't be able to have this
conversation with you today I wouldn't
be able to write books I wouldn't be
able to agitate I wouldn't indeed have
the power to run it for
elections okay so let's not fetishize
wealth but not fetishize poverty at the
same
time to be rich riches to be glorious in
the words of D Shing no I'm kidding um
no but we have another we have another
thing in common do you know what we have
in common what do we have in common been
speaking for two hours and our dogs have
been asleep next to us yeah well yours
behind mine over there it's because it's
because she I I work her out in the
morning uh every morning well your your
dog is sleeping because it's 1:00 a.m.
over there but um my dog is sleeping
because she ran a lot this morning and I
have to do that because I stream for 8
hours every day um agitating and
propagandizing to the best of my
ability my dog does the same thing you
know during the day after the big run in
the morning a lot of zooming and a lot
of sleeping by my dog next to me so I'm
familiar with your circumstances yeah
well Yiannis thank you so much thank you
so much for coming on this was
phenomenal I've been a big Fanboy of
your for uh quite some time I hope I
wasn't uh too annoying and uh also I
want to give a shout out to uh evelt
from the Netherlands who was a big fan
of mine apparently and was really keen
on making this uh chat happen it was a
little bit difficult I I will admit to
like uh go a little back and forth and
and uh secure a time slot especially
with the international time zone uh
difference but uh just wanted to give
them a shout out that's what dm25 uh uh
asked in the DMS um and and I I am very
glad that it happen finally uh are you
are you coming to America anytime soon
are you coming to La anytime soon not
anytime soon we have European Parliament
elections in June and we are running
here in Germany in Italy because we are
TR internationalist we're the only
people who are running in different
countries at the same time uh and after
that I think I'm going to collapse
during the summer
and head for the United States in the
Autumn oh okay well maybe you know who
knows maybe I'll maybe I'll be in your
neck of the woods sometime um uh so is
there anything you want to you want to
mention is there anything you want to
plug before uh we
leave two things if I may first let's
all remain Vigilant about the slow
murder of Julian Assange my great friend
who is in the belmer prison uh for
revealing the crimes our governments
have performed have committed in our
name behind our backs and secondly let
me say that next week I'm going to go to
your town in eul oh wow okay speak to
comms there um and I think you and I
should join forces amongst other things
in order to bring about greater greater
solidarity amongst progressiv in our two
countries I I agree 100% as long as you
give us Baka as long as you say Baka is
Turkish
it's in Greek as well we have the same
word oh
no all right well thank you so much for
coming on all right that was Yannis
varus ladies and gentlemen boys girls
and mb's


## Keywords:
