---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F0Ci_FG8s5A
---

# Video
Hasan W/ Sam Seder Talk About Biden & Israel | HasanAbi reacts
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F0Ci_FG8s5A)

## Transcript:
strength and support for Israel Biden on
the other hand is losing the
demographics that he obviously needs for
reelection whether it be the Arab vote
in key States whether it be the pro
Palestinian vote as a younger
demographic is clearly overwhelmingly in
support of Palestinians now um he's
losing out on these key demographics in
all states but uh but especially so in
places like Michigan obviously and even
uh
Minnesota
um in
Vogue it definitely wasn't in Vogue but
my critique I think has gotten more
sophisticated over the years but um but
we were we got a call the day after we
said anything negative about Israel from
the Israeli Embassy and uh they wanted
to send the um the the Ambassador on to
the show guy named I think it was Pinkus
and I think he ultimately did come on to
the show and listen to to our critique I
mean I
um uh I I
was I was very critical of Chiron and
um uh at that time and the occupation
broadly speaking but I don't know that
I had as uh much Clarity on the history
I mean I had a good friend who did a a
documentary about um to be fair to be
fair I will say this what you're talking
about is a time that literally predates
the new historian era of Israeli history
I feel like or it was like right around
the time when that happened around in
the 80s and 90s but I wasn't you know at
that age 80s and 90s you know I'm still
in my teens uh early 20s and I wasn't
but it
was there I had a friend a guy named
Benny Bruner and you can see his
documentary he did he he was uh
Israeli uh I want to say Dutch and he
did the documentary that is available um
or he's done many but one which really
struck me was um called the Great Book
robbery and it's a documentary about um
trying to establish that there was in
fact the
Palestinian the land was not empty there
was no there there was a Palestinian
culture there was a Palestinian
civilization
they had um and he and he he makes that
case through all the books Palestinian
books that were stolen and are actually
stored in a Subterranean level in um in
the Israeli National Library that you
really can't go in and see um and
it's it was it was very uh enlightening
to me and um uh being aware of like you
know because as a kid you're taught like
the land was empty etc etc for for a uh
what is it for a land without for a
people without land for a land without
people or land without people for people
without land exactly yeah
exactly um and
so you know my critique has has evolved
over the time like I
didn't I I don't you know I mean I think
he saw this exchange I had the other day
on my show I I've never really I never
labeled myself a Zionist uh although I
think you know maybe I don't know that I
was ever a Zionist you know um different
people had maybe draw the uh
distinctions that that different points
uh but I never labeled myself an
anti-zionist um because I I I I don't
feel like I have to participate in in
the you know in this concept you know I
believe iny and I believe in human
rights and I believe that if you're
occupying uh you know land legal it's
illegal and I believe in the concept of
of settler colonialism and uh you can
make an
assessment I think to the extent that
I've been called an anti-zionist it's
more by people who call themselves Zion
but um I don't I don't have a problem
with it being called an anti-zionist but
it's not something that you know I I
spend time identifying myself with
because frankly uh rhetorically I don't
find it
um particularly effective and if it's
not effective in me helping change
people's minds then I don't I don't
employ that type of stuff but um uh it
it
it's been a very clarifying time where
people stand and surprising in some
instances too to be honest with
you so um would you do you mind
elaborating on your own personal Journey
I've talked about mine as far as like
overcoming National mythology and
nationalistic myths that you learn from
an early age as uh someone who's Turkish
who grew up in Turkey who was a product
of both the private and and and public
education system in Turkey like uh I
have talked about my understanding of
the Armenian Genocide and what was
taught to me and how I was um how my
opinion on it uh uh evolved from an
early age despite the uh attempts of
indoctrination and I was wondering if
you uh because I think there's a very
good parallel there with respect to the
nakba and also uh Israel's ongoing
occupation is an apartheid regime uh and
the way that uh the way that this has
evolved into full-blown fascism in my
opinion in the words not just of mine
but also of friend of both of our shows
Dr ofer kasif um I I think that it's uh
it's it could be uh Illuminating for
people who are on their own journey of
of self-reflection and education for
those who are maybe on like the
precipice of understanding uh despite
indoctrination from uh their
schooling sure yeah um you know like I
said I uh I'm I'm 57 so I um doesn't
show when I was H well thank you I
appreciate that but when I um when I was
in elementary school I mean I went for
Hebrew education three days a week after
uh you know uh regular you know public
school um and until probably I think I
was like age
I think I went through most of high
school even um and uh reformed Jew um
and uh you
know the people 30 years out I mean we
still very much um steeped in the uh the
Holocaust and the the idea of Israel
that I was taught was
a you know
Plucky um sort of like a David uh and
Goliath story and Israel surrounded on
all sides by its enemies and uh how much
uh the Arabs hated uh the Israelis and
the Jews and it was presented as if this
was a sort of like an
eternal um uh struggle of religion and
um that the only thing that really saved
the Israelis was their sort of like um
their their Superior will and they were
lucky because their enemies were uh not
terribly uh smart like I just remember
being taught this story about the Golan
Heights about how
like the Israelis had spies Who
convinced the the syrians to grow trees
on the Goan Heights because it provide
shade when they were fighting and so the
Israelis knew where to fire their
weapons I don't know how that story
worked but this is you know you hear it
as a child and the idea of questioning
like wait how did the Jews get there or
like how long how many
like it was all just the Holocaust
happened the UN said here's Israel and
then the Arabs were mad because they
don't like Jews there was no sort of
material analysis of like hey wait a
second how did they you know we were
told there was no it was just a desert
and they came in and they created
irrigation they grew stuff and yeah
turned the desert into uh you know a
fertile land or whatever exactly and I
was
uh 15 or 16 and went with my Hebrew
class for the summer to Israel which is
like a confirmation class program and we
traveled up and down the country we
worked at a kabut for a period of time
and we were in it was in
1982 and um at one point and I feel like
it was early on I can't remember exactly
but I feel like it was early on in the
summer we were up in
cesaria and we were in the ruins of this
like
Coliseum and we
saw dozens of Attack
Helicopters going low across the
Mediterranean
North and we're like what's going on I
mean it looked like something was going
on I mean you know because Israel
everybody you know you had soldiers
everybody they carry their guns around
and you get used to that you know after
a while but like this was something
different and within I don't know how
much time it was not long maybe we got
into the bus or I can't remember uh um
we found out that Israel had I think had
attacked
Beirut
and I I I just remember I mean I was
crying about it I got into an argument
with my Rabbi
because prior to then it was a
preemptive
uh war in ' 67 but we were it was being
sold like it was imminent and the
Israelis just got the jump
the idea was that it's the Israeli
Defense Forces they don't they don't
start wars of choice that's not what
Israel
does um and that you know that was my
whole sense and I think that was
probably the beginning of me becoming
you
know
increasingly uh more skeptical and
curious as to like how did this form and
you know I went to college and there was
not much um uh you know U for whatever
reason I don't know it it was not I
didn't I don't remember studying much
about it in college but I was aware I
think through the first inata that this
was you know I mean things felt like
they were changing maybe a little at
that time uh and
um and then I I just I remember when
Chiron
went on the Temple Mount and basically
lifted uh you know uh uh basically lit a
fire and and became increasingly
critical of Israel during that time and
I think the Bush Administration was the
first Administration where I became
aware that they were and probably
through interviews I was doing with
people on the show that they were um not
fulfilling the role that the US had in
the past which was to sort of like
pull
Israel's worse inclinations back from
the brink but we're instead sort of like
pushing them you know like giving your
you know not just pulling the keys away
from your drunk friend but um you know
handing them the keys uh despite the
fact that you bought the car for them in
the first place um and uh and for you
know
uh by you know the Obama
era
um it was I I would talk about Israel to
some extent to some extent uh it was
farmed out to uh Michael Brooks who was
you know
um by the time we got into like the mid
the end of the Obama Administration was
was hosting the show once a week and he
was uh you know had studied foreign
policy and was much more I think sort of
engaged in it and I think to a certain
extent I had just basically given up on
Israel and my um my disposition was
basically I mean I remember distinctly
having um you know arguments about this
with you know because among Jews and on
like you know email groups I'm on uh
this would come up this is of sometimes
the biggest like political difference I
would have with people uh who in many
other ways were you know progressives or
you know liberal Progressive except
Palestine yeah and um I I mean I
distinctly remember my the argument I
would take with some of these people is
like you're you're the one who's
endangering Israel the existence of
Israel because this this cannot go on
the Democratic party you know it was
clear like to me like when Tim Kain you
know uh um refused to go see Netanyahu
speak in Congress I was like if Tim
Kane's doing this you guys have a
problem and uh because Israel is going
to become increasingly uh
isolated and you know 101 15 years from
now the you're GNA have the Christian
Zionist in this country but if a
Democrat is in power um they're going to
lose their funding and they're going to
get increasingly isolated and it's going
to be um like a South Africa type of
situation except for they won't have
they won't take that
offramp um Well turns out they they
showed you by by being like nope
unconditionally in support of Israel
actually as a Democratic party I I I
don't I I I'm I think that we are now at
the um the Apex of that support yeah yes
absolutely we will never have a
democratic uh Administration that will
even come remotely close uh to how the
Biden Administration is acting um I
think you know B Biden um I think is I
don't know why but has some
unique um I mean you saw that story in
the internationalist it's written in
this book by Alex um Ward maybe um have
you heard the
story yeah that b to um and you know
you've probably recounted it but it was
you know
when when when Bean has to be the one
saying to to Joe Biden like hey take it
easy we we don't do that uh even though
you're saying it's okay for us to kill
uh women and children we don't do that
when ban has to be and this is the guy
who was participated in the blowing up
of the uh Hotel David yeah in uh in 1948
I mean if that guy has to be the voice
of reason you know that Biden's got some
particular uh like I don't know blood
lust I don't know what it is but um I
think I think Ryan's assessment on your
show was actually pretty interesting
where uh Biden is known as a cipher
right like he always finds the middle
ground on every issue and he's just like
a perfect political machine in many ways
whether it was uh busing and and
segregation
desegregation back in the day all the
way to you know super Predators crime
bill um noticing that like uh learning a
lesson from the uh the opposition that
he had to Afghanistan and not repeating
it with Iraq like all of this stuff um I
think all of this stuff uh played a role
in him developing his positions but
Israel was never really an issue that
the Democratic party had even shown a
little bit of criticism on with I guess
like Obama being uh ironically Obama
being considered the exception almost
but like even then Barack OB Obama
obviously on his way out gave $30
billion uh uh in a in a 10-year Aid
package to Israel for the Iron Dome and
and and numerous other instances so like
I think he never had like a a reason to
develop uh a a middle ofth ground
approach so that just kind of stuck with
him you know um yeah
I me like again that story about um uh
ban where you know you get admonished by
the leader of the country you be like no
we're not going to be that vicious I we
don't want to associate that there's
something else going on there and I know
Peter Bard came on the program and he
had a good explanation he's like if you
want to know um you want a sense of like
how people where people stand on this
you know the 1619 project is a good sort
of surrogate um wish to assess like if
somebody fundamentally cannot believe
that the United States was uh founded a
in appreciate the sort of like settler
Colonial um origins of the United States
and that is built on uh the genocide of
of of the indigenous people here um they
will not be able to get it with Israel
either um they're just too invested in
in the that sort of like uh that myth
they can't they can't give it up they're
just riding for all settler Colonial
genocidal
States I mean if you're gonna do for one
you might as well do for all he just he
loves he loves Australia he loves it all
he doesn't care he's like it's great um
no yeah it's the best we could do at the
time he needs a he needs that NE Neil
Gorsuch approach uh and just like be
this being the one pet ISS that he cares
about that is the exact opposite of what
you would think from him um but it is
interesting CU like he he claims to be
Irish he claims to be Catholic and these
are like currently with the Pope and
also with Ireland being historically an
ally to the Palestinian plight it is
very odd that he would take such a
staunch uh Ultra nationalist approach to
the
matter and the thing is is
like it is um
I mean I don't think donors explains it
I mean I know that he's got some big you
know H sain or sibbe or whatever that
guy that's consistent but but it I I
just I think I it's I it's very hard to
understand because from a US National
Security standpoint there really is not
a sense that this is in any way helpful
whatsoever oh yeah Elon poppy we had on
the show he's like when has Israel ever
been
helpful uh from a new from a US National
Security standpoint uh in in terms of
like in practice right it's existence
there's an argument maybe there's a
beach head there within and uh you know
one more opportunity to control uh you
know the oil of the neighboring
countries um but I mean I don't think he
would have paid any type of like
political price if in you know November
15th he' said we're calling for a
ceasefire I don't think he would have
paid a political price um you know we're
going to start to pull back on uh Aid or
we're not even G to put an aid package
on the table I mean I I it really is um
hard to understand uh and it it is um
you know just from a Sheely from a
political standpoint yeah I mean I think
that like the Lloyd Austin's in his
corner I think are like genuinely
warning him of the backlash and the
destabilization that Israel's actions
are
causing um because it is like Israel's
uh aggressive ethnic cleansing
campaign is no is now far beyond the
point of Maintenance and avoidance we've
now gotten to an we've now gotten to a
point where it's like it's an issue that
you have to tackle head on but beyond
the the lack of like um Israel's
position as an apartheid ethn state is
is actually helping America with a beach
head or a forward operating base with
like its own Espionage tools and whatnot
um the destabilization it's causing is
obviously far outweighing the the
benefits that you get from like the
Pegasus program or whatever right um but
beyond that and this is something that
you and I 100% agree on it is
horrible domestically it is playing so
poorly because every single instance
where Joseph robinet Brandon goes on
stage and says there are red lines but
there are actually no red lines like he
did on this MSNBC interview the Saturday
show with Jonathan capart um when he
says that it shows incompetence it looks
like he's an old man asleep at the wheel
which is why someone like Donald Trump
which who also obviously benefits from
not being the president while this is
going on still is like outperforming
Biden by 10 points on the issue of
Israel because at least he has
consistency in the eyes of th those who
are being pulled on the matter where
like Trump is consistently bad on Israel
but at least he's consistent he's
showing strength and support for Israel
Biden on the other hand is losing the
demographics that he obviously needs for
reelection whether it be the Arab voting
key States whether it be the pro
Palestinian vote as a younger
demographic is clearly overwhelmingly
support of Palestinians now um he's
losing out on these key demographics in
all states but uh but especially so in
places like Michigan obviously and even
uh
Minnesota and and it is entirely in my
opinion due to the fact that he looks
weak and and he looks like uh he's
asleep at the wheel because what he's
saying does not match what people are
seeing every time he says oh Israel I've
I called him a son of a or
whenever you see a leak in the news
about how like he's really going to
change Pace on on netanyahu's actions in
in Gaza and then uh you see more uh
children being slaughtered you see more
women in uh children being ruthlessly
massacred you see the flower Massacre
that occurred um at the humanitarian Aid
Convoy uh people are like what the
is this guy doing you're you're losing
out on both ends at that point um the
other thing I wanted to say there was
another thing I want wanted to
mention oh benin's reaction also
consistently undermining him makes him
look even as a even on the international
stage it makes him look like we can't
even control our attack dog at this
point yeah I I mean I think you know
I've been saying for a while that I
think like even the age stuff with Biden
is uh fundamentally the subtext there is
leadership right like I look I if I
think somebody can do the job I don't
care if they're
110 um it's it's it's a leadership
question and so you know he boted this
in my estimation with the immigration
thing too because he was out there
saying like I wanted them you know like
I I was willing to do what they wanted
to do but I couldn't convince Congress
to do it because the guy who's not
president is in charge of them and it's
like well wait a second dude all you're
saying is
if we want action on this hire the
leader who has control of Congress yeah
and and this whole thing with Netanyahu
it plays into that same thing where it's
like you say they shouldn't do this they
do it and you're just like they
shouldn't do it all your you know
putting aside all the sort of like you
know the the
immorality yeah in the concrete aspects
of this the subtext is I I have control
of this
not a leadership position and I think
that's that's I would say that from a um
General the a general electorate even if
they don't care about the Palestinians
they're seeing somebody who is somewhat
feckless or the news media is seeing
someone who's feckless and this
basically becomes a self-fulfilling
prophecy right like you you that
narrative gets established and they
start to apply it to everything and then
the other thing is you said like you
know how it's hurting him electorally I
think it's hurting him electorally in
that way in terms of that sort of
subtext narrative I think it's hurting
him and I think it's you know who knows
how many actual votes he's losing for
this but I do know that in talking to
you know sort of like more or less Normy
to Progressive
Democrats who are in the sort of like
organizing space it's depressing them
and so like even if you don't lose all
of these votes directly the second order
issue is that the people you need to go
out and inspire people to vote for you
are just feeling like my stomach's
churning because you know and these are
the people who are paying the most
attention to what's going on yeah that's
why the vote uncommitted campaign is so
significant in my opinion which the
media is now like no longer covering as
much in my opinion after Michigan um
which I suspect could be deliberate
because it is the exact type of drama
that they love uh that that brings in
ratings and like shows a little bit of
chaos going on um but uh these are not
uncommitted voters uncommitted to the
Democratic party I mean these are voters
who are committed to the Democratic
party because the real uncommitted
voters just don't even go out and vote
in the primaries and there are many of
them right that's the average vote voter
that's the reason why the primaries are
not uh attended as as broadly as the
general election and these are the
people who lead the activist base the
progressive base of the democratic party
who are likely Democratic party voters
in my opinion and and regardless of our
opinion on this matter that assessment
has also clearly been made by the uh by
the Biden Administration as well like
they I think they are genuinely seeing
that and it is
definitely causing a little bit more
chaos and a little bit more fear even
though it seems like Biden personally is
like a very vindictive and very stubborn
person uh if we're going to get into the
and I think that that is what's
motivating him given the New Yorker
magazine piece that came out like last
week where he openly said well I don't
care about the polls because guess what
they were wrong in
2022 which they really weren't um and
that they uh and and they were wrong in
2020 so why should I listen to them
now um I don't know it's just it is very
terrifying that they're banking on
people just simply forgetting what is
going on in Gaza by the time November
comes
around yeah I I'm I'm with you 100 perc
on that I mean I think like you know
um uh
having you know I I I I I know God like
Biden you know in that age bracket may
be related to some and there is a
quality of like hey you know maybe uh
maybe you didn't need to drive at night
as far as you're driving or attempting
to drive it's not a problem for me look
the the pro the you know the dent on
that car is because they're making
parking spots you know smaller they're
making them narrower that's the problem
not not my driving and there's there's a
real quality to uh to to Biden about
that like the guy is I don't know if
he's ever been uh particularly flexible
but uh in this instance there is a
certain I don't know I I mean there's a
certain I think uh delusion maybe you
see a little bit of like they feel like
they need to pay a little lip service
but the amazing thing is too is that
like what makes them think this is going
to end like they can't have thought in
uh
November that okay this is going to go
until next November and we'll just deal
with it like they had to have thought
like at one point they were like this is
g to wrap up by January this is going to
wrap up by March I mean I think there
there's reporting that said that that
was their belief and it's quite clear
that Netanyahu has absolutely zero
incentive to do anything of the sort and
and here's the thing that really scar
sces me too Nyah also likes Trump like
Netanyahu would benefit from a trump uh
reelection 100% 100% I think he's open
about that too like I think the reason
why he keeps saying no two states
immediately after Biden says there will
be a two-state solution which in and of
itself is already like a contested
concept at this point because of you
know what the two-state solution on in
in uh Theory versus what it looks like
in practice is very different um it's
just been a continuation of settlement
expansion under the guise of like a
potential two-state um but you know
beyond that it's just very obvious that
I think Benjamin nyaho comes out and
says the things that he said yesterday
specifically because he wants to
undermine
Biden oh I I I mean look I I I I think
he he it's a huge twofer for him to um
to embarrass Biden in this way huge
twofer um and I think he probably
calculates um the longer I hang in here
the better the better for Trump and then
the ultimately the better for me um and
I look I'm not convinced that
whatever
forceed Hamas to make this attack in
this timing um you know knew that this
was also going to put the United States
in a difficult position and put Biden in
in a tough position I can't imagine they
ever thought that he would be this sort
of like Allin but um there's no there's
doubt
about where is on that um
and I I it seems like the Biden
Administration just had
no they did not calculate this and um
they didn't even appreciate like you
know the situation I I
I I think Biden walked back from this
red line thing uh my understanding a
little bit uh later today or at least
the administration did um
but I mean he walked back on it in the
interview where he says there are red
lines and then he goes but there are no
red lines for weapons delivery so there
are no red lines he said technically he
said no red lines for defensive weapon
he said like the Iron Dome and so I
don't know maybe I was parsing that too
um I think I think that is the the so
that is the
legales uh that is the legal that they
engage in in an effort to say oh we're
sending Israel and and you've talked
about this before we're sending Israel
defensive weapons actually only
defensive weapons and not offensive
weapons we're just like replenishing
their Munitions that are depleted in
defense of Israel why are those
Munitions being depleted well because
they're using those uh weapons in a for
forward posture in their illegal
occupation and further ethnic cleansing
in Gaza I think that's like a way to get
around there are speciic there are
specific armaments for Iron Dome yeah
right because I'm looking down the line
when when somebody in the Senate is
gonna braise this bill I don't know when
it's going to be but they're going to
say we're cutting off all weapon sales
except for these specific arm
interceptors I think there are
specifically yeah and and and so you
know something to that effect now I do I
think that Biden is sincere with this I
I doubt it um but the fact that he's
having to articulate this stuff and try
and put himself in a position where
because they must be looking at this
going like we've underestimated this on
some level and what are we going to do
if this is happening in June what are we
going to do if this is happening in
September like where do we go what is
our ball back and um I I but but here's
my big fear too is we're going to put uh
within a month or two we're gonna have
this um you know temporary
Pier built so that us ships can come and
offload uh um
Aid you know it's unclear to me how that
Aid's going to get off that temporary
pier and get distributed but it seems to
me that both Israel and Hamas have great
incentive to um to mess with that to
involve US military personnel to uh
blame the other side um it is like the
idea that we are actually you
know I remember when Reagan sent
peacekeepers into Le Le on and 250 I
think it was Marines got blown up Reagan
could get away with something like that
but B and leave but Biden he may have to
go the other direction like you know the
idea that we're even coming even
remotely close never mind what we're
doing with the
hoodies um but the idea that we come
even remotely close to getting involved
in an armed conflict because of this is
just it uh it's mindblowing it's
mindblowing that there would be this
level of
risk uh taken on by the United States
when the alternate is we cut your
weapons send the trucks exactly exactly
it's just like there is it's taken a
long way to to grab your ear with your
grab your left ear with your right hand
it's just like you're there is no reason
to get into all of this and and
basically make this process infinitely
harder for yourself and and convoluted
and potentially really devastating when
and this is the fundamental question
that really frustrates me when no one
asks this question to Biden directly in
media which is why is there need for a
peer to begin with are there no
humanitarian Aid convoys that are
waiting why is there even a need for Aid
in Palestine let's ask that question is
this a natural natural disaster is this
uh you know is this a byproduct of a
typhoon did an earthquake happen there
or is it actually our Ally engaging in a
deliberate calculated ethnic cleansing
and ethnic displacement campaign oh
I think my dog groomer is here one
second good I mean dog grew he just he
just knocked like the cops for a second
hold on I'm going to run this video uh
and and hear Biden's thoughts real quick
you can see it as well and Minister
Netanyahu as Israel defends itself from
Hamas terrorists who murder more than
12200 Israelis and still hold more than
100
hostages what is your red line with
prime minister Netanyahu for instance
would invasion of Rafa which you have
urged him not to do it is a red line but
I'm never going to leave Israel the
defense of Israel is still critical so
there's no red line I'm going to cut off
all weapons so they don't have the Iron
Dome to protect them there other ways to
deal to get to to deal with the with
with the trauma caused by Hamas but the
red line is Roa Israel prime minister
Benjamin Yahoo joins us live from
Jerusalem uh we don't have to give you
the news you follow American news as if
you're still here Prime Mr Prime
Minister his red line is Rafa don't go
into Rafa what's your
response look the president and I have
agreed that we have to destroy Kamas we
can't leave a quarter of the Kamas
Terror Army in place uh they're there in
Rafa this would be equivalent to saying
you know after the Allies uh fought back
uh gone through Normandy uh went through
uh Germany and you'd say well we'll
leave a quarter of the Nazi army in
place and we won't go into Berlin the
last stronghold so I think that if the
president means by that that we should
first enable the safe uh departure of
the civilian population from Rafa before
we go in we agree with that we don't
need any prompting let's make sure that
they that's how what he said he doesn't
want you to go in you know I think you
have to ask him what he said because he
agrees he said that he agrees that we
have to destroy Hamas as a fighting
organization that's what we intend to do
look it's either Israel or Hamas there's
no middleway I mean we have to uh have
that Victory we can't have 3/4 of a
victory we can't have uh uh 2third of a
victory because Hamas will reconstitute
itself with these four battalions in
Rafa reconquer the Gaza Strip and and do
the October 7th Massacre over and over
and over again and for us in Israel not
merely for me but for the people of
Israel that's a red line we can't let
Hamas survive Mr Prime Minister uh we
don't we don't want to put you in a
difficult position because you know we
know that you have to work with the US I
know we're still strong allies but
there's been multiple comments whether
it was a red line from the president of
United States or kamla Harris saying
that we need a ceasefire now I know
there's been conversations in the Press
about a fractur
relationship can you tell us about
what's going on between you and the
president because right now what I'm
hearing from the IDF and some of my
friends that are going out there to
battle uh Hamas is that they don't have
the support truly of the United States
right now and that you guys are being
pressured to come off the gas a little
bit is that
true look uh we have our agreements uh
uh on the basic goals but we also have
disagreements on how to achieve them
ultimately it's Israel that has to
decide our is on the line are they
encouraging you to get off the gas
beheaded well I'm telling you that we're
not getting off the gas I'm telling you
that we have to take care of Israel's
Security in our future and that requires
eliminating the terrorist Army that's a
a prerequisite for victory that Victory
is important not only for us it's
important for the Civilized world as
we're fighting these barbarians and let
me tell you something you know I've seen
these recent polls where 82% of
Americans support Israel in its battle
against Kamas 82% that's been constant
over the last 5 months so they recognize
that our battle is your battle and our
Victory is your Victory and I'm sure
that uh uh deep down everyone in
Washington understands that and that's
what we're going to do we're going to
defeat Kamas we're going to do what is
necessary to minimize civilian
casualties do the humanitarian Aid uh
something that we believe in but we have
to destroy this uh terrorist Nazi army
otherwise there's no future it's crazy
that he they they just have direct line
to Benjamin nahu
like oh yeah I mean I wouldn't be
surprised if he's actually just in an
office at Fox but the what's also really
telling about this is his analogy as to
why they have to keep going into
Rafa is um as if uh the United States um
you know left one quarter of the German
Army um you know operating or wouldn't
go to Berlin and I hear this quite a bit
when people justify like how much
destruction Israel has wrought in Gaza
you know they they'll site Dresden or
they'll sight Nagasaki or Oshima and um
the
idea that um you can justify this
Carnage by comparing the threat between
Hamas and um Germany and the the
Imperial Japan is just absurd it's just
absurd and they've got to make that that
leap to justify it but it doesn't it
doesn't work I'm sorry it just doesn't
work it's not the same yeah it's just
it's wild for a couple different reasons
including something that Biden himself
mentioned which is that we wrote rules
after you know like he literally said
that in an interview if I recall where
he was talking about the Dresden
comparisons ahead of time like he was
getting ahead of that narrative cuz he's
heard it so many times probably um that
like one we did write rules new rules of
engagement after that and two this is
one thing that always frustrates me
about the comparisons to the to the
Holocaust uh which Benjamin nyaho as I'm
sure you know is a holocaust revisionist
himself so this is something that he
likes doing regardless is that if there
is a group if there is a militarized
state that is like engaging in ethnic
cleansing and ethnic Slaughter
the comparison Falls not on the hands of
a a resistance group that will take it
to Violent means well built originally
by like fundamentalist guys as well for
sure it's the other side it's Israel
like Israel is infinitely closer to the
to the mechanized Slaughter than Hamas
is neither of which is I'm I'm saying uh
identical obviously to the atrocities of
the Holocaust but like one side is
clearly closer to the Nazi regime than
the other power differential you look at
the power differential yeah I mean
that's I mean that's just what it comes
down to I mean you just look at the
power
differential um and who has control of
their territory and who does not and who
you know uh where the mass starvation is
happening and where it's not I mean the
power differential is quite obvious this
is not uh you know uh a World War this
is a um a highly sophisticated
um uh country with uh far more advanced
Weaponry than maybe anyone else around
frankly uh in that neighborhood and
certainly you know more so than Hamas
and again you're not going to completely
eradicate them and the idea that
like the that Hamas is some type of sort
of like
alien force that can be you know
the Israel it is almost
impossible to imagine that Israel hasn't
created five different variants of Hamas
in they have to population it would be
astonish Israel to think Hamas itself is
an evolution hamas's tactics itself has
become an evolution due to Israel's
increased violent actions like um I
think uh Zack Foster uh I don't know if
you've ever had him on your stream or
not but he is a uh he is a Zachary
Foster is a is a professor he's a PhD at
Princeton a historian of Palestine and
he has like documented each step in the
evolution of Hamas all the way from the
all the way from the Islamic charity
which it began as as a Muslim
Brotherhood cutout uh all the way into
like the the uh Old Charter new Charter
and how Hamas changed its tactics
throughout time as a consequence as a
reaction to the Israeli negotiations uh
peace process and the the the the uh
obvious continuation and the rapid
expansion of the settlements and and
also Israel's suppression of like
religious freedom and whatnot in the
West Bank um and and how it became what
it is everybody understands this like
everyone in Israel understands former
shinb bet officials understand this
reality and Israel itself understood
this reality in its outward
communication to the Trump
Administration one key detail I bring up
uh from time to time is that I believe
in 2017 Donald Trump no longer was
giving any Aid I think due to uh one of
his campaign promises uh they were going
to completely shut off Aid the
Palestinians do you remember this they
they stopped sourc they stopped uh
funding unra yeah
um cut off funding to unra yeah and you
know who was actually against that at
the time the Israeli government the
Israeli government itself had petitioned
the Trump Administration to not cut
funding because they recognized that
this would be a national security issue
for Israel if the Palestinians were
completely starved out that it would
become uh the situation on the ground
would get worse so the fact that uh the
fact that Israel in 2017 recognizes real
it and yet the the outward communication
coming from Benjamin nahu and others
within uh uh the the Israeli government
including the defense minister is the
exact opposite now um genuinely I think
shows that that the situation has gotten
worse and the and the fascism is
completely taken
hold if you can um and and and I think
if if people can understand the concept
of Donald Trump doing whatever can to
get elected president so that he can
stay out of jail which I think a lot of
people can then I think you can start to
understand
um and and doing whatever he can despite
you know what it means for the country
the future of the country you know then
I think you can begin to understand uh
BB Netanyahu because I think for him um
the more
turmoil um the better
for his
personal uh sort of lifelong trajectory
like I think he knows that the moment
there is any type of calm any type of
Peace any type of argument that there is
um you know no um immediate threat um I
think he knows that his chances of going
to jail are you know through the roof at
that moment and so I I think he's gonna
maintain as much belligerence as
possible I don't know if Joe Biden can't
can't see what just about every Observer
of I mean I'm talking not just I'm
talking Israeli yeah you know the
Israeli Israeli press knows this that
Netanyahu is hated but they're not gonna
get rid of him until this you know War
is Over yeah and so his he is completely
incentivized to make sure that that
never happens regardless of whether it's
in you know whose best interest it's in
I mean it's
um it's it's it's it's a disaster for
obviously for the Palestinian people but
it's gonna um I think it's it's it's a
disaster for uh Israel and it's a
disaster for the
US no
absolutely
um I think here one last thing before I
uh let you go thank you so much for
coming on for as long as you have um one
last thing I wanted to talk about is I
guess like liberal Zionism used to be
the primary communication to the Western
world and I feel like uh post October 7
but even before October 7 like in the
last couple of administrations liberal
Zionism kind of like went away as far as
like a a hosb mechanism and I think it
it is that arrogance that was borne out
of the unconditional support of the
Western World had shown Israel
uh and and the the nature of like
reactionary fascist ideology constantly
increasing the pressure points and and
squeezing as much as uh squeezing the
Palestinian population as much as it can
in a and and also endlessly
propagandizing that in a
self-reinforcing uh uh mode of
propaganda I feel like this
created um an attitude that is also
playing into Israel's demise because
like without Western support obviously
key Israeli officials understand without
Western support Israel does not exist in
the way that it does no way no how
whether it be political cover that
America offers more importantly than
anything else or whether it be the
direct weapon shipments people will say
it's only 5% of the Israeli defense
budget doesn't matter it is far more
important uh that America is uh is is
always providing political cover for
Israel and also offering weapons um
and I think that um the liberal Zionist
exit ramp here is so clear to me lay the
blame almost entirely on Benjamin
Netanyahu and bring in Benny Gans which
they're kind of doing now they position
they're I think they're positioning
Benny gon as like the new leader because
they had Benny uh here uh and and talked
to him directly right KLA Harris met
with him um and and yet it's wild to me
that Biden has not been pushing that
exit ramp that has been given to him uh
that allows Israel to continue being an
apartheid state that um you know allows
Israel to continue doing what it's been
doing to the West Bank uh which then of
course invokes reaction understandably
from uh the the Palestinian resistance
groups both in the West Bank but uh more
importantly in Gaza and and then you
know you can go back to business as
usual but the the blood lust that you're
seeing from Benjamin n yahu that and
there is one one part that he is right
on this is he might not be a popular
figure but his actions are popular
especially amongst the the Israeli
Jewish demographic ped consistently on
the matter um they want him to be doing
ethnic cleansing they think it's not
hard enough they think he he should go
even
harder yeah 80% of the Israeli
population I mean that's the other thing
is that like
I gance is there but like who is
the what's the Coalition they can put
together I mean increasingly Israel's
Jewish population that's you know
um the it's their demographic terms not
ours obviously it is an ethnos state so
right um they uh
has more and more conservative fasy
authoritarian I mean I think um
look I think uh
uh you had a huge influx of uh of people
who lived under the Soviet uh
Union um and were raised in that system
which is you know uh basically a crash
course in in being authoritarian and
they're brought over into Israel and I
think that like um I I think that uh you
know having a a massive influx of of
folks like that um into your body
politic will have an impact I think
there was you know Tendencies amongst
the Israeli population as it were also
uh
fundamentalists uh who've come you know
15% maybe only from uh America but a
very loud and vocal and um intense
Dynamic you know religious
fanaticism breeds Fanatics and so all of
these factors are working there I'm not
sure that you know you would see any
change of policy whatsoever with Benny
Gans like I I don't like I don't I I I
don't I don't know if that's even an
option that exists anymore but um it it
seems to me you could have um uh a
um the the Biden Administration could
have definitely been more aggressive
with Israel up to this point and not
paid a political price I don't know what
they I don't know what they think
they're doing from here on in it's just
it's it's a show and I don't I
can't see how it gets better I don't
know if I agree with you on the USSR
take I I don't I don't know if it was
the uh the Soviet migrants that came in
considering that there is a massive
population of um of of of Mahi and and
Safari Jews in Israel that came from
like Arab Jews specifically um very they
came years and years ago no I know but I
I I feel like in the indoctrination
especially as far as I've read into it
and you're very knowledgeable on this
matter uh maybe I'm misunderstanding
something but as far as I understand
their integration into Israeli Society
in order to overcome like being second
class is being regarded as like you know
the same barbaric uh Scourge that the
rest of the Arab Muslims and Christians
are in the eyes of like the fascist
mythology that they were uh that they
were developing in Israel for it to be
an ethnos State I feel like that
integration process caused many like the
benav uh of the world to be infinitely
more reactionary than like some of the
older um some of the older population of
like ashkanazi Jews even
that may be the case that may be the
case to some degree there may be like a
um you know um but I think the
inclination of new immigrants you know
avador liberman and you got the you know
and and that whole sort of like um uh
influx of settlers right I mean
that's that was part of the project of
putting boots on the ground I would
imagine oh yeah significant portion of
those settlers it still continued to
this day like the the Russian like
passport uh cycle is like still very
much in existence it's like a weird like
white supremacist in the way that we
understand white supremacy here in the
Western World here in America like it's
almost a continuation of similar
policies to like make Israel more white
seemingly um I think that that is
definitely a that is definitely like a
genuine interest
by some in the Israeli
government like a deliberate attempt
um yeah no I I I think so I would like
to see someone do a uh a deeper dive
into that I've always been looking
around for like how has these shifts in
in demographics impacted Israeli
politics and and maybe someone in Israel
has done it but I have never I I haven't
come across it um uh in these parts
um but dude before I go let me plug this
uh GoFundMe would
you
um the uh A friend of mine has been
helping a family in gazin and we're
starting to see more of this actually um
but uh the there're a family that um
have a child with Down syndrome and they
um uh we helped them raise some money to
get them out of the the country I'm sure
you know people know the dynamic that's
associated with with getting out through
the Rafa gate can you can you put that
link in the Discord if you don't mind in
the Discord chat so I can present it
here yeah I actually um I got a bitly of
it let's see where do I uh just type it
in the chat
here see it yep there it is thank
you um and uh we got them they' just
like literally just got uh footage of
them at the Rafa gate and uh almost the
um almost the entire family is out
they're going into Egypt to you know um
they have nothing there's there's a
video I have of that like they have six
bags uh you know and they were in a tent
in Rafa um and
so it's it's a weird d dnamic because
there's so much pain and suffering there
um and to focus attention or help on any
individual family it sort of cuts both
ways but I don't know it's been uh at
least gratifying to know that
like you can directly help uh some
people if you know even a couple of
bucks uh help them get settled and um
this uh uh and know that you've managed
to save some of these people and and and
given them an opportunity to sort of
like normalize and deal with the trauma
that they've been going
through yeah I just saw some video of of
uh their little girl you know and uh
it's it really is it's amazing but it's
it's it's so horrific but if folks have
the opportunity uh please yeah mods are
uh pumping the the link in the chat as
as well well Sam thank you so much for
coming on always pleasure having you
here great to talk to you and uh keep up
the good work man I really really
appreciate what you've been doing thank
you three years now
so my my real
Uncle get there sorry you're cutting off
can you say that
again yeah hopefully I'll get out there
soon I want to see your that be
great all right man all right a good one
bye that was Sam Cedar everybody my real
Uncle Sam Cedar and not my fake impostor
Uncle J chunk
Wert uh doing the
most very reasonable voice uh I always
appreciate Sam's commentary and takes on
the matter because like
um because I I think he has a
way uh


## Keywords:
