---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DyFjXk_QFx4
---

# Video
Have the Tides of History Shifted? with Vijay Prashad
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DyFjXk_QFx4)

## Transcript:
oh


welcome everybody to another edition of
Millennials are killing capitalism live
it's good to be back with you again um
today our guest is going to be VJ
prashad and so I reached out to VJ uh
about a week ago um right after the um
retaliatory strike from Iran and I you
know at the time I was just thinking
this seems like a really significant
event uh VJ is someone who obviously
tracks geopolitical developments very
closely uh in a number of different
areas and in doing so I also looked at
the recent report that tricontinental
Institute for social research with VJ is
the director of uh had published on
hyper imperialism and so we're going to
have a conversation today uh and talk
obviously about you know the last 200
days 199 now 200 tomorrow um obviously
since the historic events of October 7th
and um the genocidal kind of response
that we've seen about um some of the
changing you know political
forces and um I think that this this
report of hyper imperialism also off
uh some interesting Reflections overall
kind of on on where we are um some of
what people talk about as multi
multipolarity so we'll kind of get into
all of that so I'll just say I I'm sure
our audience is familiar but VJ Pasad is
an Indian historian and journalist he's
the author of 40 books including
Washington Bullets uh red star over the
third world the darker Nations a
people's history of the third world the
poorer Nations a possible history of the
global South and the withdraw Iraq Libya
and Afghanistan along with Nom Chomsky
um and many others he's also the
executive director as I was mentioning
of tricontinental Institute for social
re for social research uh the chief
correspondent for globe Trotter and the
chief editor of left word books um and
he also appeared in the film Shadow
world and two meetings so VJ welcome to
Millennials are killing capitalism live
it's good to be with you again um
obviously we've had a couple of
conversations over the years on the
audio side but you know we're doing
video now too and I thought it would be
great to invite you on this platform and
connect with us and our viewers in this
way so good to be with you um It's Great
To Be With You Jared I'm really sorry
for the bad light that I have um but
more than anything before we get going I
just wanted to tell you that over the
course of these 200 days as I have from
different parts of the world looked at
the pro protest movement in the United
States around the question of Israel's
Massacre of the Palestinians you know
whether it's the students now in New
York City um or students at Pomona
College or wherever I often think and
I'm not just saying This Jared because
I'm on the air with you I often think of
the name of this podcast millenniums are
killing Capital capitalism and the
reason I think about it is that I think
think an an entire generation of young
people are being motivated into politics
in a very different way than say people
who are now in their 30s and so on these
young people Jared I'm I'm saying this I
think in a way that I hope um is fully
accurate but it's how I'm seeing it a
lot of these young people are just
saying not on my watch you know I'm just
not going to let it go there's no room
to have a debate and discussion I'm
going to go to Hillary Clinton's meeting
and I'm going to get up and I'm going to
put my hands up and shouted at her I'm
going to go to Nancy Pelosi's meeting
Joe Biden's meeting I'm just going to go
in there and I'm going to say what you
guys are complici in is wrong and I I
just don't want to be a part of it and
when I see those videos which are almost
daily events Jared it's not it happened
once and it's over almost every single
day some young person in the United
States I'm talking about goes into a
hearing great risk to their young lives
says no no not from me and I think
millenniums I don't know if it's the
Millennials but it's somebody is
definitely angry if they're not angry
with the capitalism in its depth they
angry with imperialism and and I mean I
think you know you and I can talk as
much as we want on this but this is
happening out there and it's real and
it's the real motion of History it's
pretty interesting um to reflect just on
that okay the world is but that's
happening
wow yeah yeah no I appreciate that VJ
and I mean it's it's interesting you
know because it's like I mean the name
initially was born out of this kind of
joke because I I don't know you remember
but like especially 5 10 years ago there
used to always be these these headlines
in the media that would say you know
Millennials are killing the car industry
or Millennials are killing the housing
and you know it was it you know of
course it was a reflection that
Millennials at that point didn't have
much wealth to be able to acquire
anything right and so Josh and I thought
well let's just kind of flip it on its
head and and you know turn it into a
sort of positive aspirational goal right
um but at the same time I mean these
young folks are gen Z really you know
it's the it's but there was a joke that
we said at one point um you know
somebody asked on Twitter what's the
generation that comes after Millennials
and we said Communists and of course
again this wasal but you know maybe you
know maybe that's maybe that'll be the
case we'll see um but I agree with you
in terms of um I often feel having these
conversations um I'm you know I
appreciate them all I hope that they
provide people um with ways to organize
their thoughts and you know think about
you know how to intervene but there are
people out there intervening right now
and solidarity to all of them who are
doing that absolutely um uh
so the first thing that like I had said
in the introduction the kind of moment
in my mind and I don't actually know
exactly what sparked it for me but you
know seeing Iran's military response you
know after the assassination of the
Iranian you know diplomats military that
were in the consulate you know within
the embassy in in Syria um you know
obviously these
are one that the assassination of those
figures in the embassy is it is it
something to talk about or in the
consulate is it something to talk about
in itself um and and what that also uh
you know means but beyond that like also
you know Iran
responding quite significantly I mean I
think some people have tried to downplay
it a little bit and maybe on a damage
level or whatever you could do that but
uh it seemed to have a lot of meaning
and seem to be a real change in sort of
their their policy or their approach to
some of the aggressions of the United
States and Israel and so I I just wanted
to kind of start there and see in terms
of those developments you know um
you know how how you kind of would
contextualize or think about
them I mean the first thing I think
that's important Jared is to talk a
little bit about Iran
itself you know Iran is a country of
about 89 million people it has a very
very old sense of itself you know it has
a sense of itself having a relatively
unbroken civilization that goes much
before Islam arrives in Iran you know
during the time of the Persians it has a
civilizational
continuity the reason I'm saying that is
that I think a lot of people
particularly in the new world don't
appreciate um the depth of cultural
sensibility in the old world you know in
China for instance or in India or in
Indonesia Iran um you know you think
about Nigeria Ghana the these countries
have a sense of themselves uh that go
back very long you know they have a very
good sense of who they are they are not
young countries you know with a young
history they have deep roots and
understanding and therefore the sense of
dignity built into these countries as a
country you know there's a difference
between a country in its modern form the
modern State and a
civilizational understanding of oneself
you know a civilization
understanding of oneself we are Iranian
we are Persians it creates a sense of
dignity that's quite important to
recognize it's not related merely to
let's say the Iranian Revolution of
1979 the Islamic Constitution you know
and so on it's not related to that it
goes back a long time you don't fool
around um you know with that sense of
dignity and the sense that I don't want
my dignity violated I mean when the
United States conducted Ed a Ceta
against the Iranian Democratic regime of
Muhammad madc in
1953 it was not popular at all and the
memory of that Keta is intact inside
Iran's young people when I meet young
Iranians travel to Iran talk to people
and so on mosak is not forgotten mosadek
is part of the you know in a sense their
curriculum you know I don't mean in
school curriculum I mean the curricul of
who they are the learning the
discussions the conversation um the
regime of the Sha of Iran was
humiliating for the the sense that the
Sha was using oil money to import vast
amounts of weapons he was the largest
importer of weapons in the world at a
certain point you know the US arms
companies uh were thriving on Iranian
oil he would just recycle the money he
wasn't taking care of the Iran Ian
people that was a humiliation which is
why during the Iranian Revolution of 79
there was no real opposition to the
revolution it was a complete Mass
Uprising um delivered later into the
hands of the Islamic sections ayini and
so on but the Revolt was a generalized
Revolt of the population 89 million
people with a great sense of patriotism
and this is not the first time that that
an one of their people have been killed
in an assassination like this in 2020
the United States without provocation
assassinated a leading figure in Iran's
political uh history General kasim suani
he was assassinated in Bagdad airport
without provocation Mr suani was coming
to Iraq to have a conversation with the
Iraqi government um in fact would
perhaps have been dialing down tensions
in the region
dealing with the question of Isis and so
on he was assassinated without
provocation in a in a very real way you
know it was a surprise to everybody um
that's so this is not the first time
when the Israelis attacked the com the
embassy in in Syria okay now let's first
acknowledge that Iran is a place of
great um dignity and understanding of
itself and they're not going to allow
people to constantly poke at them
without retaliating that's the first I
mean what do you expect the United
States knows this when us ships war
ships go near and into Iranian
territorial waters you know in The
Straits of Hormuz Iran always sends out
motorboats to harass those ships it
never allows us ships free access into
Iranian Waters always comes out and why
because they are very quote unquote
jealous of their sense of of territorial
Integrity they are strongly seeking
National sovereignty and so on now come
to this direct incident
firstly Israel is conducting as you said
a genocidal war against the
Palestinians the sensibility around the
world against this is very high in Iran
people are very upset by this because
over the years pro Palestinian sentiment
has become part of Iranian nationalism
um you know when ansar Allah in Yemen
the government of Yemen said we are not
going to allow ships to carry arms into
um into Israel this was greeted with
satisfaction amongst the Iranians
Iranian press congratulated Anar Allah
for taking this position um there's a
great Pro Palestinian sensibility across
Iranian Society during that genocidal
war against the people of Palestine the
Israelis violated the Vienna convention
on diplomatic um uh the Diplomatic
convention which is signed by Israel in
1961 and attacked a Iranian Embassy in
Syria they violated two International
laws one the UN Charter by attacking
territory in Syria one UN member State
attacking another without provocation
Syria didn't attack Israel and secondly
attacking a diplomatic space that
violates the Vienna convention killing
seven High officials of the Iranian
government in 1998 when the United
States was attacked probably by al-Qaeda
in Nairobi and in Daris Salam both times
Al-Qaeda attacked US
embassies United States
retaliated against Al-Qaeda C
Al-Qaeda camps in Afghanistan us
directly
retaliated Bill Clinton was the
president and the United States
destroyed the only Factory in Africa
that was in Sudan in in in carum that
made medicines for malaria the only
African Factory that made malaria the
alifa pharmaceutical Factory leveled it
in a cruise missile strike if the United
States feels that it's okay to retaliate
when its embassies are attacked by
destroying a pharmaceutical Factory in
Sudan which had nothing to do with the
attacks in Nairobi and Dar Salam then
what is the precedent for the Iranians
when their embassies attack High
Personnel killed at a time when the
person who attacks them is in the middle
of a genocidal can you not retaliate
with that great prop Palestinian feeling
that feeling that we have a old
civilization we never really retaliated
when kasum suani was killed therefore
this time it was inevitable they would
retaliate and they did and they will do
it again and it's a mistake to imagine
that Israel has some Superior Firepower
that they'll be able to take on the
Iranians you see Israel has an easy time
attacking the Palestinians who are
largely defenseless Iran is a country of
88 million people 89 million people it's
three times the size of Iraq's
population they are not going to now
with their high level of Technology
they're not going to take this lying
down they will go all out and they
will go into a if they are attacked they
will go into a situation where they
don't care if there's large loss of life
why because their dignity is very
important they have an old civilization
you know so this should be understood by
people in the United States and so on
that Iran is not going to just you know
allow the us to do whatever it wants
Iran is a country of dignity they will
not permit themselves to be walked over
in fact they criticize themselves for
not retaliating after Kim suman's death
so henceforth I don't think people
should play with Iran with the
assumption that the trigger will not be
pulled appreciate that appreciate the
backgrounds too and um you know in some
ways I mean it this this this does
connect you know because I wanted to get
your opinion also on the Palestinian
resistance on you know what is called
the AIS of resistance a bit and the
significance of you
know their role uh you know over the
last six months obviously you know
as we've already said there's the
egregious genocidal war that is is being
waged upon Palestinian people as a whole
uh particularly um of course most
egregiously in Gaza but also
increasingly in the West Bank and
elsewhere um and at the same time
they're uh you know there have been
these significant shifts in geopolitical
Dynamics it feels like um you know or
maybe another way to put it is that some
of the shifts that have have already
been
happening over the last several years
are becoming more Stark um and so you
know part of what I wanted to say with
this is that it does seem that the
resistance has opened up a horizon of of
new possibilities and new uh new
conversations about Palestine that had
been kind of foreclosed under you know
with with The Siege on Gaza and
everything else and obviously this comes
at a tremendous human cost but what are
your thoughts on um on the resistance
and on these changing Dynamics you know
Jared to get there let's first start
with Professor Jodi dean of Hobart and
William Smith college she wrote a piece
at the Verso books blog where she used
the word exhilarating you know she said
I felt exhilarated I don't know the
exact phrase but something like I felt
exhilerated um when I saw the October
7th events for that she has been
suspended in fact I think they want to
fire her um it's it's at that level okay
let let's think about that I see over
your right shoulder you have the new
translation of gasan canaan's book on
the 1936 Revolt in Palestine published
by 1804 books and I'm happy to see it
there because I had a role in the new
translation of this tremendous book by
Gan kanafani of the popular front for
the liberation of Palestine and it's not
I'm not just saying it because it's over
your right shoulder Jared but because
kanafani um look back at the 1936 Revolt
to try to understand what is the
scenario that the Palestinians face what
is the scenario you see the Palestinian
people whether Christian Jews or Muslims
because Palestinians had different
religious faiths there were Palestinian
Jews as well and so on Palestinians have
lived in that part of the world for a
very long time you know they've had a um
a role there um and as a consequence of
European
anti-Semitism um Jews who lived in
Europe whether they were in Poland or in
Russia or in Germany France and so on
European Jews who faced anti-Semitism in
Europe seeking an outlet from
intractable anti-Semitism in Europe you
see
Jews from Palestine didn't flee to
Europe because of Palestinian
anti-Semitism didn't exist Jews in
Palestine were happy to stay there they
were well integrated into Palestinian
Society it was European Jews who were
fleeing European anti-Semitism because
of the horridness of European racism you
see I mean they are the ones who come um
in the 19 20s and 30s after the Bal for
declaration um lord balfor of the
British Empire Britain had colonized
Palestine canaani was confounded you
know these the Jews are coming from
Europe fleeing
anti-Semitism taking the land from the
Palestinian people including Palestinian
Jews displacing them and the
Palestinians perplexed by this phenomena
rise up against the British Empire and
against European Jewish settlers he
analyzes that over your left shoulder
you have a book by France penon it's an
interesting book it's I think it's the
dying colonialism but the more famous
book is wretched of the earth which
inani books is just published in Zulu
just to let you know um fenon studying
the context of settler colonialism when
settlers come from elsewhere and
colonize the land Fon argues that
settler Colonial
in the fact of being settler Colonials
have to create a structure of violence
to control the native they just have to
it's not a personality decision they may
not be sedom masochist people but
because of this nature of having steal
stolen somebody's land and then demand
that they work for you and so on as
labor on the land and to make you behave
they have to create a structure of
violence they have to treat you in a
certain way
and then fenon argues the violence
imposed by imperialism and Setra
Colonial culture that violence that's
there imposed on people creates a
reaction of violence people react
violently to that violence the structure
imposes violence on everybody and we've
seen that across history fenon is
writing about the context of North
Africa he's writing about Algeria and
the French create a structure of of
settler Colonial violence on the
Algerian people that violence imposed by
France creates a violent reaction in
opposition you see that in the United
States you know when violence is imposed
on a people they react violently um you
know the riots after the the beating of
Rodney King in Los Angeles those riots
are an example of the violent way that
the subordinated react to a culture of
violence um that's going to happen you
know that's going to happen but
organizations don't respond violently
unless it is insisted upon so the
Palestinian struggle starts as a Civic
struggle it's born largely in Kuwait
among University students that's where
Al fata is born becomes the Palestinian
Liberation
Organization um and these Palestinian
groups attempt over the course of
several years to engage the Israeli
government they attempt to engage people
saying we demand that resolution 194 the
right to return of the Palestinian
people be honored and so
on that is their politics Israel refuses
to engage them at all and then they move
to the armed struggle because they have
no choice they want to raise you know
the question of the the existence it is
an existential question Palestinian
existence the fedin appears there same
way in Gaza Hamas is the young
organization born in
1987 in the midst of the intifa of 1987
it doesn't have a long
history Hamas is born in 87 in Gaza
itself there's a range of political
attempts different kinds the people of
Gaza organized in Hamas organized in the
Palestinian other factions the fata and
so on attempt a political solution in
2005 they go to The Ballot Box Hamas
wins the election what does Israel and
the US do we don't recognize you in
other words Hamas attempts a plainly
Democratic politics they are refused
having been refused the Israelis Gat
them they Gat Gaza they close it down
Hamas and other factions try a range of
possibilities again different kinds of
protests including in 2019 the unarmed
peaceful March of return Israel fires on
them ruthlessly killing people who are
Marching unarmed you can't say to the
Palestinians why don't you try X or Y
they've tried
everything you know when you put a
people into a situation of violence they
respond violently the
Palestinian attack on October 7th and we
don't know all the details yet because
we don't know the side of the
Palestinians we don't nobody from
Palestinian side has told us what they
did or what they didn't do there are
lots of accusations in the Israeli media
against the Israeli government very
confounding narratives are at play the
Israeli government says these terrible
atrocities were committed Israeli media
says they didn't happen children were
not beheaded so we really don't know
what happened on October 7th in full but
what we do know is it's part of a
history of resistance that comes Jared
in different forms this was definitely
an attack of some kind yeah that much we
know and why not why not that attack
because in fact by international law the
Palestinians as a people under
occupation have the right to resist
their occupation now you can say why did
they resist it like this or that that's
acceptable why did you attack civilians
it's all that is an acceptable
conversation all I want to establish is
they had a right to you know resist
their occupation that much is undeniable
do I agree with all the tactics that
were used probably not because most
likely in a condition of war we never
agree on things you know I'm screamish
about the killing of civilians in
general now some people might say to me
ah but there are no civilians everybody
is a settler there are no civilians
there I I said that that's an
interesting position I happen to not
agree to it you know at least we can
have a conversation but what's
interesting now this conversation is not
being allowed in many places in Germany
they are using censorship and force to
shut down conversations
it's reached that position in the United
States not as bad as Germany in United
States still students can go and camp
out and say dest and so on in Germany
it's banned you can't have the
conversation so what happened on October
7th is not an unusual event it's part of
a long series of resistance by the
Palestinians using different tactics but
broadly put the strategy is the same and
the strategy is to make make sure that
Israel is not
comfortable is not comfortable with the
occupation of the Palestinians cu the
moment Israel in the world get
comfortable with the occupation of the
Palestinians the Palestinian cause is
finished for instance the government of
Morocco is comfortable with the
occupation of Western Sahara in fact the
United States has delivered Western
Sahara by Imperial Fiat to the kingdom
of Morocco they are comfortable with it
the price is not high so they have no
problem it's going to continue the swiis
are not able to remind the world of
their existence the Palestinians do not
want their faith and I think that is
what October 7th really
was appreciate that um so I was thinking
a little bit with your book uh that you
published with Nom Chomsky that we had a
conversation with you about a couple
years ago the withdrawal
and you know one of the things that I
think both of you cautioned us about
this a little bit with that book um is
obviously it's a book in part about an
empire in decline or beginning to to
decline it's also but one of the things
that you mentioned is that you know just
because it's declining does not mean
that it's less dangerous or less violent
and um you know I've thought about that
a lot especially with the you know the
the special relationship obviously that
exists between the United States and
Israel the the things that the United
States as a as a government I'm not
talking about the people who are out
protesting and and you know but has
been uh all has allowed to occur has
also provided you know ideological and
psychological kind of uh support for um
and um you know and and I think that
this is a serious concern obviously you
know the United States in it I don't
mean to diminish all of the wars that
the United States has done in the
absolute numbers of you know human
beings that have been wiped off of the
pages of History by uh us Wars because
obviously we could talk about you know
your work and other work about that as
well um but I do think that so I guess
in part one of my questions about it is
do you think that part of what's
different is that we're seeing this
destruction because of smartphones and
technology and everything else now and
so there's a better view that we have to
exactly what these imperialist wars look
like or um you know are we are we seeing
kind of the Mask come off more fully in
terms of what is allowed to happen you
know tactically in a situation where you
have a kind of I mean you talk through
your work on uh even in hyper
imperialism of looking at these
connections between like the United
States Israel the West uh you know
Western Europe Etc and these other
groups it I think for many it's been
kind of shocking the number of you know
norms and values and international laws
that have just been thrown aside uh in
this moment so how do you how do you
make sense of some of
that I mean I'm going to say something
Jared which I might come to regret so um
here goes um simultaneous with this
genocidal bombing of the Palestinians of
Gaza is the war in Ukraine it's a
simultaneous War it's a good test case
to see what's different between them um
there simply are not images coming out
of Ukraine that are as horrifying as
coming out of Palestine they simply are
not you know Baku these different places
names are bandied about you know people
have Ukrainian flags all over the place
but you don't have
imagery of you know thousands of
children
massacred um you don't have entire
family lines the we family I don't know
much about where the we family comes
from but imagine the entire lineage of
the we is wiped out about 400 families
Jared have been wiped out in Gaza you
know the entire lineage they they will
not reproduce these Family Lines nothing
like that is happening in Ukraine okay
if it were happening you would have
heard about it you would have been
inundated with the imagery you would
have had those cell phone footage
everywhere it's not there why because
the Russians aren't bombing like that
you see it's very interesting when Mr
zilinski travels to Washington to meet
the the arms dealers he leaves from Kev
International Airport I've covered a lot
of conflicts in Iraq for instance when
the United States first bombed Iraq 2003
they bombed the airport they closed down
the the runways they had to rebuild
everything when they came in you know in
order to make it useful um they bombed
all infrastructure there was no power no
water there was nothing everything was
destroyed they bombed the relays relays
and so on the Russians aren't bombing
like that Kev is still a fully
functioning City you know there are
music concerts happening and so on I'm
not saying there's no brutality in that
war all wars are deeply brutal but they
are not bombing to destroy the Ukrainian
people entirely they're not wiping them
out there are not actually over the
course of these two years there are not
you know
a million ukrainians trying to flee
elsewhere people have left they've left
the indignity of war that always happens
yeah nobody hangs around if you have a
car if you have some money you're gone
you take asylum in Spain you take asylum
in Germany wherever you don't want to be
there during a war but entired
neighborhoods in Kiev are not being
destroyed in Odessa being destroyed and
so on yeah it's not happening
the United States bombing in Iraq was of
a much different character than Ukraine
the US just pummeled civilian
neighborhoods ramadi fuja 30,000 people
were killed in mosul in the battle to
reclaim that City 30,000 you forget that
neighborhoods were pummeled I remember
visiting Western Iraq entire areas were
destroyed wiped out flattened yeah
there's 28 million tons of rubble in
Gaza 28 million tons I say the number
Jared most people have no idea what I'm
saying I I could have said 200 million
tons I could have said 2 million tons
you don't know what that is guys you
don't know what 28 million nor do I but
it's a lot of rubble and what I'm told
is if you bulldoze all that Rubble into
the Mediterranean Sea you could create
another mini Gaza small Gaza of the
coast a lot of concrete and so on yeah
you don't want to do that you'll the
Mediterranean but 28 million because the
Israelis have
pummeled neighborhoods destroyed
sections of Gaza City leveled um
universities they bombed the bakeries
they bombed the fishing boats so that
they you the Palestinians would
starve okay this is different than
what's happening in Ukraine it's not
just the ubiquity of cell phone images
because now we have good cameras they
have them in Odessa
they have them in in Mario Paul where is
the footage the Russians simply didn't
bomb like that it's very
interesting the international criminal
court immediately framed a warrant
against bladimir Putin for removing
children from a war zone and bringing
them into Russia not killing them mind
you for removing children now might very
well be a war crime but I want to still
emphasize that the Israeli High
officials have been killing murdering 15
20,000 children 7,000 known missing
people in Gaza of them 5,000 are
children not one international criminal
Court warrant against one high official
of the Israeli government it's not just
the ubiquity of cell phone image it's
just that they are bombing in a certain
way that they are trying to decimate the
Palestinians and they are saying that
the second nakba Gaza nakba we're going
to kill those human Savages and so on so
people are reacting to that people are
reacting to the nature of the
bombardment and the fact that the bombs
falling are either delivered by the
United States or paid for and delivered
by the United States or Britain and
other powers Germany the complicity is
clear but it's not just the Simplicity
it's the nature of the bombing it is
horid I was in Gaza after the 2014
bombing it was terrible at the time I I
didn't imagine some 3,000 people killed
in the matter of weeks this even that
was terrible I cannot imagine what
Gaza you know what it's going to be I
mean I I want to cry talking to you in
October itself I lost three friend
friends in Gaza one of them had driven
me around in 2014 another was a close
colleague since over these 200 days I've
lost five friends in Gaza some have been
able to leave the
country I mean this is a different level
these were sensitive delightful
journalists they did not deserve to die
they didn't do anything they were not
actually part of any political project
that used to frustrate me I used to be
frustrated with their level of you know
I'm just a
journalist but that's the history of
Palestine it produces extremely
competent and sensitive people but they
are not there anymore Jared they are
gone and that is what people are
reacting to people are reacting to the
fact that they are watching sensitive
lovely people poets
painters writers you know interesting
personal stories are being told about
ordinary people who didn't paint or
write and you know billions of people
around the planet getting access to
these stories are feeling the pain of
the loss those Souls disappearing like
this for what reason for what reason and
from and the other side being led by a
man of no sensitivity Benjamin Netanyahu
it doesn't help the
Israelis that the man who's leading them
is a man of no sensitivity it doesn't
demonstrate
humanity and these innocent humans are
being
massacred yeah I mean I definitely feel
the loss uh myself and I appreciate you
you know driving that home in terms of
folks that you know and you know um and
I mean it's it's I yeah I feel all of it
and for a variety of different reasons
but I think you named some of them quite
well there um I want to then bring this
kind of to this this report that you've
recently published called hyper
imperialism it's quite an extensive
report I recommend people take a look at
it for themselves go through it um you
know convene a study group about it you
you lay out a variety of um you do a lot
of things in the report one of the
things that you do is kind of lay out a
variety of kind of camps or sets of
states in the world today as part of
your effort to kind of make sense of the
geopolitical situation today what some
people have called multipolarity or
maybe the basis for
multipolarity um what are some of the
key takeaways for you from this report
um and maybe you know are we seeing some
of these things
um you know further play out in in
recent events in in your
view oh you're muted
sorry uh I'm so happy you talked about
this report I'm I'm holding a hard copy
of it it doesn't appear as a hard copy
you have to go and print it out it's 186
pages I I'm actually so happy you said
convenor group to read it and so on it
is in a way the summary of eight years
of work in the 8ye history of
tricontinental
um let's first talk about what we were
trying to disprove you know to start
with one is I was very interested and I
I continue to be very interested in the
overwhelming military posture of Western
countries um there's something quite
bizarre about the fact that the Western
States unable to solve basic problems of
poverty hunger and so on can spend so
much money on weapon systems of great
destruction I mean I was in Santa Monica
a few years ago in Los Angeles
California very rich neighborhood and I
was struck by how many homeless people
sleep on the beach um you know I'm just
talking now from the standpoint of the
rich it's your Beach how can you
tolerate being in a society where you're
sharing that space with people who don't
have any place to live you don't even
have them removed because you have some
liberal
sensibilities um but I don't mean just
remove them by force I mean transcend
poverty build homes for people and so on
you know the the appetite for ending
these things seems to have gone there's
so much money wasted squandered in the
military industry so we decided to have
a look at the actual military spending
you know the Stockholm Institute accepts
that the US state department spending at
900 billion roughly is the number we
reject that um we looked at Department
of energy where the nuclear spending
takes place the interest on Military
debt and so on and we came up with a
number of 1.53
trillion if you estimate upwards some of
the other military
budgets you come up with an enormous
number you know well over $2 trillion
spent in every year of that
75% of global military spending in 2022
was spent by the United States the NATO
allies and close allies like Japan and
and Korea if you add all this up 75% of
military spending is This Global North
block we did we found that the global
North therefore which spends 75% of
world military spending is not only a
Block in name it's actually a block
institutionally it's United by military
Alliance NATO formed in 1949 it's United
by political Alliance the G7 and then G7
plus partners and there's an
intelligence Alliance the 49 Network
where the intelligence share and so on
the global n actually operates like a
block it is a pole it exists as a
conspiracy against the planet sorry to
use the word conspiracy people will say
oh he's a conspiracy theorist nothing
conspiracy theory here NATO is an
established Treaty Organization the G7
started meeting from
1974 the five eyes intelligence network
is now the 14 eyes it has a Wikipedia
page for God's sake it's nothing
secretive yeah it's a block that's
number one number
two the global South countries are
disperate there's no unified Global
South Alliance
there is no Global South block doesn't
exist the global South is a range of
different kinds of countries but we were
interested in trying to analyze them so
we came up with an idea that the
countries that have strongest seeking
sovereignty Plus have a commitment to
socialism that's one group there a group
of countries China Cuba and so on people
can debate and argue whether a country
belongs or doesn't belong Vietnam but
that's a debate then there are strongly
seeking countries that have no
commitment to socialism country like
Iran for instance you know maybe Algeria
and so on yeah they're not there's no
socialist content then there are other
countries that are seeking to build a a
project of some sort of sovereignty and
so sovereignty becomes the way we
understand the groupings you know where
where to put turkey for instance a NATO
member and yet seek strong sovereignty
so we had this exercise of in fact
categorizing countries very interesting
exercise what we have come to understand
is whereas the global North is a block
and is a block with a military
intelligence and political Alliance the
global South is not a block there is no
military political and intelligence
Alliance on the other hand there are
some unities that are there some
groupings are available the g77 group of
friends in defense of the UN
Charter regionalism plays a big role
here the bolivarian project in South
America to some extent the incite
project in Africa and so on regionalism
plays a role um but what we also want to
emphasize in
this is that
increasingly this amorphous Global South
is finding a way to articulate something
or the other I don't want to exaggerate
it you know I'm uncomfortable with the
term
multipolarity only because and I and I
caught how you talked about you said
what some people have called
multipolarity because it assumes the
existence of several poles I don't think
we have several poles I think there is
still the global North Pole and
therefore there is one unitary source of
international danger imperialism has one
head and then there are different
countries that are attempting to emerge
in different ways China and and and
Russia for instance are defensive Powers
China is the second largest component of
world military spending if the global
North is 75% China is 10% 75 to 10 it's
not a matchup these are not competing
imperialism um there's a misread of the
world situation
if a country invades another country
that's not an act of imperialism that's
an act of aggression that's an act of
violating the UN Charter just because
Russia attacked Ukraine doesn't mean
there's something called Russian
imperialism Russia has a defensive power
it is not seeking world domination we
also looked at um military bases and so
on I mean the thing about this report is
it's data heavy and just a word about
that I am very much a believer that you
have to build the theory from the facts
I'm also a Believer and today's the
birthday of Vladimir Lenin um who wrote
A a text on imperialism in 1916 I'm very
much a
believer that you must build the theory
from the concrete facts of the moment
that's called a conjunctural analysis
what Lenin had done in
1916 was a conjunctural analysis of
imperialism in his time
we are attempting in our own way to do a
conjunctural analysis of imperialism in
our time the subtitle of this text is
about the danger and decadence of hyper
imperialism it's dangerous because the
only instrument the West seems to have
or the global North seems to have is the
military so when confronted with a
problem they seek a military solution
bomb them bomb them bomb them n chowski
in the with draw calls it The Godfather
you know let's whack them send lucab
bratzi to go and take somebody out and
so on yeah danger but also decadent
Jared decadent what do you mean by
decadent why using a word like decadence
decadent decadent because these
countries in the global North don't have
a project for the world they don't have
a way to answer the compelling problems
of humanity so I reject this idea that
Biden is senile and that's why he can't
talk properly or that Trump is is a
nutcase and I reject all that the issue
is not one of the global North countries
has produced a leadership the ruling
class in these countries cannot produce
a leadership that actually inspires
people because the ruling class has no
project what can the US ruling class
produce except
banalities you know figures like Marco
Rubio Ted Cruz you know I mean you know
Eric Adams these are
mediocrities with no ideas no no
compelling way to inspire people they
pin the US flag on their lapel they put
on a blue suit pin the US flag on their
lapel and they walk around as if they
are important people but come on Eric
you're the mayor of New York what is
your idea compelling vision for the
future you don't have anything you don't
have even an understanding of these
young people who are brave enough to you
know to confront suspension because of
something they believe in which is they
don't want to see genocide in their name
these are decadent people Eric Adams
Marco Rubio you know Joe Biden Donald
Trump it doesn't matter that Mr Biden is
an older man age is no bar you see there
lots of older men and women in the world
of great distinction and Clarity Lila
Khaled of the popular front great
Palestinian leftist sitting in Jordan
she is this contemporary of Joe Biden
she is a woman of great clarity Clarity
doesn't come from age you don't have to
be young to be clear you have to have
some ideas a compelling project a reason
to be alive a reason to understand and
assist Humanity as it transcends it
problems hyper imperialism is produced
for the ruling class of the global North
a decadence sclerotic they are like you
know the calcium deposits inside the
arteries and veins they are giving the
global North heart attacks you got to
get beyond that Jared the reason you
need a new class to come into power in
the United States is because this one is
useless they certainly they're useless
for us that's for sure um uh so uh I
want there's a couple things that are on
my mind but the one I do actually want
to ask you about um is that you know
because we haven't talked about it in a
while you had a great conversation with
two black on black Miss podcasts um I
probably this past summer when things
were really starting to heat up in the
Sahel region um and you know I I
thinking about the election in Sagal as
well and you know the also the the move
I think it's in um
Nigeria the Nigeria Nigeria or njer but
one of the two where they they they've
kicked out the the the US military um or
ended their cooperation agreement you
know and um these you know these
Dynamics are still unfolding and um I
think they're they're very interesting
ones um I don't know if there's anything
I'm sure you're continuing to follow it
um what what is your sense about kind of
what people would call the
frankophone uh you know um African world
and and in specifically the sahal
region I mean look firstly um France had
a really rigorous hold on West Africa
and the Sahel you know from Sagal all
the way out to ner I mean it had a real
hold even after these countries left
French Colonial Dominion in in' 61 any
of them left in around
6061 France held on to them through the
CFA the Frank um and these countries had
to hold their reserves in the Bank of
France and so on I mean it's it's a
ridiculous thing the close advisor to
president fa in in Sagal who's the
youngest president on record there the
close advisor has written a terrific
book about France's Colonial currency um
the CFA he's written a terrific book I
mean that's a close advisor to the new
president of Sagal in the Sahel in ner
and so on I've traveled in that region
quite a bit um it's interesting that
there have been these two military CPS
in Bina Faso two in Mali one in ner and
they've all created now a federation
it's interesting how the anti- French
sensibility has really picked up um it's
picked up for two reasons one is
economic I think
knowledge of France's economic grip on
this part of the world has frustrated
people but secondly the military
intervention um France intervened
militarily in
2013 against alqaeda uh you know which
had been emboldened by France and the
United States destroying the Libyan
state in 2011 it was called operation
seral they came into Mali and so
on when France did that um it raised the
concern among on the people of the
region and the concern was where is our
own military why can't we defend
ourselves why do we have to rely on the
French initially and I must say this
that initially the French entered and
said we'll train the military uh but
soon they set the military aside and
started engaging Al-Qaeda directly um
why can't we make a military why are we
reliant on the French for our currency
why does France take our resources at
Cut Rate prices these were the questions
that began to percolate and because of
neoliberalism most of the political
forces had surrendered to some
neoliberal ideology or the other um very
few of them were credible um leaders in
a move against uh the French because
these questions that had percolated
resulted in an anti-french mood and none
of the main political forces were
capable of standing up to the French and
this is why
lowlevel officers in the military uh
took matters into their own hands and
when they were not able to succeed Bina
Faso they were CED by another set of
officers young people captains Colonels
and so on same thing in Mali the coup
wasn't able to confront the French it
was itself removed and a new group came
in um and these groups have been pretty
forthright they have returned to the
sources of their inspiration Thomas
shankara in Burkina Faso a very
important inspiration for the young
officers because he himself had been an
officer he was murdered assassinated in
1987 they're aware of that history um
Ibrahim TR for an instance you know very
much a scholar uh now of of all that
stuff and and looking to advance an
agenda I think with these developments
in Sagal with a young leader in power
with him being advised about the CFA
Frank and so on the countries like ner
which are you know landlock countries
they will have now a pathway uh if they
all start a conversation about a post
France Africa and I think this is very
interesting and again we must watch
accompany this process be cautious not
try to get ahead of it um this is not
necessarily an Anti-Imperialist process
this is certainly anti French um also
maybe anti- us in
because the US has a massive um uh you
know um drone base you know the French
and the United States were concerned
about ner and they interfered in ner a
lot because of the migration question
migrants coming through towns like
agadez um I've written several stories I
traveled to agadez and so on um you see
the French intervened in the ner
Parliament to push a law that
criminalized migration one of the acts
of the new military government well it's
now a civilian government backed by the
military was to anull that act and to
say that migrants and those who help
them are not criminals uh if this
migration is a problem of you know the
IMF let's say in West Africa and of
Europe on the other side why should the
people migrating be criminalized very
interesting developments taking place I
must say so you know to your point um
they are direct you know people who've
directly experienced colonialism one
form of the other it's taking a very
long time to begin to make moves to
exercise some form of sovereignty we're
not there yet but the process is
certainly developing quite rapidly and
and I would ask people to watch wait and
accompany but don't exaggerate what
people are doing because you know
there's a tendency to disappointment and
it's not fair to exaggerate what other
people are trying to accomplish and have
both the exaggeration and disappointment
in your head it's better to accompany
what other people are doing stay at
their
Pace right on I appreciate that and I
know that you do have to run I
appreciate the the time with you today
VJ and um I'm sure that we will do it
again um always great to be in
conversation with you today uh just
thank you very much for this very happy
to be with you and I'm very sorry about
the fact that I have a cold and it has
interrupted I think some of my my brain
it comes like a fog here and there but
I'm really glad we had a chance to talk
Jared always good to be in conversation
and I hope you you get over that cold
soon uh I meant to give you a few bless
you but I didn't want to interrupt you
because you were uh you were moving so
quickly through it but again thank you
again VJ
all right folks so a couple of things
just before I take us out of here so one
um you know thank you again to VJ Pasad
for that Monica thank you so much for
becoming a YouTube
member um yeah we didn't get into this
Dr ball um but I agree with you
certainly um I think that obviously
there
are there's certainly plenty of military
investment in psychological Warfare um
and there's also a whole lot of
capitalist investment in psychological
warfare through the media outside of the
military um but that is certainly a a
big dimension of it
um I want to also just say a couple
things so tomorrow we will be back with
Kai Haron um we're going to talk about
he has a piece that just recently came
out on the Verso blog that is called
forget ecomodernism um
which is a really interesting piece it's
obviously critique of ecomodernism which
is one of the strains of what gets
called political ecology but basically
um you know left-wing or Marxist
attempts to um deal with the climate
crisis catastrophe
apocalypse um and it's a critique of
that and also an Embrace of degrowth but
a you know a specific train of degrowth
and we'll get into that a little bit
more um and so anyways I'm I'm
interested in that conversation and
Kai's work I also want
to put a couple other things on people's
radar so one Thursday we're going to be
on with tu black and rasul moat um we'll
do that first as a live stream and I
also will release it as a audio podcast
as well um but we're going to talk about
their new book wandering black Rage
which folks probably read the original
pieces or listen to us talk about it
perhaps on the podcast um you know when
they came out in uh I think Black Agenda
Report um but you know great work there
really enjoying reading that book uh I
appreciated the shout out to uh Brooke
terpstra in in the in the epigraph at
the beginning of the book um and the
other thing that that I would wanted to
put on people's radar is I haven't I
don't have a time for this yet but I
think on
Thursday um actually I think it will be
at 7:30 p.m. um I'm going to get
together with hopefully Jason aak K from
uh H resist a few years ago when Howard
had uh massive like 300 student
occupation of the administration
building um we're going to have uh Wendy
Travino and perhaps one other person who
were involved in the Occupy Movement but
out in Oakland which had you know some
of the most advanced uh struggles during
the Occupy Movement and we're GNA have
um a couple organizers from Philadelphia
Housing action which um folks may have
heard our conversation with them a
couple years ago on the podcast but they
were part of the formation and the
encampments that ended up leveraging
around 50 homes from the uh PHA which is
Philadelphia Housing Authority which is
of course part of the federal housing
you know initiative and whatnot um but
also from the city of
Philadelphia for a land trust through
multiple encampments and squatting and
all kinds of stuff like that during um
2020 you know when things were locked
down because of covid um and so what the
reason that we're going to pull these
folks together is because there's there
are these encampments going on at
college campuses and I wanted to convene
a conversation with folks who had been a
part of encampments could talk about
some of the you know strategies tactics
uh decisions how do you maintain
leverage how do you negotiate uh how do
you um ret remain politically clear when
um these encampments are can be open
spaces and contested spaces there's
different groups in them um how do you
establish security and deal with police
and so you know hopefully this would be
helpful for folks that are you know
thinking about this I know that it is
likely that this is a tactic that seems
to be um growing in the moment and I
don't think it'll be refi confined just
to college campuses there's a lot of
solidarity you know encampments and
protests and things like that and so so
just wanted to bring some folks together
to hopefully have a conversation about
um about the the contradictions and the
challenges of that type of organizing
but also people who in at least a few of
the cases have been successful in um
winning demands and then when you demand
win demands how do you you know hold the
people who agreed to your demands
accountable and so we'll get into all
that so I just wanted to um to say that
to folks before we closed out um again
appreciate VJ for coming on and sharing
his thoughts and it's great to great to
be with you all have a have a great rest
of your day






sh



## Keywords:
