---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szzsT7TLv9k
---

# Video
How Adolph Reed Became An Anti-Essentialist ft. Adolph Reed
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szzsT7TLv9k)

## Transcript:

welcome back to the Michael Brooks show
joining us now honor pleasure privilege
as always Adolph Reed jr. Adolph thanks
so much for doing this how you doing oh
hey man I'm okay it's my pleasure it's
always fun and I'm gonna start out with
giving a shout out to to Atlantic City
and Bob McDevitt and my brothers and
sisters in a UNITE HERE Local 54 which
the t-shirt
well the t-shirts from a bar obviously
from Irish bar let me down that's great
bar anybody that done in a city should
go but they're struggling now and
there's a big political change on the
verge of happening possibly I'm a down
there so watching that too
but anyway it's always great to be on to
talk to Michael and I talked to Trey
this morning and he said to say hi Oh
awesome that was that was great to have
yeah he had a lot of fun too good
so uh David and I David was joking David
I didn't know from that turay was your
son and so what we were joking about it
is that sometimes you'll reference your
son when you talk because he's a you
know fellow peer and academic now maybe
not peer to fellow academic and uh and
so what we're saying is like you know if
if if if
Adolphe didn't have like a fully grown
son who is also a successful academic
this is some type of it would have been
like a Dookie Houser situation this
genius kid I noticed I can't remember
now weathers when he was on your your
show I think it was actually I keep made
a reference to how how he got interested
in history and he mentioned that on long
car trips we would talk about history
and I know this is somebody wrote in the
comments and and yeah and and I think
they get back and play catch and I
thought yeah that's exactly but that's
great that's that's that's yeah I mean I
wound up like he he want to get me
embarks on a ten-year
career as a baseball coach really yeah
that's awesome
yeah I mean what happened was when he
moved up to the nine and ten year old
yeah it wasn't almost all rookie team
and the manager it was a good guy was a
holdover and he didn't have any
assistant coaches because it's because
all the coaches left with their kids and
he asked at the parents meeting and you
know nobody said anything so a good
Catholic boy I said well if you can't
find anybody else and it was like that
through high school that's awesome I
actually remember I and Little League I
was I was I was the best player on a
terrible team and the coach was this
nice guy who like all the other coaches
in this Little League had it completely
you know they were insane it's like
we're 11 years old were 12 years old
you're not gonna be able to relive your
high school fantasy so sports glory
threats and this guy wasn't like that at
all so he got he he picked off a couple
of people who were decent and then
everybody else could you know barely
throw the ball and and he so he got all
of that and then all the other teams you
know that were sponsored by like the
local plumber or whatever and we were
and I'm and I can't believe I'm
admitting this and thank god there's no
photographic evidence or pre or pre
digital photographic evidence we were
the the dare team so we were the
anti-drug very clean like this is a
purple cuz I wanted to talk to you about
your own political trajectory and how
you develop this can't the essentialist
framework so let me take that any way
you want to go man like how what what is
the what is the connection between how
you develop this anthony essentials
framework in your own political process
as an academic but also somebody who's
been you know an actual organizer for
decades to
yeah well I mean it's really interesting
question I mean I I mean like I was
inclined to like call myself a Marxist
before I knew what it was right so what
that meant was that I was inclined to
look for material explanations for stuff
and I could see exploitation right I
mean I wasn't you know the genius child
it was like a family phenomenon right I
just inherited the family business but
and I mean I came through black power
right like I was a product of the black
power moment but I always had like a
class perspective with me and there were
ways that you know the race line could
like seem to make sense if you didn't
ask any questions right like everything
could work at the level of internal
consistency right like if you assume all
the assumptions or if you take all the
assumptions at at face value don't try
to fit them to the outside world then it
could all have seemed to work I mean I
can't believe you did I grew up Catholic
so I was prepared for that kind of kind
of ontology but the problem was that I
was prepared for that kind of ontology
right so I could see the holes in it
right and then I mean I spent a year as
an organizer when I was in college with
the swp youth youth organization the
young socialists Alliance so I read more
Marx then I read more before and read
more after and it just seemed like these
big you know what's word I'm looking for
taxonomical abstraction 'he's just
didn't make sense right and I mean one
of the reasons I had problems with
geometry I was in high school was was I
had trouble accepting the you have
to pause it right because I wanted new
explanations so I wanted explanations
rest up too and then as the movement was
too
helping around me and I wasn't the only
one going this direction I had friends
and comrades in North Carolina who were
kind of moving in the same way and when
I went to graduate school I ran into
more of them because my program you know
drew people like us and we just started
trying to think think the abstractions
down to the ground down to actual
material social relations like I'll give
an example of that yeah what's an
example well yeah good one is is the
black community right so who who speaks
for the black community who who makes a
determination as to who speaks
authentically for the interests and
concerns of this abstraction called the
black community and frankly it it helped
you know not just being in a ph.d
program but being in Atlanta at the
moment of racial transition in in the
local politics you could see it
happening right you could see the class
character of the transition you could
see how the populist or communitarian
symbols that had been associated with
the radicals was so easily taken up by
the bourgeois politicians because it was
all superficial stuff right so you know
I mean I spent got probably close to a
decade once I stumbled onto the
Frankfurt School right I spent probably
close to a decade trying to figure out
how a distinction at Habermas made at
one point I think this was probably in
legitimation crisis a distinction
between cultural practices and
formations that are organic and those
that are structurally produced and
deployed and I spent close to a decade
trying to make sense of that distinction
trying to make it concrete and couldn't
and you know my my my default is
when there's some that I don't
understand then I I will think for a
long time I think sometimes too long
that there's something wrong with me
like I've got a brain dysfunction in
something where I just can't grok the
subtlety of this this distinction and
get really pissed up and after and that
was one of them and then after about a
decade I realize I mean the more and you
know I studied anthropology like in
college but I read a lot lot more
afterward and the more that I started
thinking like a Marxist anthropologist
kind of I thought well of course I can't
make sense of this distinction because
it's right because every you
know cultural node is is strategically
produced and deployed in some way right
and then that got me thinking back
through it was kind of liberating moment
actually because it got me thinking back
through like you know not just that
nature culture but combined shop you
know gesellschaft and I realized that
all that stuff is right and and
there's no traditional society versus
modern society it's all like self
self-congratulatory and and
that social orders are constantly made
and it constantly made through the
conflict and contradictions whatever
right at the same time I mean I so I
mean I tell you what like I got
interested I can tell you exactly when I
got interested academically in yeah in
the race theory stuff in the when was it
90 no probably around a turn in this
century when Ward Connerly who was like
no from south south southwest
louisiana went to california became a
bigger was pushing what he
called the California Civil Rights
initiative which was a ballot initiative
that would have prohibited
the state of California from keeping
records by by race except for two
instances and it's when I found out what
the two instances were that the process
began that culminated in like taking
this up as a research area the two
instances were law enforcement and
public health and I thought okay so if
you accept that race is a biological
fiction right then the last thing you
want to do is make an exception for for
Public Health it should be just the
opposite all right and everybody can see
the mischief that the law enforcement
stuff would permit so I thought okay
like I'm gonna write an op-ed piece cuz
you know it's like in the 2000s already
and I'd been doing that kind of stuff
stuff for a while for one of the major
papers in California but because I'm
kind of a kind of political person that
I am I thought that before I wrote
anything or got too far in it I would
check with with near the opposition
forces and see how they were dealing
with these problems and I was stunned
the people opposition to Connelly yeah
right okay and just I just want to tell
people just in case in an army Ward
Connelly was coming very much from the
right and he was a kind of you know
quintessential kind of 90s black
Republican and we need to you know we
need to pull our pants up and this type
of crap and that's right yank okay yep
and but what I what what stunned me was
that the opposition seemed to be
accepting you know the terms here and
claiming in my understanding erroneously
that that if this thing passed we would
no longer be able to track the diseases
that we as people of color get so I was
yes right because I thought okay well I
can't write anything now because if it's
whatever I write would be appropriated
by the other side so that started me to
work on it and and and it's been an area
of interest ever since I mean now I
can't recall a moment in my life that I
believed that the race was a real thing
you know what I mean I mean it's you
know and and this is partly because of
of the anthropological background I
guess right because you understand
pretty quickly that that the that Homo
sapiens is a species so it does not come
divided into sub populations that are
larger than the immediate breeding group
right right yeah but also I mean just
having lived I mean this and especially
to be honest from being down here I mean
I remember after my ninth grade year we
went on a trip to nut notre-dame and to
look Loyola and Chicago I never said of
Catholic you know summer school things
and I think the one at Loyola Jesuits
it's like the Confraternity of Christian
doctrine Catholic social justice thing
and and we were in a a little meeting
right I mean just a racial justice right
I mean discussion and and it's white
girl from st. Louis who was you know
blond but really heavily freckled said
that she didn't have anything against
intermarriage for herself she was just
concerned because of the kids and I said
well so what about the kids and I said
and and she said well because the kids
will be born speckled and I said wait
want me to get Ephram and I pointed to
what one of the seniors at my high
school and said to her which was true I
said look look I mean she's she's black
right before carload or knee
whatever we were in and she looks whiter
than you do right right that's giving
before the freckles right I mean so and
I mean one of the things that about you
know spending time here it's really like
in the Caribbean or like anyplace in
Latin America like you can't but 15
minutes you figure out the following
right yeah at the folk level but but I
mean beyond that I mean I'd say really
it was even before not I think about
this it it was even before that epiphany
with with the Connelly thing that that
I've been engaged against you know
philosophical essentialism in talking
about race and gender in the American
Academy I think we can probably trace
that back you know sometimes in 80's or
probably even earlier I guess you just
watched a Michael Brooks show video
subscribe to get them all why wouldn't
you don't be foolish
click subscribe below and become a
patron as well patreon.com slash TMDs
thanks everybody


## Keywords:
