---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e3GFG0sXIig
---

# Video
How We Should Vote (Range Voting)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e3GFG0sXIig)

## Transcript:
60% of Americans feel that we need a new
third major party because they're
dissatisfied with the current options
but we know from arrows theorem that
it's unlikely for such a party to ever
stand a chance in the last video we
looked at an informal proof of arrows
theorem which essentially says that it's
impossible to have a fair voting system
however could there be some magical
system that violates the theorem is such
a thing even possible let's look at the
mathematics behind a better voting
system to recap arrows theorem says that
any voting system that uses rank
preferences and has at least three
candidates cannot have all of non
dictatorship unanimity and independence
of irrelevant alternatives the
dictatorship is a system where one voter
gets to decide the entire election even
if everyone else votes against them for
example let's say that mr. F is the
dictator that means that if he votes for
bulbasaur to win even if everyone else
teams up against them to say that
charmander should win bulbasaur will
still win it's obviously undemocratic so
we definitely want a non dictatorship
unanimity means that if everyone votes
for charmander then charmander wins this
is another rule that seems fairly
obvious since it would be truly bizarre
for someone to win with zero votes
independence of irrelevant alternatives
means that if squirtle beats Charmander
removing Bulbasaur as an option doesn't
change the fact that squirtle beats
Charmander this is another rule that
makes sense but nearly all modern voting
systems violate this rule this is
extremely problematic because not having
this rule ensures that the voting system
will be subject to favorite betrayal or
situations where a voter will
disingenuously put their favourite
choice lower to ensure a better result
this eventually forces the vote to be
dominated by two parties and creates
discontent as people campaign against
the party they hate rather than for the
candidate they love now let's look at a
new voting system range voting range
voting works a lot like Amazon or
Netflix voters are given a ballot and
give each choice a rating
from one to five stars.we average all
the ratings and the candidate with the
highest rating wins simple enough let's
look at how arranged voting compares two
arrows theorem is range voting a
dictatorship
obviously not since each voters ballot
contributes to the final score does
range voting have unanimity yeah
if everyone gives Charmander a higher
score than Bulbasaur then Charmander
must have a higher average than
Bulbasaur does range voting satisfy
independence of irrelevant alternatives
yes if we remove squirtle it doesn't
change the averages for Charmander or
Bulbasaur so Charmander we'll still beat
Bulbasaur so what just happened did we
break arrows theorem well not quite the
original assumption in arrows theorem
was that we're using voters ranked
preferences but in range voting we
actually get even more information from
the voters by getting a score from one
to five more importantly voters can give
to candidates the same score rather than
force a ranking one of the most
important properties of range voting is
that it never pays to give your favorite
candidate a lower score even if you
believe your candidate is unpopular or
unknown you can still give them a high
score without fear of a bad outcome this
is clearly not the case with current
voting systems for example we can look
at the u.s. 2000 Bush v Gore
presidential election Bush narrowly beat
Gore in Florida but polling show that
had Nader not run in the election Gore
would have likely beaten Bush taken
Florida and won the entire election
range voting would not only stop third
parties from spoiling the election but
could also allow them to win whereas
current systems discourage voting for
your favorite there's never a good
reason to betray your favorite under
range voting one situation that people
might worry about is the unknown lunatic
wins this is when someone gets all their
friends to vote Mac stars for them and
the rest of the country gives no opinion
allowing the unknown lunatic to win
experimentally this doesn't happen since
enough people will give unknown
candidates a minimum score we can also
counteract this by giving all candidates
the same baseline number
of zero stars meaning that everyone will
need a significant amount of the
population to vote for them in order to
overcome that baseline score however
there is an important way in which range
voting falls short of majority rule
systems
that's what something called condor say
winners if there's a candidate that
beats all other candidates and
head-to-head matchups that candidate is
a converse a majority rule will get the
Condor say winner if one exists but
range voting might not for example let's
look at a two candidate situation where
60% of the voters give Charmander five
stars and squirtle four stars and the
other 40% give Charmander one star and
squirtle four stars under range voting
Charmander would have an average of
three point four stars and squirtle
would have four stars making squirtle
the winner yet sixty percent of the
population prefers Charmander over
squirtle and the result would go against
the majority's wishes under range voting
under majority rule
Charmander would easily win and
Charmander is also the converse a winner
since it would get sixty percent of the
vote to squirtles forty percent the
reason this occurred was because while
Charmander was popular
it was also divisive making Charmander
the winner would make the majority
extremely happy but would leave a large
minority extremely unhappy on the other
hand everyone in this vote likes
squirtle so the question is whether we
would rather have a system that
optimizes for the majority's first
choice or the overall happiness of the
group also is getting a conversate
winner more important than allowing
third parties to win debating these
questions begins to exit the realm of
mathematics and enter the realm of
philosophy for now thanks for watching


## Keywords:
