---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z_9NMXH7eDs
---

# Video
How Corporatists Corrupted America w/ the Left's Complicity  (w/ Bill Mitchell)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z_9NMXH7eDs)

## Transcript:
it's an incredible pleasure for me to
welcome Professor William Mitchell to
bad faith podcast I first came across
Bill Mitchell when listening to an
episode of macro and cheese people who
listen to both uh of these podcasts will
know that I frequently find myself so
stimulated by conversations that happen
over there that I want to continue them
over here on bad faith but for those of
you who don't already know William
Mitchell is one of the world's leading
heterodox economists and professor of
Economics at the University of Newcastle
Australia his books include Eurozone
dystopia and this one which I have had
the pleasure of getting into over the
past week or so reclaiming the state a
progressive vision of sovereignty for a
post neoliberal World welcome to B bad
faith podcast Professor thank you thanks
for having me so what was so compelling
about both your interview on Macar and
cheese and this book which I found
myself immediately wanting to grab when
I read the synopsis of it is that it
does I think Prov
somewhat of an antidote to I think the
stagnation and frustration that's been
breeding on the left in what we've come
to call the Post Bernie era and it also
gives a diagnosis of sorts for what the
left the broader left has been getting
wrong about how to meet the challenge of
addressing um neoliberalism and right
populism so I wondered if we could start
by you giving your theory of the case of
what the left has been getting
wrong well I
mean I'm old enough now to know to have
seen a broad span of developments over
the last 50 odd years and uh the left
really started
losing traction
and direction in in the 1970s in my view
and that's what the book you you you
were holding um discusses traces the
Tipping Point of when that happened and
you know what happened in was that
during the postc World War period from
you know 50s 60s into the early
70s the the left was fairly well
organized and had good message that they
they wanted uh within a capitalist
system they wanted governments to
mediate the capital labor
conflict um
they wanted uh governments to mediate
that and deliver returns to workers in
the form of Full
Employment uh good good Public Services
good public infrastructure and what we
observed was Full Employment reduced in
in
inequality uh um upward mobility of the
working class into a middle class and um
and all of those things that we Define
as that period of prosperity now there
were problems of that period of course
uh uh particularly relating to gender
issues race issues and uh those type of
issues that subsequently become a focus
but uh broadly the working class were
were improving their position after the
second world war
now that by the end of the
um 60s the uh capital if you like as a
broad aggregate representing the
recipients of profit they were becoming
discontented and uh and at that and at
that time of course Global Capital was
starting to emerge we had Financial
Capital you know capitalism was evolving
from industrial Capital into Financial
Capital uh where where manufacturing
centers were shifting into Asia and and
uh Eastern Europe Etc and finance
Capital was becoming more powerful and
and more
transnational and at that time Capital
started to fight back if you like and uh
uh started to build this story that the
nation state the you know the
governments of our lands were becoming
uh powerless against
the uh dominance of international
capital and that
uh uh governments who had previously
been using their fiscal capacity their
spending and Taxation capacity to
deliver
these more prosperous times for lower
inome uh families and
workers
um the the narrative that came out of
the right and the and representatives of
capital the big peak employer organiz
ations and was that um uh we couldn't
continue like that that uh what
governments now had to do was worry
about uh uh Returns on Capital and uh
and if they didn't do that then uh
Financial flows would work against the
nation and destroy the currency that was
the narrative in the early 70s and then
Along Came the OPEC oil shocks which you
know doubled the oil price overnight
almost and that created the first real
uh episode of inflation for many years
it was Global oil dependent companies
were uh countries were severely impacted
by the rising price of oil and the
response of that was to impose of the
fiscal authorities was to impose
austerity and that's when we saw the
first era of stagflation which is The
Coincidence of inflation and
unemployment previously those two things
were were separate and um what the what
we're leading up to here is that the
right were very clever they they were
well organized uh they they created
think tanks they bought big media
organizations and uh they they spun a
narrative that that look you know this
this period where governments took
responsibility for Full Employment
that's over now the first statement of
of of that was a British labor party
prime minister James Kahan in um
September 1976 at the labor party annual
conference where he famously got up and
announced that uh uh the the days where
governments could could in create jobs
and and uh provide jobs for all over the
role of government now has to be to
manage
inflation and uh and Target fiscal
surpluses running surpluses spending
less than they are receiving in tax
revenue now you know that was Monumental
because the left at that time were
completely disoriented by the the
inflation and and unemployment that was
Rising they didn't know how to handle a
raw material shock like an oil shock and
and Senior People Scholars on the left
started to articulate the same sort of
macroeconomic statements about
governments have will run out of money
the financial markets will destroy the
currency and all of the things you know
that are taxes will go through the roof
if governments keep spending like this
like drunken Sailors you know all of the
nomenclature that came with this this
scare mongering and uh the left bought
it and uh from there on that you know in
the mid 70s they got distracted by
postmodernism uh by identity issues and
and don't get me wrong those issues are
extremely important for society to to
work through but at the same time they
surrendered the main contest in
macroeconomics that the government has
this role to play and uh uh to mediate
the sort of competing uh desires of
capital and labor and the left just
abandoned that terrain all together to
the right and from then on we've been
how to pay for it you know you'll run
out of money the financial markets will
destroy your currency there'll be
inflation interest rates will go through
the roof all of the things that that I
call sound Finance
became the Mantra of the left and
effectively uh hamstrung it from any
creative and Innovative policy and
meanwhile the right knew it was a myth
but they used that myth to then uh bully
governments all around the world to to
shift from being a mediator in that
conflict to being an agent of capital
and as an agent of capital they then you
know privatized and outsourced and
imposed user pay systems uh uh cut
public spending uh and and basically
gave the right a party and uh you know
they were partying on this and what what
effectively happened was that the right
reconfigured government in their to to
for their own agenda and told everybody
else that oh no the government had to do
this because it would run out of money
and that's that's sort of where we're
are where we're still
to die I think that's all a a lot and
important and we're going to get into
the details there just quickly to the
point about identity politics I made my
bones uh in many respects in journalism
by critiquing the left liberals
adaptation of identity to Politics as a
sort of um distraction or a um veneer
which disguises the extent to which they
are completely out of touch and perhaps
disinterested in um at on some b level
uh class politics and meeting the class
needs the economic needs of all the
various identity groups that they have
focused on I I might choose to frame it
as being identity Poli being used as a
shield as instead of being an actual
distraction um I do wonder how much you
think the shift away from substantive
class politics was really because people
sort of forgot about them and found
identity politics more appealing or how
much it was a concertive decision to
realign um a there there's a narrative
um that says that's kind of largely
plotted out by the power memo of the
1970s that says there's an understanding
that given the shifts in the way
advertising works the rise of Television
the uh Power that television advertising
now has means that if the left wants to
succeed if liberals if Democratic party
in the United States wants to succeed
then they have to also be currying favor
with the large institutions that will
give them enough money to compete in
that ad space and so then if you are
going to be constructively taking the
same money uh from the same sources as
Republicans are how do you distinguish
yourself and you do that via focusing on
identity politics which don't actually
implicate any of the underlying class
terms um I want to give you a a chance
to to respond to that if you disagree at
all I don't I don't necessarily disagree
but and I think say in the US the power
Manifesto in 1971 was incredibly
powerful uh and that demonstrated how
well organized and well funded the right
in the political Spectrum had become and
and I think you know for an ordinary
citizen out there just going to work
every day uh the the formation of those
uh crazy media compan you know like Fox
and sky and all of these things that was
a well-designed strategy and the the
development of think tanks that were
masquerading as you know independent
research centers pumping out propaganda
that that looked as though it was coming
from authoritative research but it was
just basically ideological
propaganda and uh you know the invasion
of the schooling system uh uh into
influencing curriculum and uh so you
know they worked out that if you start
at age five and between 5 and 10 and
into secondary school you know you can
influence uh condition people's thinking
and so you know that's what happened and
uh so if you think for the average
citizen you know it's pretty hard if
you're just making ends meet going to
work every morning and coming home at
night with a big mortgage you're getting
berad in the evening news the morning
news in your newspaper you read at
lunchtime uh with this sort of stuff so
I think that's that definitely happened
it was
organized and well well designed I mean
these research institutes these think
tanks were really marketing
organizations they weren't research
centers and I think that that that makes
it really hard for an average citizen to
to know what's going on and and at the
same
time inflation was the F for the first
time in many decades had become a real
problem for all of
us and you know that made the cost of
living pressures uh really substantial
and so thinking about higher order
things were was not really easy for uh
the ordinary citizen but I think also
the
left
uh the the left bought the the spin uh
they the the left has always felt
insecure on economic matters uh because
the right say we're the representatives
of business and you know we know what's
best for the economy and the left has
always behind being sort of behind the
eightball on those issues in
particularly in English-speaking
countries and so when the when
when monetarism came along Milton
fredman's
monitormusicpatternphotographyproductssci
employment Etc that that was
unsustainable the left had no real
intellectual capacity to to fight
against that and so to salvage their
academic
Pride they became interested in um you
know I went to conferences as a young
Progressive in the' 70s into political
economy conferences and all the talk was
feminism race Herman
methodology and all of that stuff and uh
and and the analysis of class economic
class had just gone and uh you know that
evolved into an idea that oh class is
irrelevant now you know we we we're
differentiated more by these these
identity distinctions and you know and I
sat in conferences where uh women would
get up and women bosses in corporations
would be speaking at Progressive
conferences and the women in the
audience the workers would would think
that they had more in common with the
the CEO who was a boss or the supervisor
who was a a boss or a woman than they
had with the other men on the on the
assembly line and you know this this is
what happened to the left and they got
distracted by that yeah I want to ask
you about how that happened because I I
see that as more of a void that existed
and people filling it with other very
important things like uh a racial
apartheid system here in the United
States of America or deep gender
disparities I don't fault anybody for
talking about those in the void but it
seems to me that the crucial problem is
the left's insecurity talking about
economic issues not the existence of
deeply important R issues like racial
and gender segregation and in um
inequity in the workplace housing
markets and beyond that of course have a
economic bent to them as well the March
on Washington um the Civil Rights march
on Washington was a March for jobs and
freedom right it was an economics March
and it wasn't just an accident that the
racial Legacy of that is carried on and
valorized in our history it was a choice
to try to segregate a class the class
aspect of those movements the communism
and socialism that so often came in
tandem with black liberation movements
in the United States of America from the
identity aspects of those movements to
neuter them in these interesting ways so
speak to me you you've alluded to this
um Capital labor conflict and how at
least in this postwar era there did seem
to be a kind of Victory um for Labor uh
we saw the emergence of all of what we
consider to date our most basic and
Lasting social safety night protection
station net protections um an 8- hour
workday Social Security
Medicaid programs like that uh but you
write in the book that that was sort of
a AIC victory that wasn't necessarily
the result of the kind of Labor power
struggle uh that the left believes is
the narrative that we sort of embrace
today what how would you complicate how
we understand the postwar victories of
the
left yeah I
mean just go just to go back to the
identity issue just don't get me wrong
those issues were are extremely
important for society to
evolve and I and I think the point you
make about the March was that that did
have a class aspect to it an economic
class aspect to it as well as an
identity issue as well as a race type
issue in the United States context and I
think it what happened was event through
the 70s and the 80s that Nexus got got
got lost and uh the focus became just on
identity and and and separate from class
now going back to the postc world war
period I think one of the important
things that defined that period was the
beginning of the Cold
War and uh the the the fear you
know the second world war was really a
complicated effect Fair between you know
communism and capitalism as well as
between ideologies and and Nations and
uh the sort of narrative that America
won the war for us is is not exactly
correct uh because probably the second
world war was won by mistakes made by
Hitler on the Eastern front with
Russia and uh you know the the bad
winter and uh spreading troops too far
and not being able to make progress uh
in in the East and the the fierce
fighting of the Russian soldiers who you
know who knew their their terrain better
than the Germans in the Dreadful winter
that that that last winter and you know
there were fears you know Churchill who
was you know the big big player in in
the west at the time you know he he had
plans to Mar
to continue the March into and and uh
run through to over Stalin and of course
sty the fears were that Stalin had the
opposite Ambitions and would uh keep
marching to the west and uh spread
communism into into Western Europe and I
think the the West did fear had had
great fears of the spread of Communism
you know in
Australian uh foreign policy was was
dominated by this Theory called the
domino theory that China communist China
would March progressively through
Vietnam Cambodia Philippines down
through and take over all of the the
English speak you New Zealand and
Australia and there were this communism
was you know at the end of the second
world war everyone was uh terrified in
the west of Communism you know and
that's that in America that that's
spawned the
party uh travesties or scandals or
whatever you want you know disgraces
whatever you want to call it and the
purging of Communists in throughout the
West in important
positions and and so that conditioned
the way in which not only not only that
but also the Great Depression also
demonst you know in the
1930s uh created a break in economic
thinking because up until you know at
the early stage of the 1930s the
dominant economic Paradigm said that all
just cut workers wages and employment
will
rise and uh of course that made matters
worse in the early 30s and and it wasn't
really until the prosecution of the
second world war where government
spending was very
substantial that governments learned and
and of course in the meantime John
mayard canes had written had published
his book in
1936 that really red defined economic
theory uh to give a fundamental role to
the nation state as a a ball walk
against the sort of vagaries and
fluctuations of capitalism and uh so by
the prosecution of the second world war
really taught governments that if they
spend big they can create employment and
prosper material prosperity and so you
put the that knowledge together the
question in 1945 was how do we do that
with when we're not building tanks and
missiles and equipping troops to fight
each other how do we maintain that in
the peace and the way they maintain the
vision that they formed was that they
would build Bridges and schools and
hospitals and and uh have public sector
employment and you know and generally uh
deal with M the peace time Prosperity
that way but also the of Communism was
significant in the west and they knew
that uh uh the appeal of Marxism was uh
was strong among workers because you
know workers in
uh uh pre-war factories weren't exactly
uh uh dealt with uh good occupational
health and safety conditions and good
pay and you know the oppressive nature
of capitalism hadn't been dealt with by
then and so they knew that that if they
didn't deal with those issues and give
workers some stake in the growing
Prosperity then they would could be uh
lured away to Marxist thinking through
their Trade union organizations through
their uh other workingclass
organizations and in America through
through racial identity and uh and if
they didn't so if they didn't give some
stop to their workers then there could
be dangerous destabilization of
capitalism and and capital sort of
understood that too that they had to
give
some
material stake to to the working class
or else their hedgy might be threatened
and I think that that sort of more
balanced view on both sides of the
conflict and the fact that the
governments PL sort of walked the walked
the tight route between the two
competing interests and gave something
to workers and something to Capital
through procurement contracts and you
know the development in of the military
industrial State and all of that that
that defined that postwar Peri immediate
post-war period and and that fear of
Communism can't be
understated so then what happen uh why
is it that that when there was a uh
economic crisis in the 1970s the OPEC
crisis that you alluded to there wasn't
a and correct me if I wrong this is the
wrong way to frame it a kind of Kian
response that the left could adopt that
could offer a solution to how to address
the problem without leaning into the
austerity politics that have defined the
neoliberal era which followed
well the problem was that because
because typically prior to the 1970s if
you had any inflationary
pressures you
had low higher low
unemployment and when you had high
unemployment in the short periods that
we had had fluctuations where
unemployment Rose there was never an
inflation problem and so keesy in theory
had really constructed inflation as an
excessive spending problem when
unemployment was very low you know in
technical the technical stuff was the
Phillips curve that said that if you had
high inflation you had low unemployment
and vice versa and so the
inflation theory that Keynesian had in
their head was it must be something to
do with high demand High
spending now and so when the when the
OPEC situation came along and it was a
cost cost shock not a demand a pressure
issue it was it was just purely because
the supply side had become extremely
expensive
overnight and uh the the Technologies in
place were all dependent on the product
that had become very expensive and that
is oil uh the kanen academics really
didn't know how to deal with that they
were a little bit
uh lost in in the debate and uh now the
ones who knew what had what was going on
were the Marxist economists uh and they
they knew they knew well that uh
distributional struggles so so
effectively what OPEC presented the
world and this class conflict was a
question as to who was going to take the
real income loss from the imported oil
uh price Rises because that meant that
more of national income had to be
devoted to imported oil and less could
be distributed to wages and profits and
so the question then was well who was
going to take that loss and of course by
the by the early 70s uh trade unions
were still quite
powerful were very powerful and of
course uh uh corporations had become
more uh industry become more
concentrated with very large powerful
corporations and both of those powerful
bodies on either side of the struggle
had had the capacity to inflict damage
on each other and so the question as to
who was going to take the real income
loss was H was a battle and uh firms
were trying to get margin push to to
protect themselves from the past the or
costs on and of course there was real
wage resistance from the the the working
side in the form of you know nominal
wage demands to protect themselves from
those price Rises and that's what
created the inflation and the kin had
no no no real understanding of that type
of
dynamic and uh that that that gave them
a credibility gap in the debate in the
early 70s and meanwhile uh Milton
fredman and his Chicago gang were had
had were developing you know they and
the power Manifesto on the industry side
they were all coming together with this
narrative that oh the kany era was just
spend spend spend look what it's done uh
you know when I was uh when I was still
at high school all of the debates in
Australia were about Trade union
power uh corporate you know all of the
the the media debates were trade unions
have become too powerful we've got to do
something about it now the the the kein
had no answer to any of that to power
I'm sorry to interrupt but too P the the
implication is that the power of the
trade unions caused oil prices to rise I
mean what was the logic behind rooting
the crisis and the power of the trade
unions well see that that was in the the
this the fight back of capital began
before OPC OPC became a
convenient convenient uh scap coat
episode that yeah yeah that that sort of
ratified what they were already talking
about you know with the power Manifesto
in the late 60s you know fredman was
saying no we wages are too powerful you
know uh are growing too fast and and and
so that was the struggle was already
happening but too powerful for what what
before
OPEC what was the negative consequence
of wages grow growing essensially in the
1960s well the profit share was getting
squeezed and uh and uh you know the
business so it was the crisis of capital
it was yeah okay there was a the
discussion in the 60s was Trade union
power and rate of return on
Capital and uh and and the the Full
Employment era forced Capital to share
some of the booty and give it to work
workers in the form of increased wages
and and uh conditions of work safety and
all of the occupational issues and and
eventually that became a you know
Capital became paranoid that they were
their rate of return was getting squeeze
too much and so they wanted to work out
a way that they could restore their
their rate of return and grow it and the
only way they could do that was to run
these narratives about Trade union power
squeezing them out of control Communists
all of this
stuff I guess what I'm getting at is it
seems it seems like that narrative would
be would have no appeal to anyone except
for the small percentage of Americans
who are capitalists and who not who
aren't wage workers so you know how how
are they selling it at that point I mean
I get when OPEC happens that everyone is
impacted by high fuel cost and people
are looking for someone to blame for
that but prior to that I I'm really
struggling with because with how the now
predominant narrative that spending is
the problem um that the national debt is
like a household budget and inflation is
being caused by um uh a lack of
thriftiness on the national level um
that all of these things I I I
understand that they how they are kind
of entrenched now but in a period of
time where a different economic model
was predominant and uring to the benefit
of working people the way it was in the
late 60s it's hard for me to comprehend
how the arguments that were so uh iner
to
today took hold in the first place like
who who was who was who was buying it
who was how was this pitch appealing to
working
people well remember that you know there
was a shift on the working people Side
Of The Ledger after the war because you
know we created a middle class in our
countries there previously hadn't really
been a middle class and
uh we also hadn't hadn't experienced an
era of mass consumption like we did from
the
1950s you know all of those
advertisements on the TV shows with the
the the housewife
reflecting the era uh with the
new Kelvinator fridge and the new uh
stove and all of the stuff that you just
you know and and the the the
introduction of
TV uh into our families in the 50s well
in Australia it was the 60s but you know
just continually being bered by this
middle class Mass
consumption narrative and reality and uh
and and of
course that was made possible by the the
development of credit and so credit
cards and you know big mortgages evolved
as being important parts of our lives
and uh uh so if you're a middle class
person you know you you don't no longer
associate and trade unions were even
though they were quite powerful they
were starting to lose traction because
the middle class were less interested in
trade unions and the industrial working
class and I think you know that
that that that Evolution into a
materially well-off middle class uh with
debt hanging out Mortgage Debt uh that
created a dynamic that uh uh Capital
could introduce these scaring tactics
that oh you know you if if if if
governments spend too much you'll be
taxed the taxes will rise and uh you
know you don't want you're a hardworking
American a hardworking Australian you
don't want the government to be on your
back with these huge tax increases and
and
but and you know as we said the power
Manifesto and the related developments
all around the world that were spawned
by capital and financed by Capital they
were strategic they they they exploited
that middle class Mass
consumption uh
status of our families you know I in
those days people would say you know as
I was at University oh well I think the
work there you know you you can't talk
about the working class anymore we we're
actually evolved beyond that you know
we're we're middle class aspiring
entrepreneurs you know people were
bought all that I I was on a panel not
long ago where a young
18-year-old she was the uh Youth of the
year in New South Wales which is the
state of Australia she got up and said
there's no workers anymore we're all
entrepreneurs now that sort of evolution
began in the 70s that's how it
happened okay so this is this is great
so I want you to move us forward a
little bit because one of the more novel
arguments novel to me I'm sure uh
perhaps not no to other people uh who
are more familiar with the field is the
way you
Center
globalization and
nationalism as kind of uh competing
ideologies and framing nationalism
specifically as a an ideology that has
opportunities for the left as opposed to
one that is more commonly framed
especially in Contemporary American
discourse as um necessarily right-wing
uh regressive uh bigoted uh xenophobic
and the like um you make an argument
about globalization occurring in the
broad left acquiescing to it as an
inevitability when the reality is that
they should have been making the case
for nationalism a a a focus on the role
the nation state could play in using
spending to create public goods can you
unpack unpack that for us
yeah I me that's very interesting
um the the the the argu I mean the left
has always believed in sort of an
international perspective you know
there's this movements about
cosmopolitanism and uh uh going Beyond
you know creating an international
workingclass
solidarity and uh you know you go back
to the 19th century and there were
efforts to build the so-called great
Internationals and they all
failed uh and and were reduced to you
know chaos in the attempts of organ
international
organization
and you know you can see it today in the
the way in which the left supports the
the EUR European Union for example now
the European Union is the is the most
advanced for form of
neoliberalism uh it's the most advanced
form of
anti-left uh procedure and ideology and
it's even built neoliberalism into its
actual legal structures which you know
America and Australia and other
countries haven't done the European
Union has built neoliberalism into its
treaty structure which is intrinsic
legal
framework but the left still hang on to
it and say oh we'll just reform it
because it's their expression of of
cosmopolitanism and
internationalism and uh and for them and
there was sort of reason for them to
doing uh believing all of that because
for them the focus on the
nation is xenophobic as you said that it
that it's it breeds U it breeds uh
Marshal conflict it breeds uh you know
uh military type
conflicts uh it believe it breeds um
racism and uh this is what you know and
attitudes about immigration that are
negative and all all of this
stuff and and it breeds fascism
ultimately you know and and I think a
lot of the left thinking still is
terribly influenced by what happened in
the second world war with the sort of uh
the Reich in Germany you know the
the supremacy of the white the Aran and
all of that sort of stuff uh has
influenced all of that now my view on
all that is that nationalism is a
Scourge nationalism as described you
know as a superiority of a of a race uh
is a Scourge and the left should never
Broach it and pro and never will I don't
think uh
but you've also got to understand the
idea of a
currency and uh the power of the the the
a government
currency uh and what it and and this is
where we talk about mmt of course modern
monetary Theory this sort of my work and
that
uh there there is a you
know the government's currency is
incredibly powerful and and and it has
to be used in a way to to advance
prosperity and
and illuminate our you know take us
Beyond just where's our food coming from
into higher order things you know like
education and philosophy and art and uh
the higher order things that we can deal
with once we've satis we've been able to
find food for for our
families and uh then the question then
is well what gives that currency legit
imacy and uh you can't have a worldwide
currency it wouldn't work uh because
what gives it legitimacy is a concept
called like demos a demos you know a
coherent a coherent group of people that
are willing to work together to look
after each
other uh simply stated you don't think
that's possible in a global I mean I'm
not trying to be naive or polanish about
how we are from that point today
obviously do you think it's impossible
to conceive of a kind of global
Community look I think right now it's
impossible I think look I think we can
have a global Community to deal with to
deal with some things that that are on
the right scale to deal with across
borders like climate change and uh and
uh R you know rule of law type rights
treating people who you know boat people
you know Australia is obsessed with boat
people coming from from Asia so I think
we those things should be dealt with on
an international scale with
International agreements but I do not
think that culturally and historically
and uh
linguistically we're we we see each
other
as in international
terms uh I think we see it CH as as a
national
demos and uh the the the question then
and that gives you know I don't in
Europe for example it's a classic case
because they've got a common currency in
20 of the 27 states of the European
Union and you saw it during the global
financial crisis how reluctant Germany
and France and the northern wealthy
States were to provide unconditional
trans fiscal transfers to Greece and
Portugal and
Spain you know and and there all of
the negative uh race attitudes came out
during that era you know the Germans
talking about those proplate you know
lat Latinos down south and uh um I think
that demonstrates that there isn't a
paying demos a similar argument is often
made in the United States a diverse
multiethnic multi-racial multi-religious
pluralistic country where race has in
fact differences between people identity
differences between people have been
used to divide the working class very
purposefully so to the extent that there
is truth to your argument isn't that
also an argument
against the uh the nation state being a
vessel for the kind of spinning and
social up up uplift that you're
recommending on a nation's on the basis
of a
Nation yeah I think look America is an
interesting an interesting country
because it does have those type of
complexities that are a little bit
different in other englishspeaking
countries but here's a question for you
if if I went
to let me say if I went to
Mississippi some town in
Mississippi and I
asked I asked somebody you know what
what were what are you do you think that
they would say that they were
Americans well of course yeah of course
they would say they were Americans now
they if they they wouldn't if I went to
Europe and I went down to a to a a Greek
Village and I said well where are you
from they would the first question
wouldn't be they were from Europe they
would say they were from some small
little community in
Greece and and so America has been able
to evolve even though there's all of
these Regional differences and language
differences you know if I go down to
Tennessee I can't I can't understand
what they're saying when I go visit
towns in Tennessee in the past and and
there's all these Regional different is
that's true but but because of your
history you've been able to unite a
nation as America well I would I mean
that's that's so complicated right I
mean I I take your broader point to be
that
the the power of currency the point that
I am sorry if I interrupted but the
power of currency comes from a sense of
a deos and that we are it's kind of a
well maybe I'll just go ahead and let
you finish your point because I do think
this has some pretty significant
implications because the kind of of
um I don't know keian state that we
briefly had where there was spending
that did create a middle class and a
period that many Americans look to as a
kind of house on period of American
History was contingent on huge swads of
the American public not being able to
benefit from that social contract and
when there was greater equality Racial
equality and other kinds of equality
that gave people broad access to that
social contract at that point those
social benefits began to be Stripped
Away largely with an argument that you
shouldn't be giving away this nice free
stuff to poor undeserving people so it's
difficult for me to see to the extent
that America has succeeded or failed in
that effort how that is so different
than what would end up happening on a
global
scale the the the point I'm making is
that
federal states like Australia and and
America and
Canada uh those countries yeah they have
they have poverty they have uh uh
disadvantaged groups they have uh
Regional
differences but they have broadly been
able to accept that they're a nation and
that there is a federal government and
the federal government
represents
everybody now for an individual in those
States someone in in the Southern States
of America who's who's uh uh black or a
Native
American uh out in some of those uh uh
settlements you know they they are less
enamored with that Prospect but they
they they still see themselves as part
of the American Experience
erence and uh uh you know in whenever
there's a military conflict the the
poorer Americans go to the into the army
and represent America and of course the
elites uh treat treat those
disadvantaged American soldiers as fod
but that's beside the point they they
see themselves as broadly belonging to
America and part of the American
American Experience whereas in Europe
for example the the Greeks and the spa
Spaniards their their cultural history
has been so so strong and Rich that they
don't really identify as Europeans first
and foremost and the reason why why
Europe is in such a mess is because of
that that they still they still see
themselves as belonging to this the
demos like Spain or Italy and that they
haven't become Europeans in in the same
way as we're Australians and EUR
Americans it's a different type of
evolution help me understand connected
to the point that you were M making
about the how currency works and why you
don't believe currency will work on a uh
a a global level um with through the
lens of mmt
well because if you if you want to have
a Global Currency you've got to have a
single government and a single a single
central
bank now do you really believe that the
Americans are going
to who's going to be who where's that
going to be located who's going to make
decisions just to be clear I you're not
making a case based on how economic
system works economic systems work but
rather on the contemporary political
realities of a divided world and Nations
who have clear economic advantage over
the others that they wouldn't want to
sublimate themselves and create uh
disadvantage themselves politically Vis
A other countries which is not
disputable but I I I thought you were
making perhaps a different point when
you first brought up the idea that you
know leftist think internationally and
that is an impossibility well an
improbability or something that you have
to fight for is a different thing than
an impossibility an impossibility I
think of something as that something
that might be precluded by the real
realities of how markets work or
something like that as opposed to I
think the LEF is as they aspire to a
degree of internationalism the reason
isn't the you know they understand it's
aspirational and that it's a fight but
that they believe that it's a fight
worth having because ultimately if the
argument is that America is only able to
provide benefits through SP spending mmt
style spending at the expense of the
rest of the world the way so many of the
benefits that befall the West are at the
direct expense of the rest of the world
then it's not worth it that's not really
what our objective is as as
leftists
right I mean you're getting to the nub
of it that uh I don't believe that you
can do that within a capitalist system
because the the capitalist the
capitalist system is an exploitative
system across National boundaries and
and you know there's no way that uh the
first world industrial and financial
Elites are going to say well let's let's
uh share all of this power with the
African nations for example that we're
that we're busily uh exploiting in an
extractive way to extract their wealth
and bring it into the first world I mean
there's just no way that that's that
that's not a reality that's that's
possible and uh within a capitalist so
why how how me you explain then because
you write that um neoliberalism has a
war against sovereignty and it seems to
position
sovereignty um which is perhaps a better
word than nationalism given the valences
of
nationalism um should be something
that's embraced by the left because it
is something that would allow you to
spend domestically do the mmt have the
uplift of the working class do the
redistributional stuff all of that all
of those things but are you then in in
in these passages making an argument for
improvements within capitalism that are
stepping apart from what your main
argument might otherwise be which is
endian capitalism altogether progressing
past
it well well both um I mean personally I
think we and I think I've evolved that
was written in
2017 and I've evolved as well since
then
uh I mean my current position now is
that the climate challenge is so so
immediate that I don't think it can be
solved within a system that
prioritizes private profit as being the
the the guide to how we do you know
allocate resources I don't think we can
continue that way but that's
but the other side of the story is that
we have we have seen a Taming of
capitalism in that
19 postwar period second world war
period and we did that because people
were forced their governments
through Democratic processes to be
become a mediator rather than an agent
for Capital
now the argument in that book was that
we've we've the left should be focusing
on that
issues those issues uh first and
foremost to restore the to to take
control of our governments
again uh now I've evolved into thinking
that the climate change the climate
challenges moving so quickly now
now uh that we're we're facing an
existentialist
position uh that that really means we've
got to not just reclaim the state but
also evolve the system of production and
ownership that's where I'm at today this
is this is what's so interesting I would
love to hear more specifics about what
that looks like because what was so
compelling to me about what you've
written here is that the diagnosis of
how left political parties in America
and in Europe specifically consciously
sort of
abandoned what should have been their
role which is to make the case for
resisting the what you describe as
macroeconomic myths that were being
pushed by corporatists the pow mimal
crew and all of those and you you you're
right to make matters worse most
leftists have bought into the
macroeconomic myth The Establishment
uses to discourage any alternative use
of State fiscal uh capacities uh for
example they have accepted without
question the so-called household budget
analogy which suggests that currency
issuing governments like households are
financially constrained and that fiscal
def deficits impose crippling debt
burdens on future Generations a notion
that you go on to th debunk later in the
book you you seem to offer that there is
a different direction that the left
should go and different priorities that
the left should be talking about even in
this moment um and you write elsewhere
how uh that the choice that the left
made at this crucial juncture in the in
the 70s basically um here's I love this
quot quote effectively reduces the left
to the role of defender of the status
quo that's allowing the political right
to he he hegemonize the legitimate
anti-st systemic and specifically
anti-eu grievances of citizens this is
tantamount to relinquishing the
discursive and political Battleground
for a post neoliberal hemony so
basically what so many of us on the left
have observed that the right is able to
capture a kind of a genu genuine
populist sentiment a kind of American
first sentiment a kind of
anti-globalization sentiment that
doesn't get recognized as authentic or
legitimate by the um liberal media of
political class because it is entwined
with a lot of jingoism and xenophobia
and racism and things like that but in
the absence of the left of liberals
making an affirmative argument for left
populism and in fact affirmatively
working to crush left populist movements
like the one Advanced by Bernie Sanders
or Jeremy Corbin that you are
effectively again creating this void
that irreducibly is going to lead people
increasingly to the right so you know is
this just a case of you saying yeah the
solutions we know the solutions are
there in terms of winning these more
immediate political battles including
the ones that would have dramatic
impacts on on an issue as important as
climate change but the liberal political
class is simply unwilling to make those
moves simply unwilling to take those
stands because of whatever moneyed
interests political interests Etc keep
them keep them keep them from wanting to
embrace the kind of U left populist
politics yeah I mean that that's that's
it
uh you know I mean we can't discount the
fact that the financial resources that
are on the right are substantially
greater than the financial resources on
the left and the control of media and uh
is substantially in biased towards the
right
uh but but even saying that you know if
you think back to
the
the um 209 British
election uh every everybody thought that
U you know Corbin would get completely
demolished but he didn't do too badly
and uh and one of the reasons for that
is he he gained a lot of the youth
vot and uh the question then was well
you know Murdoch's Rupert Murdoch's
tabloid press were incredibly against
Corbin as they are against any
Progressive
notion but they didn't have Traction in
that election
and the reason why the youth vote
favored a sort of much more optimistic
Progressive agenda was because of the
role of social
media and because the youth read the
youth get their politics from social
media not from buying a a a newspaper
from Murdoch in the morning which
historically has been the way in
which the popular
popular uh message get out and so you
know that's a very optimistic thing for
the left in my view uh but then you get
you know the Takeover of uh the Takeover
of the social media by by characters
like musk and uh uh and Facebook has be
you know they've become agents of the
right again and uh uh I I think I think
my view on all of that is that the the
left is really underfunded
uh is a complex is a complex structure
the left is a much more complex
structure than the right the right is a
single message that we just want to
maintain power for for
profit and uh the left is much more
complicated it's an intellectual much
more intellectual uh
organizations uh they worry about
philosophy and and complex issues about
identity I mean there's a there's a way
I can describe the right project in much
more complex terms as well if I chose to
and I could also describe the left
project as wanting to maintain power for
the people the same way that you frame
the right pro project is wanting to mean
uh Power for profit no yeah now I agree
with that but uh some some somewhere
along the the line um the right can uh
narrow their message down and and fund
fund a very targeted message whereas the
left gets get caught up in inene battles
and philosophical battles and what have
you and uh are less less well funded and
less able to direct their message that's
that's a I think that's a big difference
uh the the left become sort of like a
shotgun whereas the right become much
more targeted like a rifle and I hate to
use uh military type analogies but
that's that's that's the point that the
left are much more sophist sophisticated
intellectually in my view in the way in
which they Pro progress their politics
and that's been a
disadvantage well you know I think the
point about money seems to be the big
one it seems to be the real elephant in
the room and the measurable difference
between the two political factions I
don't actually know that I agree I I
have a hard time looking at the
coordinated success of the what I've
come to just refer to as the PO memo
strategy uh over the last 50 years and
call that an unsophisticated operation
to look at the proliferation of think
tanks as you've alluded to conservative
think tanks and media institutions that
hold themselves out as um uh organic and
uh Grassroots when in fact they are
astroturfed and deeply funded I can't
help but look at the um
uh consistent right-wing bent of uh
media
ownership from a Elon Musk to Murdoch to
Jeff Bezos all the way down and see that
the real Advantage the right has is that
they interests in line with they are in
fact the vessel for corporate interests
and any genuine left is going to be an
antithetical to those and the Democratic
party has bought into those same
corporate interests and so there simply
is not there is simply just an enormous
asym
between how much funding you know a
leftist podcast like mine is going to
get versus bench Heros there are there's
an entire country that is very invested
in Ben Shapiro advancing a particular
message right now given Global events
right yep oh absolutely I mean you know
the the the the right have the power of
of corporate money and the left
typically run cake stores to raise money
at on Saturday morning at sport events
you know whatever they run their cake
stores and their Raffles and their you
know they they raise pennies whereas the
 brothers donate billions and that
that's always been the case and that's
uh and and that's because the
brothers represent the power Elites and
the cake stores represent you and I as
the citizens and we don't have any
particular power uh but the the real the
real problem also is that money has
infiltrated our political systems such
that the labor parties or the Democrat
Party in America relies on that that
money too to prosecute their political
efforts and that compromises them and
that's the pro that's a the the big main
political parties are totally
compromised by corporate money so how
then you know do we go about reclaiming
the state given those realities I mean
right here in the end of your chapter 1
summary um as to where this book is
going you say after describing the
problem um and how we've basically
bifurcated our politics into a
reactionary nationalism and a
progressive globalism globalism being a
problem the reactionary nationalism
being a problem as well um how do we
find our way through you say need it be
this way as we argue in the second part
of this book a progressive emancipatory
vision of national sovereignty that
offers a radical alternative to both the
right and the neoliberals one based on
popular sovereignty Democratic control
over the economy full employment social
justice redistribution from the rich to
the poor inclusivity and the
socioecological transformation of
production in society is possible help
us help us Professor Mitchell to
understand give us some glimmer of hope
how is this possible especially since
we're all sitting here in the middle in
America the middle of a of a uh election
season we're being presented with two
options that we've all had before we're
not excited about the first time around
neither of which presents that middleway
through yeah I mean possible doesn't
mean
timely you know and and I've always seen
my role as a left scholar as being to
educate so you
know it the the the changes that we now
see the
neoliberal program didn't emerge
overnight anyway the neoliberalism took
30 years or 40 years to evolve into its
current form and it took a long time to
you know those think tanks and the media
barrage that that occurred it took years
to to change the debate and go from a
sort of collective vision of society to
us seeing it ourselves as just
individuals you know that that that so
social change evolves Much More Much
More slowly than we think and
uh
and what what the progressive Vision
requires is a
re-education and you know my little my I
see my role my little part of that story
is being an educator to educate people
on Modern monetary Theory and to give
them a vision that give them knowledge
and and Empower them with a notion that
when the government spend it's not going
to tax you you know uh out of existence
it's uh it's not going to run out of
money it does have uh these capacities
that can help you then that's a small
part of the story uh and education
typically
takes a generation to make some social
changes now I think we're pushing uphill
but that's the why I see it well let me
ask you about that though if I can
because I remember during the Bernie
campaign I I I worked I worked on the
Bernie campaign I remember there was
this tension between how much we were
going to lean into mmt talk about mmt or
whether that was too big a lift in the
context of an abbreviated campaign cycle
to convince the public that I'm not some
crazy Looney socialist um or you know
I'm just a normal Social Democrat kind
of
socialist uh and you know and that we
could we all know that we the government
doesn't have to tax topend but let's
just provide the public with a tax plan
that could pay for these policies
because you know we're going to get
banged on every MSNBC appearance with
well how are you going to pay for it
because that's that's the neoliberal way
to say that we would all like to have
good things we're just really the same
I'm just the Practical party he knows
that we have to pay for things so I
wonder how frustrated you are about the
framing that has been adopted by so many
of us on the left about wealth taxes and
the like as opposed to taking the time
between campaign Cycles or even now when
we're in the middle of the campaign SE
season to be pushing information and
education about mmt especially because
such a big part of the national
conversation right now is about
inflation in the extent to which Joe
Biden is responsible for it yeah I mean
I'm very frustrated and uh you you you
you go to all of our countries you know
the labor party is in government in
Australia now the labor party in Britain
is likely to be the next
government uh and and the Democrats are
in charge in America at the moment
uh the question I've I have in my mind
is why don't they take take advantage of
that uh that power base you know in 2007
the Australian labor party won a
landslide after after years of uh
frustration with
the with the conservative government and
once again in
2022 they won a very substantial the
labor party won a very substantial
victory at the federal election and and
you know wiped out the conservatives now
why didn't they take advantage then to
of that significant power imbalance in
in seats in
Parliament uh to to start re-educating
the the public and
uh that would have that would have been
entirely possible but instead they they
they hunkered down on the the mainstream
n economic narrative and that's terribly
frustrating and the same thing with
Biden you
know he he won a famous Victory against
Trump in my view why didn't he take
advantage of that to to to shift the
debate now the debate's not going to
shift in a big way quickly but it can
shift start shifting in small ways
relatively quickly why didn't these uh
why didn't they take advantage of that
and and that's because I think that
those parties the Social Democratic
parties you know Democrats labor parties
whatever you want to call them uh uh
have been become coopted by Capital
that's the problem and until we go back
and and to me the only way out of that
dilemma is back to
Grassroots and uh you know in Australia
the labor party is basically an
aggregation of
branches local membership
branches and uh they effectively push
the the member the the candidates for
election up to the National level and I
think it's the same in the Democrat
Party in
America so effectively as US citizens
we've got to educate ourselves and then
take control of the political process at
the branch level at the Grassroots level
and then aggregate that pressure
upwards there was a reason
why there was a reason why welfare
states formed in in the early 90 early
20th century there's a reason why
workers formed trade unions in the late
19th century it's because their
conditions of society became intolerable
and I think we're heading we're heading
towards that point where citizens will
will realize that their economic
situation is
precarious uh the the the climate
situation is precarious the the the
standards of living are declining the
middle class is getting followed out
again uh and and we've got to fight back
and the only way we can fight back is
through local
organization and that's the only way
this is going to change and that's a
that takes quite a long time I know
we're well past an hour so I'm going to
let you go but I did just have this
quick thought um I've been interested on
a couple of recent episodes uh by guests
talking about the role of globalization
and the appeal of the um American the
first movement as a consequence of a
instinctive understanding I think among
many working people of the negative role
that globalization has played and I hear
you saying um that it's going to be a
Grassroots effort I would argue that the
two major political parties are
completely captured and third party
efforts are going to be uh are the most
some of the most optimistic um outlets
for me but I'm thinking about how Maga
Donald Trump was able to come out of
nowhere largely with this populace
messaging that was so effective and
wondering about the extent to which the
left version of that could have a
similar effect um and I wondered if if
you were in charge of a kind of left
version of an anti-globalist messaging
campaign what would that what would that
sound
like well you know I'm I'm an
internationalist as well as a a localist
because you know we're I I we're all on
one one planet and we're all we're all
part of humanity and uh so you know I
think and that that sort of sentiment
translates
into you know in the book you'll read
that we're I I want the IMF and the
World Bank to be uh scrapped and a new
multilateral institution formed so that
the wealthy materially wealthy Nations
can make sure that that gets spread out
to the the poorer material uh poorer
material
Nations so in that sense I'm thoroughly
International uh and and we're not going
to solve the climate issue in in a in a
uh by by going back into our
backyards uh but at the same time I
also believe in
localism and uh I don't think we're
going what the pandemic taught us I mean
in Australia the early days of the
pandemic you know we've suddenly
realized that we couldn't get uh uh
protective medical equipment because we
no longer made it we had to get it from
China and the boats weren't coming from
China because the factories were shut
because of the pandemic and I think uh a
lot of a lot of people realize that uh
uh by creating these very long Supply
chains you know Global Supply chains
that we became very vulnerable in in
times of uh crisis
uh and that that has spawned throughout
the world a an awareness that uh we have
to shorten Supply chains again and bring
things back into a manageable
geographically manageable uh uh spaces
to to insulate ourselves from those
vulnerabilities so I think that you know
we talk about a retreat from globalism
well that's that's that's part of that r
ret treat that we're now seeing that uh
the long Supply chains leave us
vulnerable but
moreover what we're not seeing yet but
we we're going to have to see is that
one of the solutions to The Climate
challenge if we can solve it and I'm not
sure we can uh because social change is
moving more slowly than the the climate
is pushing us but one of the U things
we're going to have to do is bring
Supply chains back locally
anyway uh for food security and you know
to to reduce our energy consumption to
move into a degrowth type environment
and uh produce things more locally and
uh
uh you know that's my narrative that uh
we've got to encourage uh a much better
uh food supply chains so that we have
more uh
um reliable and healthy food produced
locally and those type of things yeah
I'm very interested in the kind of
targeting of organizations like the IMF
and the World Bank I've seen how much
traction the right gets out of targeting
let's say National Security
organizations or you know the FBI the
CIA and you know for reasons that
sometimes liberals think
are wrong and there's been a weird
defensiveness from liberals of these
organizations that historically have
targeted the left and have conducted the
red scares that you alluded to earlier
and the like but there seems to be a
really natural understanding among the
public that these institutions are not
created for the public benefit for the
benefit of working-class people and it
it is interesting to me that while
conservatives have leaned into this kind
of like you know globalist um concern um
that's sometimes anti-semitic coded
there isn't a kind of specific critique
that I'm hearing about the way that
International financial institutions
work to undermine their kind of
financial domestic financial goals or
domestic Financial realities and I I am
really curious to hear people who
understand it more come up with a sort
of elevator pitch for why let's say a
disgruntled independent voter should
have a critique of the IMF on their lips
as readily as they have a crique crique
of Davos or some of the other kind of
benoir that you hear talked about on the
right yeah I mean the the I mean I'm ex
I'm extremely critical of the IMF and
the World Bank they've become neoliberal
institutions they were formed as part of
the postc world war
consensus uh that you know fixed
exchange rates had gold convertibility
and uh that was believed to be the way
in which we would have Global Financial
stability after all of the ructions
during the Great Depression and the IMF
was really a canian institution that was
uh created to make sure that uh
countries that were struggling to defend
their exchange rates according to the
the fixed exchange rate agreement would
have the foreign exchange that would
allow them to maintain their exchange
rate parodies according to the agreement
now when that system
collapsed as it was always going to in
well effectively when President Nixon
got on National Television in America
and closed the
convertibility uh in August 1971 and
then you know the JAMA Accords in 1975
ended that system
forever uh the IMF didn't have a role
anymore but it reinvented itself as a
sort of a attack dog for neoliberalism
and this is when we started to get all
of these very harsh conditionality
programs to for to lend money to States
that had run out of foreign exchange it
would then devastate public The public's
sector uh cut funding to education and
uh health care and uh uh this the the
whole export Le uh development ethos
driven by the World Bank and the IMF of
there that you know you had to turn
subsistence sustainable sub subsistence
agriculture into export L cash crops
which devastated the natural environment
which was uh counterproductive because
it just flooded the world markets with
too much produce which then drove prices
down and and then meant that the country
poor countries couldn't pay their loans
to the IMF back and then you had more
repressive structural adjustment
programs and meanwhile back at the ranch
you've destroyed your natural ecology
you've devastated your forests and uh
your soil Etc you know the IMF is uh is
is a is is part of the neoliberal
machine and uh and and it has it has no
role to play in a progressive n uh
International vision for for for the
left in my view we've got to reform uh
scrap it and create a new instit tion
that becomes a distributional
institution from from wealthier
countries to poorer countries uh without
conditionality without
devastating uh uh the public sector in
those poorer countries you know the the
the neoliberal the neoliberal narrative
has impos this development Vision on
poorer countries in in Africa and Latin
America America Etc Eastern Europe uh
and the IMF
agenda and if the America and Australia
had have followed that agenda back in
when we were poor countries developing
we would have never
become Advanced countries it's
impossible to become an advanced country
by following the IMF agenda so there
should be no support for those
institutions from the left now I know
that runs contrary to what the a lot of
the people in the left think but that's
that's the
reality the left is very complex or much
is more complex than the right as an
organization trying to create a
collective out of all of those desperate
elements is quite difficult sometimes I
think that's true but sometimes I wonder
if that's just our vanity as leftist
wanting that to be the case because in
some ways that we we have such the
obvious winning argument hey most most
of us are workers and not capitalists
most of us are closer to being homeless
than we are being billionaires we have
all of these things in common and it's
the right that has to work over time to
obscure that Reality by focusing on
identity to politics they're the they're
the first identitarians they're the ones
that use racism and other forms of
bigotry to drive people apart and we're
playing defense on that and I think that
sometimes if we played more offense on
our winning message then we would
obviously win
um but I do think the main problem is
that we don't have anybody playing
offense there is no political party that
actually represents us because there's
they've been so completely and
thoroughly captured so is our argument
really difficult or is it just that
nobody's making our argument and I agree
with all of that I mean uh identity has
been used to divide and conquer and to
create and make this you know in
Australia it was the labor party in 1974
that that introduced this term it's
probably an Australian term but do
blooder do blooder this was a so so not
like welf Queen yeah what you know yeah
Welfare Queen and this is you know this
was at a time when unemployment was
Rising uh due to the state you know the
OPEC disruptions unemployment was rising
and we had a bloody labor government out
there building this narrative and and a
nomenclature terminology
uh uh about uh the unemployed being to
blame for their condition when it was
obviously a systematic lack of jobs we
had a we had the government of the day a
progressive government building
this linguistic structure of doll
bludgers and C Cruisers and job snobs
and all of this terminology that entered
the Lexicon to describe unemployed who
were lazy Idol and couldn't be couldn't
 working you know and and and and
that that that came from the left and
that that that distorted the whole thing
and that was a divide and conquer
strategy that oh us middle class
employed people who go to work every day
we work hard for our living and look at
them over there they're not doing
they're just bludging
on on on uh unemployment benefit you
know and so identity's always been used
in that way and the left has fallen for
it
what's interesting I mean my only push
back on some of the identity stuff is
that I do feel like class identity is a
form of identity politics and I think
being upset about identity politics
isn't G to get you anywhere it's being
able to weaponize Identity for your own
political ends effectively and it's not
identity politics isn't bad people have
identities the the thing is you want
people to play into the ones that are
mass movement building and create a big
enough tent to actually being a to have
political change and that is reminding
people of their class identity and so I
don't know there there I don't think
that these things are mutually exclusive
I do think that there's a way that
sometimes the left can harp on the
negative ways that liberals have
weaponized identity to obscure their own
complicity in
neoliberalism um that are alienating to
groups that have only known political
identity through their kind of racial
ethnic religious whatever identity and
that you could be working with those
things instead of working against them
and simply offering an an an additional
identity that has been left by the
webside which is class and Democrats
fundamentally will not pick up that
mantle they're they're incentivized not
to because they're fully bought in
they're fully they're fully bought into
the neoliberal project they they know
better they're not like distra I don't
think they're distracted by race I think
they are cynically exploiting the
reality of these other identities that
don't actually cause need them to change
anything about their class status or
their or their um
I think that's true but if you go back
to the 70s the academics did become
distracted uh you you're you know
there's a difference between the
academic class and the activist class
the academics the research programs did
become diverted into those issues away
from class away from E economic class
and uh you know there was a book in 1973
by James Arona called the fiscal crisis
of the state and that was the first
statement from
extremely left thinking uh that the
government would run out of money well
the government could never run out of
money but it it bought that line and
that influenced us so that was that was
discretionary that
shift uh that was discretionary and I
mean if you think you know we've now got
recent documents CIA documents that you
know there was a boom of Continental
Marxism in the 1960s and into the early
70s you know the the French
marxists now they were doing tours of
America in in the the 70s and now now we
understand that and that completely
diverted the marxists into a particular
way of thinking that sort of
abstract uh Continental Marxist thinking
and completely distorted the way in
which Marxist activism was was emerging
in the early' 70s now it's now been
revealed and we've got documents that
the CIA was funding those conferences
and
tours you know because they realiz the
CIA worked out that these French
Continental marxists were
loonies and would would would so turn
off people from Marxism that well why
not we why don't we promote it you know
I mean that seems to be what I mean that
I mean that's that that that's kind of
That's where I've landed and I can't
prove anything today but you look around
the left media sphere and you see some
people who you think well
uh maybe they have gone from being an
unknown quantity to having a million
followers on Twitter over the course of
three years because their their brand of
weird uh bigoted misogynist left I'm
thinking of a particular guy named
Jackson hankle um is destructive to the
left it makes us look bad and so let's
make him the guy that's the face to the
left I mean you see I don't know who can
say what's motivating what but I I I
struggle with arguments given the
enormous power IM balance that
would blame individuals for caring about
issues that are important um rank
Injustice is an inequality and that that
being the reason be you know attributing
that as the reason that the left
movements are failed when everyone in
the world with every dollar behind them
is working overtime to shift our
politics in a Direction that's going to
be less effective and I don't want to be
blaming us internally when we need to be
like okay here's what is effective let's
come together around those
things well I mean I agree with that
but you know take take take the climate
issue you know I've been on panel I've
been on panels over the last couple of
years where I've been uh on the panels
have been leaders of green
parties you know the green move in in
Scotland in Australia this sort of thing
and you know they they say oh the only
way we're going to do this is if we
involve financial markets and create
green bonds and get them behind this
well you know that's eleth yeah and
that's it and that's that's just that's
that's an individual political leader
representing a movement of green people
who are all great people who are really
motivated to do well and to do good
things for us
but they're completely boted by the
mainstream economics agenda that the
only way we'll be able to do this if the
financial markets do it for us well
that's that's that's a recipe for
disaster if you let the financial
markets into to this and and a complete
misund and a complete
misunderstanding
of what the motivations of the financial
markets are you know I should ask you um
on Rising sometime last week we had a
guest uh a friend of my co- Rising is my
morning show at the hill and my co-host
is libertarian it's like a right left
show and he had a friend of his who
wrote a book about how conservatives
have to start paying attention to
climate now mostly because it's a losing
political issue for them and young
conservatives actually do believe in
climate change despite all of
the propaganda to the contrary and so
like he's trying to pitch it like
conservatives have always loved clim
Theodore Roosevelt was the
conservationist Nixon started the uh EPA
and so this is really our Legacy and we
need to reclaim it and so I asked him
you know are one what do you have to say
about the intervening like 40 years of
client Deni denialism between Nixon and
now 50 50 years and also what do you
have to say about the incentives of
various people in the Republican party
and Democratic party not to
adopt green policies because of how
captured they are as political actors I
mean you just waking up and deciding
Republicans should stop being climate
denialist doesn't really change any of
the incentive structures here and we got
into it and he's been a real can I say
 on uh Twitter since then but I'd
love to have someone who knows what
they're actually talking about come on
and respond to the claim that there
aren't that that you can basically get
out of the climate crisis through
capitalism I don't believe you can and
that's when I said earlier that that's
where I've evolved to uh I'm really
annoyed about the whole green New Deal
movement and the the whole the whole
green growth you know which is the
mainstream left type agenda now green
growth and uh uh uh the financial Market
involvement in it that you know well
we'll just get the financial markets to
to fund all of this well you know that's
the that's the now the mainstream left
narrative and move movements around the
world and even my mmt colleagues in
America get up and talk about the green
new dealers you know Way Forward well
it's not going to be the way forward at
all we the the the the essence of
capitalism that we do things to make
profits and the prophets are siphoned
off to a particular class and the rest
of us are more or less in service of
that agenda and that's the we we we
can't achieve DG growth with that and uh
just though of the isn't the point I
understood Like Bernie style green New
Deal transition policy to basically be
trying to accommodate for the fact that
there are workers who are going to be
disadvantaged by a transition away from
um fossil fuels not that capitalism is
going to resolve it but that to get
broad public Buy in you have to have a
offramp for people who are going to lose
their jobs because we're going to shut
down all of these dirty energy sectors a
just transition yeah
yeah your critique is not with that it's
with if what what like what's the aspect
of the green New Deal then well you're
gonna what give Elon Musk a bunch of
money and we're gonna electric car way
out of this or something yeah I mean
that I just don't I don't believe that
the world can continue prioritizing
economic growth growth I just don't
believe that I don't think the the our
planet can't sustain that uh you know
what what's the current estimate we're
now 1.7 times the the resource Capac we
we're consuming at one point and
producing at 1.7 times the capacity of
the world to Resource that so you know
we that's that's that can't
continue now the the the the the logic
of capitalism and capital accumulation
go back to Marx is that we've got to
keep growing that's the that's the ethos
and logic of capitalism well those two
things are that are in commensurate we
can't those two things can't work
together capitalism has to have economic
growth continue we can't continue to it
feels scary I think I mean what happens
if you stop I think that's the question
that a lot of people to have answered
before they can kind of accept the idea
of degrowth not to mention and I heard
you talk about this on macro and cheese
not to mention that people want to know
how we're going to respond to developing
countries who haven't had the
opportunities to grow into the first
world and modern standards of living and
all of those things being told oh now
you've got to stop and I know that
you've said well no there's got to be
redistributional things so they're not
disadvantaged by saying oh now's the
point where everyone has to stop
um but I think those that's what people
worry about when they hear degrowth and
also you know people have a lot of folks
think that without capitalism without
the profit motive everyone will just sit
around in their house playing video
games all day and contemplating how to
murder their neighbor or
something yeah no look I think I think
you know these are all related to the
social change that would be required and
I think you know understanding of the
way in which social change occurs it's
very slow it's not
it's uh it's step forward step back it's
complex and it takes decades and
generations and that's the dilemma I
think we're we're facing as as Humanity
on this planet that the our ability to
make the necessary changes you know you
you and I as middle class I'm presuming
we're both middle class people you and I
have got a have got to have a dramatic
Traction in our material footprint
that's the
reality we've got Ian I have no issue
with that I will say bill that I already
live in a 700 foot one-bedroom apartment
and don't drive a
car so I kind of feel like I'm ahead of
the
game you are ahead of the game and all
all power to you uh and I live in an
echo I live in an echo Village that has
a community farm and and we have
negative power bills because we use the
Sun and and so we I'm probably a little
bit ahead of the game too but the the
the you know you think of the average
American middle class person with the
huge house and the and the yacht and the
the power boat in the driveway and the
big four SUV the big four-wheel
drive like a tank as their car to drive
their children to school uh this is
dramatic contraction is required and
that's required a to reduce our
footprint but also to share some of the
footprint so that people in in uh in the
the poorer countries have at least some
material security you know I'm not
against material I think that's made our
you know you and I are talking because
of material Prosperity uh using cameras
and computers and networks I'm not
against any of that but uh Al Ely we've
the middle class in in the wealthy
countries are going to have to take a
dramatic contraction in in their
consumption and we've got to produce
different things and I don't think
Society can adapt quick
enough and I think we're headed to some
end point which is not going to be very
attractive to any of us yeah I think I
definitely agree on that point I could
pick your brain about this stuff uh for
another uh hour Bill Mitchell I but I'm
going to let you go I really appreciate
how generous you've been with your time
today and I really do encourage people
to read uh reclaiming the state and your
other works can you tell people where to
find you um online I know I understand
you have a a substack is it or a some
other place that you write articles
online I I run a Blog and I've been
running a Blog it's the 20th year now so
I was an early blogger uh you can just
just search Bill Mitchell Economist
you'll find me I come up number one on
Google
so thank you all right terrific thank
you again for spending your time with us
here today thank you to all the bad
faith listeners for tuning in and as
always take care of yourselves and keep
the faith hey YouTube thanks for
watching just a reminder that this is a
podcast you can catch an extra premium
episode every Monday for $5 a month at
patreon.com podcast that's
patreon.com podcast for $5 a month an
extra episode every week additionally
please you consider liking this video
subscribing to this channel it helps us
out it helps Independent Media beat the
algorithm we appreciate you and as
always keep the



## Keywords:
