---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6s6DT1yN4dw
---

# Video
How to publish your notes for free with Quartz
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6s6DT1yN4dw)

## Transcript:
most of the notes that I write are
published online and I've mentioned in
previous videos that the service that I
used to do that is obsidian's own paid
service obsidian publish but publish has
its own faults it's paid for starters
and there's no way to self-host it it's
also been very slow for me for quite
some time I also wish that there were
more options for customizing it and I
wish that I could include it in some
sort of automated pipeline in this video
I'm going to talk about a free
alternative to obsidian publish and how
to set that up from scratch it's called
quartz what is quartz quartz is an
actually a community plug-in it is a
separate tool that happens to work
really well with obsidian and that's
because it was designed with obsidian in
mind but you don't have to use obsidian
to use it now when you're looking at
publishing markdown notes there are
actually three components that you're
looking at the first is the tool that
actually creates or edits those notes
and stores those notes as markdown now
you can use obsidian for this but you
could use a text editor or an IDE like
vs code as well next is the part that
turns that markdown into HTML HTML is a
better format it's more portable for
viewing online and it is easier and it
has become the standard pretty much for
most websites so markdown is going to
have to be converted into HTML which is
what markdown was made for and that tool
that that is called the static site
generator after you have this bunch of
HTML you're then going to have to find a
way to put it online and putting it
online means putting it on someone's
server that could be yours but it could
be somebody else's now with obsidian it
does all three of these roles but quartz
only does the middle part the static
site generation which means you'll still
need to use something to generate your
markdown notes and you'll still need to
have a hosting provider so there are
many combinations that you can choose
for these three tools or one or two
tools but here's the workflow that I'm
going to show you I'm going to use
obsidian to generate the source text
which is the markdown files I'm going to
use quartz as my static site generator
and then as my hosting provider I've
chosen GitHub pages and just to give you
a sneak peek this is the end result this
is a site that I've created using my
notes generated by s and also hosted on
GitHub pages and just like you might
expect with obsidian publish clicking on
the links works just as well there's
even a graph view so you can click on
that and okay it only has a few nodes
right now but you get the idea so I'm
going to show you how I set all this up
but I got to say up front that this
really isn't for everyone I think for
most people obsidian publish is still
the easier option it is convenient it's
right within obsidian and $8 a month
really isn't a lot to pay for a tool if
you use it a lot like I do however if
you do want to do it this way I think
you're going to find it easier if you at
least are familiar or comfortable with
working in a terminal if you've worked
with Git and GitHub before and also if
you're comfortable with node.js or npm
or NVM or at least can copy and paste
these commands I'm also only going to
show these steps on a Mac because that's
what I'm using so these commands might
look a little bit different for your
operating system I'm going to leave a
link in the description below and in the
first pin comment to the documentation
that I used while I was going through
this so you can check out the right
commands for your operating system step
one is to download and install quartz
quartz is open source so we just need to
copy or clone the repository that it's
in and then save that locally so that we
can work with it we're also going to
need to to install some dependencies for
it so I've got a fresh repository in
fact I don't have any repository I'm
just in a directory that I want to put
my repository in and we're just going to
go through the quartz
documentation so the first thing we've
got to do is clone the actual quartz
repository so we're going to do
that and if I just check here there's
quartz right there I'm going to call
that something else because I don't want
it just to be quartz so I'm going to do
MV quartz doing it in public all right
so let's just check all right now going
back to that we're going to CD into that
one doing it in public It also says that
it requires at least these versions of
node and npm so I do just want to check
that all right so it said 18 I'm fine at
21 and then mother version of npm is 10
and it's 9.31 all right so I'm going to
npmi and what this is doing is is it's
going through quartz and installing all
of the dependencies that have been
declared there so that was pretty quick
actually and then I should just do npx
quarts create and now it's saying which
one I should do how to initialize the
content so either empty quarts copy an
existing folder or simp link an existing
folder okay well I'm just going to do
empty quarts because this is entirely
new that sounds right um choose how
quart should resolve links in your
content all right it says treat links as
absolute path for quarts 3 and Hugo
treat links the shortest path for most
obsidian vaults okay well I'm going to
do that so then I've installed course so
it's here so let me open that folder now
that was in vaults doing it in public
and this is my new quartz repository
this is what it looks like this quarts
over here and I guess this is where the
stuff is going to go step two is to set
up the GitHub repository now sign up for
a GitHub account if you don't already
have one this is still free you can
create as many repositories as you want
and we're going to be creating something
brand new for this okay so before we go
too much further though I do want to
make sure that this is synchronized to
GitHub so I want to keep this as a git
repository I know that quartz is pretty
good at that so I'm going to go to
setting up your git repository here so I
already have cloned and set it up
locally so now I need to create a new
repository on github.com
and do not initialize the new
repository all right going to create a
new Repository it's going to be called
doing it in public and then it's it'll
be a public one I don't initialize it
with this license I'm not going to put a
license right now create repository all
right and I'm going to copy this and I
believe I'm supposed to go
back so get remote add origin and this
is mine
oops
okay so this is configured to the
original quartz one so I'm going to do
get remote RM
origin and then get remote ad origin so
then okay so I'm looking for mine to be
here and then Upstream is the quartz
GitHub repo which is right okay then it
says I can sync npx quart sync no pull
all right let's try
that okay now let's go back to that
GitHub repository and see if anything
happened okay so it is here cool cool
cool step three is making all of this an
obsidian Vault so we're going to take
the folder or the repository that we
already have and we're going to open it
in obsidian then we can configure
obsidian to look the way that we want
one of the cool things here is that I
now have a get repository that has
Quartz in it but there's no actual
content in quartz now quartz turns
markdown into HTML right so I'm going to
have to create the markdown and I'm
going to do so in obsidian so Now's the
Time where I'm going to open the same
vault in obsidian because these are just
markdown files so I should be able to so
then I'm going to open the folder as a
vault and I'm going to go down to the
doing in public one click open open and
this is loading it up for the first time
so obsidian is doing some
indexing one thing I am going to do is
I'm going to go so on the left is my um
my main Vault my personal Vault and I'm
going to go into obsidian and copy over
the hot Keys one because I really just
hate transferring shortcuts and I have
like very particular shortcuts that I
use all the time so I'm going to do that
obsidian and then just copy over the hot
Keys now let us see if that works all
right so let's do L all right so now
that's working great okay I don't like
how this looks so okay I'm going to make
it light just for now just so you can
see it a little bit better I'm going to
look for a theme and I'm going to
install and use this one so now I want
to install some
plugins and first of all I'm going to
turn on community plugins then I'm going
to browse and I know that I definitely
want long form so I'm going to install
that okay so now that I've installed the
long form plug-in I'm going to go into
here and it says to begin I have to find
or create a folder Somewhere in My Vault
in which I'd like to create my novel
right click it and select create long
form project all right so I'm going to
click that create long form project
because I know that quart said this is
where it should be and this is going to
be doing it in public okay I'm going to
create it there that created another
thing with another index but okay that's
a little Annoying one thing that I'd
like to do actually is create a read me
so I'm going to add a read me here okay
so I've written this read me which is
basically just saying what this is and
how to give feedback and also I've got
an outline of how I think things are
going to go but I'm not entirely sure if
I go back to quartz here I'll see that
for authoring Content they actually have
um a standard format that they recommend
this is the format that courts is going
to be looking for so because I'm using
obsidian I'm going to create a templates
folder
actually that means I'm going to install
the templator one to you can use the
templates um core plugin but you know I
prefer
templater and I'm going to put templates
there and that it doesn't exist yet so
I'm going to create a new folder called
templates and here I'll put um chapter
and I'll put the stuff that they have
there
except this one is going to be yeah I'm
going to make it a templator template
file
title draft okay that's fine and I'll
leave that
free all right so that's the template
sort of dra the chapter template and
this is what I always wanted to do so
just to confirm yep so it's going to use
templates that that is fine and then I'm
also going to go to the long form my
scene template I'm going to say that's
the chapter because I don't really use
scenes but I'm going to use that all
right so if I go here and I'm going to
create a new scene called introduction
which is really a chapter it does have
those things so it has a title draft and
it has an empty tag so I say the
introduction goes here here step four is
finding a way to link your local
repository to the repository on GitHub
so that when you make a change it
appears on GitHub as well I want to see
what this looks like actually cuz I
haven't tried that yet I'm going to go
to this oh yeah so syncing my content so
now I can go to npx quart sync I'm just
going to copy this it is already linked
to my GitHub so I should just be able to
paste this
in and and all right so this is just
pushing to GitHub so let's see if we can
see that right that looks like it
because we should have yeah yep that
there it is so this is the outline and
stuff all right now to see how it looks
like um there must be some way to build
it so I'm going to build and preview
quarts I'm going to just copy this and
then go back here paste that this is
saying started a cord server listening
at here so I'm just going to command
click that and this is what that looks
like cool so go index here oh this is oh
this is going to put all of the things
under the folder great introduction
introduction goes here and there's the
read me here so that's actually really
good this looks pretty awesome step five
is to host your Vault online now there
are many options for this I'm going to
go with GitHub pages but you can also
use cloudflare or netlify it's really
personal preference I'm just going to
use GitHub Pages because I'm already
using it right now I just have it on
GitHub so people can see it there but
it's not rendered I want what I'm seeing
here to actually be Vis visitable online
do that I am going to have to look at
hosting it the host quarts online and
I'm just going to do GitHub Pages for
this honestly so in my local quartz I
need to create a new file so I'm going
to open this up workflows and then I'm
going to create a new file here and I'm
going to call it deploy yaml and then
I'm going to copy this whole
thing is there anything I need to change
I don't think so okay so I'm going to
save that so it says go to the settings
tab in my Fork repository and in the
sidebar click Pages under Source click
get Hub
actions so this is that settings Pages
then under Source I'm going to do GitHub
actions and then I can just do an npx
Court sync so from
here npx
qus
sync all right now let's see if that
worked so it should be Nicole V Hoven
which is my GitHub username then
github.io and then doing it in public so
let's see all right this is great so
this is it I need to change this so that
it doesn't say this is a blind quartz
installation um but it is at least there
and the introduction is here okay so
this is definitely it step six is
optional you can actually stop here and
your site is already accessible from
your
but if you want to use a custom domain
like if you have a name like doing it
inp public.com and you want that site to
show up there then you're going to have
to make some adjustments first you need
to go to wherever you're managing your
domains for me that is Park bun really
good service by the way funny name but a
good service and when you go to the DNS
records for that particular domain
you're going to need an a record and
that is an address record record and
this is from the GitHub documentation
and the quarts documentation you're
going to have to put the answer or the
value as these four different IP
addresses what this is doing is that
it's saying that when anyone requests
this site it should refer it to one of
the GitHub servers now let's go to
GitHub to complete the other part of
that conversation so we'll go into
settings for the repository here and
then Pages I've already set it up so you
can see the not here but what you're
going to need to do is in the source
here you should select GitHub actions
and then in the custom domain part you
can type in your domain click save it'll
do a DNS check it might take some time
for the DNS changes to propagate this is
notoriously frustrating just give it a
bit don't panic maybe give it an hour or
so sometimes it takes longer than that
it can be really frustrating but after a
while come back and check it and
hopefully it'll be all resolved and then
you're going to be able to take this
enforce https checkbox as well courts
just won the annual obsidian specific
awards called gems of the year for 2023
under the category best tool does that
mean that I'm giving up obsidian publish
and switching entirely to quartz no see
I believe in using the best tool for the
job and there are a lot of jobs I have a
lot of use cases I still plan to use
obsidian publish for publishing the
majority of my obsidian notes I also for
work use other static site generators I
use Hugo and Gatsby for code
documentation and also for the website
for my own personal site I use Hugo and
now I'm also using quartz for a new
personal project that you might have
caught a glimpse of I don't know if I'm
always going to have that combination of
tools I really like quartz I like it
enough that I do see it potentially
taking over some of these use cases I'll
let you know how I go with that in the
meantime check out carts and if you
decide that you like it too then
consider supporting the developer Jackie
xia on GitHub now I don't know him at
all but he's made a great tool and I
think that he deserves a recognition for
it and speaking of recognition thank you
to Gilbert Sanchez or Hayes Gilbert on
my patreon Discord server for sharing
his experiences and trying out a lot of
these static site generators and also
inspiring to finally give this a go
thanks for
watching


## Keywords:
