---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4FngeEwsVLU
---

# Video
How Did Essentialism Lead To Intersectionality? ft. Adolph Reed
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4FngeEwsVLU)

## Transcript:

so just to kind of summarize it with
this best of understanding so one you
have a Marxist orientation you go
through black power with all of its
obvious appeals particularly at that
time yeah to what you say and to 19 and
20 year old too right absolutely and
then you have this you see the internal
contradictions then you see the ways if
I'm understanding you in which like the
aesthetics of radicalism can easily
migrate to you know conservative
Democratic Party politics in Atlanta in
the 70s so that you know a historical
example we've talked about is like maybe
Baird Rustin seems really boring in the
60s and then you realize actually him
and a Phillip Randolph are in addition
to fighting American apartheid and Jim
Crow they're talking about labor demands
and social provisions that it can't just
be delivered by some kind of you know
you know HR you know some sort of
corporate back patronage machine but you
know that same machine well while
keeping forward the same core economic
policies can you know we're different
clothes and signify different things and
and and look maybe you know I'm not
maybe there's some value to that maybe
there isn't but that is not structural
and economic so then you go through
there and then you and then and then if
I'm understanding you correctly and this
is where I think your work is so
illustrative because right now I think I
mean we are just bombarded by
essentialist narratives of any sort yeah
that you of every sort but you you kind
of point out in your work that like some
of the response to a class-based and
also racist tract like the bell curve
mm-hmm that some of that respond
doesn't go into interrogating the very
work of trying to creating that those
subcategories of humans to build a
script of hierarchies to justify a
particularly predatory form of
capitalism which I read that book that
it instead of trying to skip that and
interrogate the map it just builds a
counter map right you answer that right
that's right okay yeah yeah no no
absolutely right absolutely and and the
fundamental problem with that stuff is
its ontological but even before being
ontological it's it's idealist right and
you explain that to people I think
that's really important yeah I mean
idealism is a philosophical orientation
that presumes that ideas are real things
and have a real force and can do things
in in the world and that they have
essences ultimately and the essences can
be realized in in in the world so for
instance I mean one of the things that
always kind of tickles me about late
Victorian and Edwardian Rea science
right is that the race theorist spent a
lot of time constructing ideal tax
animals right like what the
quintessential type of the tooten was or
like the lower Galatian or whatever
right right because at this time they
were like as as many as 36 different
races inside Europe depending on who's
counting
and they were so fixated on trying to
get these exact taxonomy 'he's right to
identify like the pure nordic type or
the pure Gallic type or whatever which
which was always only an intellectual
abstraction from from from taxonomic
characteristics that they've
can made-up right so I mean there's
always like the Oh who said it's like a
Nordic has a high vaulted for right
above me and and then what they did was
they went out to measure actually
existing populations according to their
approximation to or distance from the
ideal type of of that geographic area
right when all of it was just pure
made-up okey doke right but
they were absolutely convinced it was
scientific and the cool thing about it
to me
from a teaching point of view is that
the harder they try to specify it
scientifically the more they expose that
they couldn't because you just can't
like like like you know all these
classification systems are totally
arbitrary right and as always like the
who says so anyway I mean so I think now
fast forward I guess like the 1980s and
the emergence of what was called
identity politics what what you see is
that essentialism takes the form well it
takes a couple of forms the first
variant is the naive one right it's like
you posit a population category and you
impute a way of thinking values right or
whatever to it okay so so blacks are X
all right so so that implies that
there's something essential about being
black that lives in inside the person
right like it's there what whether or
not you you want it right so I mean and
I've been going back to the beginning of
the 20th century or like the end of 19th
century yes or you know that's the
little scientific logic you know
underneath the figure of the tragic
mulatto right because what's tragic is
them a lot of looks like he or she is
white but
this essence that keeps them ever from
being truly white right all right so
that's like garden-variety race
essentialism and you can do the same
thing with gender right or for whatever
else and then I guess by the mid mid 90s
probably as as as the identities began
to proliferate then people started
saying well but wait I'm a man but I'm
also black or really not to be more
honest I'm a woman because it's like the
privileged identities and I'm also black
so like my blackness makes me different
from white women and my woman this makes
me different from black men and I know
there's a cut of the Black Studies
budget and a cut of the Women's Studies
budget that I should have access to
because that's where all the stuff lives
right right and that's the political
economy of racial worth of Rick racial
or gender representation and so
ironically you know the notion of
intersectionality comes into existence
and I can't see people typing on the
side now but I'm sure that's just going
crazy that we have the best people laid
off and they're very smart and they do a
tremendous job frankly so yeah I better
talk about my audience like it's Trump
talking about his people the great
people and they do a great job well one
of them discovered that Tory has a
three-door closet in his basement
and and that was sad chatter for for for
about two or three minutes right but
then a squirrel ran ran past and their
attention change but right okay they
have no attention spans
now hit intersectionality over it build
some more bridges so the irony of the
intersectionality is that it came into
existence as a way to solve the problem
that the big is centralized identities
were like too big and too capacious and
didn't capture enough discrete
experiences but what they did but what
intersectionality does does in instead
is instead of dissolving the problem or
resolving the problem of essentialism by
dissolving the the essentializing
categories it increases them right it's
like fishing right so it increases so so
there are more so there's a special
perspective of a black woman there's a
special perspective of a gay black woman
right and goes on and on and on
ironically a few years earlier something
similar it happened around the
mixed-race notion right because a lot of
people who were advocating mixed mixed
race and and I got from from a reliable
source on this is that who attended what
she described as the Million mulatto
March like in DC which was actually a
couple of people was like white mothers
of mixed-race kids who wanted to have
some some separate identity for them and
you know why not like that's a game plan
you know I can't beef about it but
ironically well people understood a lot
of people understood the mixed race
category as a way to jump out of the
racial binaries it it actually just
produced more discrete and sharply
defined racial categories so all right
so I'm Nancy intersectionalities and I
just want to be clear today that the
critique and it's interesting because it
has nothing to do with and this is
something that at least I've been sort
of banging on and is definitely
elemental to your work and to our way to
raise work that is this is a separate
trajectory from the idea and the project
of making sure basically that everybody
has legal and civic equity in a
political society or a democracy that
there's no discrimination in terms of
housing employment voting public
assembly or anything else that that is
one trajectory but then on the other
hand that instead of looking at these
descriptive hierarchies recognizing
their origins and where they're coming
from and trying to unsettle them you end
up reifying them in a more and more and
more precision and replication right
yeah I think that's right yeah yeah I
think that's right and I mean in the
Academy it became like the issue in the
90s because of the premise that to be
able to study the X you got to be an X
right and my first reaction to that is
well like I'm interested in the 19th
century I don't got a time machine so
how can I do that
right right it's the same principle
right right and it's fundamentally anti
intellectual right and I mean this was
also the moment when people like you
know really got got got fat off of Ragan
on the Enlightenment and you know I've
always been kind of Enlightenment sort
of guy but at least some some some some
pieces of it right like a lot of pieces
of it actually like you know the
objection to clerical or
but no matter what the cleric is right
and but people often uh what I hear that
and you know bristle right when I say
yeah well yeah I think the enlighten was
pretty good I mean I remember when I
gave my job Jeff talked at the new
school one of my colleagues he's a great
guy actually but asked me at one point
to Q&A
he first never marked and said Wow
liking this there's some ways in which
you sound like a really like status
liberal and he said so why why is it
that you are so committed to the state
and I think he was looking for something
that you know was Locker Rousseau
whatever or even marks but it set him
well because I want to make sure that
the people who live on the other side of
the hill can't come and eat me right and
I think that's one reason that we need
to stay right and I think the
Enlightenment was like that too right
like you can't and when the idea see I
mean I mean I sometimes joke that post
toasty ism of whatever sort is like
demonic right because this idea that I I
have my truth and you have your truth
and as what Walter Ben then Michaels
argues you know still into shape with
signifier what that means is it is a
disagreement is no longer what no is
there's no no no more space space for
argument right there's difference
there's no space I'm his no space space
for this agreement and that's like the
you know like the end of and believe me
I I can't believe that I was almost
tempted that that's like the end of
society right like I was almost tempted
to say the end of civil society which is
the phrase that I've never uttered in my
life and without contempt and I think I
just saved myself from doing it then but
right thank you you just watched a
Michael Brooks show
video subscribe to get them all why
wouldn't you don't be foolish
click subscribe below and become a
patron as well patreon.com slash t MBS
thanks everybody


## Keywords:
