---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TbCzi8ACbJ4
---

# Video
Huey Newton, Black Radicalism, and Intersectionality (TMBS 43 ft. Asad Haider)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TbCzi8ACbJ4)

## Transcript:

welcome back to the Michael Brooks show
I'm Michael Brooks joining us now is
Assad hater he is the author of mistaken
identity race and class in the age of
trump Assad thanks for being with us
thanks Michael Assad you have a really
powerful story in fact in your book
where you talked about discovering the
work of ue p newton can you explain
when that was where you were coming from
and and how you found Newton's work and
how it sort of sets the stage for what
you're doing yeah I was coming from the
position of someone who was the son of
immigrants from Pakistan to the United
States and I grew up experiencing you
know a kind of the basic form of liberal
racism but in the middle of rural
Pennsylvania so sometimes if we drove
half an hour outside of where we were in
the University of town it would be not
so liberal and we also would from time
to time travel back to Pakistan and I
would see the scale of poverty that
exists in the global south and that very
much affected the way I understood
politics in the United States so when I
discovered Huey P Newton's autobiography
which is called revolutionary suicide
and for a young man who was looking for
a book to read that was that was quite
appealing to good some it is and I found
an amazing story and there are many
aspects of that story that are
remarkable but for me what was most
meaningful was that I had discovered a
tradition that was part of American
history
that was deeply involved in struggling
against
not only racism within the United States
but on a global scale and that kind of
solidarity that Huey Newton and the
Black Panther Party put at the center of
their politics a global revolutionary
solidarity which was against racism and
capitalism that was a formative
political influence for me so you were
you're sort of anchoring in
quote-unquote identity politics right
comes from a tradition that is is global
and orientation it links struggles in
industrialized and non industrialized
countries and it does also have an
economic critique built into it and if I
understand it right at Lee you're
writing from the perspective this is not
like you know we'll get into some of the
more sort of you know the the conflicts
that are sort of now driving this sort
of narrative fight of economic versus
identity which you're transcending and
getting away from them I think in some
very effective ways but one of the
things that I sort of got from reading
you is it's not even just that that this
sort of positing of the two against each
other is false it's actually that these
are you know academically we can make
distinctions and they might even be very
useful ones but sort of functionally
there is a lot of dynamism and how these
things work
and in where people you know occupy
different places at different times with
regards to identity and economics does
that make sense what I'm saying yeah
absolutely and I would add that you know
I for I mean I'm I am an academic and I
I work with political concepts for me
the guidance in producing concepts is
mass movements and fundamentally when
you look at the history of mass
movements against racism not just in the
United States including in the United
States but not just their global
movements against colonialism
imperialist movements throughout the
20th century you find that there is no
kind of hair-splitting distinction
between well there's this aspect which
is about race and then there's this
aspect which is about exploitation or
class or something like no they oppose a
unitary phenomenon of domination and
exploitation which was grounded in
relations of race in relations of class
and and and they opposed that in a
unitary way and so I take my guidance
from those movements which fundamentally
when you look at the history were
engaged in some way with Marxism and is
this where the distinction and Wool
we're gonna move forward pretty soon but
is this though where you would say that
there is a real distinction though
between the tradition you're identifying
it's something like an intersectional
argument because specifically not the
sort of broader understanding of an
intersectional argument that it
integrates you know gender and race and
economics and that these are all you
know important lenses of understanding
but that specifically in that
terminology and that argument actually
comes from a relatively narrow legal
theory in legal argumentation and not
this broad or political project you're
talking about is that where you would
make that distinction
yeah I would say it's really important
to look at the specificity of the of
what kimberl√© crenshaw was talking about
when she proposed the term
intersectionality and I I advocated this
for any concept to be really specific to
look at its history and to look at the
context in which it's put forward and to
not just use it out of context in a sort
of general vague way as though it could
refer to any object which comes your way
and unfortunately that has happened to
the term intersectionality and I think
that when it's used in this way
it limits our analysis because when
we're talking about you know I was
referring before the colonialism if
you're talking about a phenomenon like
that it's not that there are separate
relations which are you know one line is
race another line is economics another
line is gender
there's whatever other lines you want to
come up with and that then there's an
intersection of them and that's where
imperialism is no it's it's a specific
structure that's articulated together in
a specific way and we can't take these
abstractions and just say they're
intersected intersecting and solve the
problem that way


## Keywords:
