---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DJrleT-4oj8
---

# Video
If We Burn with Vincent Bevins
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DJrleT-4oj8)

## Transcript:
here with us to talk about if we burn uh
just we're going to start with a little
bio of Vincent and then he'll go into a
presentation on the book and then we'll
do a few moderator Le questions and then
open it up to student Q&A and we want to
leave a lot of time for you guys to ask
questions so please do stick around
until the end um so Vincent bevans is an
award-winning journalist and
correspondent from 2011 to 2016 he was a
foreign correspondent in Brazil for the
Los Angeles Times he also ran a section
in the FHA day uh so sou Paulo Brazil's
uh largest newspaper in 2017 he moved to
Jakarta Indonesia to cover southeast
Asia for the Washington Post Vincent's
work has been published in the New York
Times the Atlantic The Economist the
guardian foreign policy the New York
Review of Books the new Republic and
More in 2020 he published the ground
breaking book The Jakarta method which
leveraged archival research eyewitness
testimony and Declassified documents to
reconstruct the United States support
and complicity in anti- communist mass
killings around the world in the 1960s
and in 2023 he published his second book
if we burn which we're here to talk
about today that interrogates the
relationship between a decade of large-
scale protest and revolts and their
relationship with Revolution and
significant structural reform so we're
thrilled to have him here today to speak
about if we burn and with that we'll
turn it over to
Vincent yes thank you very much I want
to check my volume first how is that is
that good should I get further away how
about that how about that every yeah
everything's good okay thank you so much
for inviting me and to everyone for
coming out today I'm truly honored uh
I've been working on this book for four
years I've started it before my first
book even came out I would have never
expected back then than anyone was going
to be interested in either of these
things so I'm I'm I'm truly grateful for
the attention and for the for the
invitation um over the next 25 minutes
or so I'm going to try to talk in
general terms about this book um where
it comes from from what it tries to
do and some of the picture that emerges
from the project and hopefully in some
way relate that to the questions of Law
and political economy somehow or another
um if
possible
um but this is a book as the subtitle
indicates about Mass protest and that is
a topic that is personal to me I have a
personal connection to it um a little
over 10 years ago in June 2013
I was living in sou Paulo Latin
America's largest city working as a
foreign correspondent and mass protest
literally arrived on my
doorstep um history came knocking in a
way that no one that I know in B of time
was
expecting um and what happened briefly
is that at the beginning of June 2013 a
group of leftists and anarchists
organized rockus Street
demonstrations against the rise in the
price of a bus
Fair um the the first four
demonstrations were successful at
shutting down traffic and blocking um uh
centers of public transportation this
was a group that believed in
prefigurative action so blocking a Turn
Style making um transportation literally
free at least in the short term lined up
with their long-term project which was
to decommodify public
transportation fully in Brazil so that
there would be no cost for bus or Subway
rides at all but these first four
protests succeeded at shutting things
down in certain parts of the city but
they certainly gen didn't generate
sympathy among those with the biggest
microphones in the country the
mainstream media which is largely owned
by oligarchs in Brazil in right
leaning so on the day of the four fourth
protest which I attended the mass media
in Brazil called for a Crackdown on the
protest and if the journalistic class in
Brazil which of which I was sort of a
part I was I was an outsider had
belonged to the class of people in
Brazil that usually experienced
repression at the hands of the military
police they would have known how this
was going to go but they're not and they
didn't when the actual Crackdown came it
shocked the country and most importantly
the people in the media with these large
microphones and the this caused them to
split their narrative they went from
saying these are a bunch of punks and
anarchists that we need to sweep off the
streets to this is a good thing somehow
uh this is an uprising somehow in
defense of the right to rise up and as
this happened more and more people
entered the streets with different ideas
of what the protest was was about they
entered into initially verbal and then
ultimately violent conflict with the
original organizers and within one week
A lot happened in this week and everyone
has that I know that live through has
been reliving that week ever since but
in that one week from the Crackdown to
January to June 20th I'm sorry what we
would now recognize as the beginning of
a farri movement in
Brazil violently expelled the original
organizers from the streets they they
won the Battle For What the streets was
about a group that was formed in that
strange chaotic week um went on to lead
a new protest movement to remove the
democratically elected Central left
president dear rousa and what everybody
now agrees is some kind of a
parliamentary coup or at least that's my
position that it was a parliamentary
coup and then campaigned for Jer bolaro
who won in 2018 and took office as
probably the most extreme right-wing
leader in the Democratic world and this
new group that was formed in June 2013
took power alongside him they entered
government as
well so it seems to me at least that the
Brazilian people got in the end the
exact opposite of what they asked for
back in the first half of June 2013 it
seemed that June 2013 was about asking
for better Public Services they got a
government which slashed Public Services
it seemed like it was a reaction to a
police Crackdown they got a government
which celebrated police
violence
so in the rest of the decade as I like
many many other people that lived
through this strange month of June 2013
when other things that were apparently
similar started to happen in other
countries around the world Ukraine Hong
Kong turkey was happening at the exact
same time Chile and so on we watched
with a mix of trepidation and anxiety
thinking hoping that it doesn't go the
same way that Brazil went and in some
cases it did more or less in other cases
it didn't but I was not the only person
that lived through this this uprising of
June 2013 that was quite
affected by it troubled by it and as a
result looked around the world every
time something else like to this seemed
to be
happening um and I also looked backwards
because I came to the conclusion
ultimately that June 2013 in Brazil
would not have gone the way it did if it
had not been interpreted by people like
me in the media as if it were the same
kind of thing as the uprisings in North
Africa which started in late 2010 and
early 2011 another foreign correspondent
in Brazil and 2013 that was even more
clueless than I was said oh they're
doing the Brazilian spring they're doing
Arab Spring but Brazilian now there's a
lot of problems with that not only that
Brazil had a democratically elected and
popular president whereas in North
Africa they had dictators that have in
power for decades but that's why I
looked backwards and looking around this
decade it was not only the Brazilian
case where original organizers now say
things are worse than what we were
fighting against things went backwards
things didn't did not only not go
forwards they went
backwards and this is strange because
this is the decade that apparently saw
more people take part in Mass protest
than any other decade in human history
these things are hard to calculate who
knows but as far as we know it was the
1960s that was the previous record the
2010s exceeded the number of the 1960s
and yet a lot of the original organizers
will say things got
worse so what did I do with this uh this
this very personal concern with these
strange phenomena I came up with a
project which was certainly ambitious
perhaps hubristic which was to try to
tell the story of the world from 2010 to
2020 built around these concerns
obviously you can't actually tell the
history of the world over the course of
a decade so like any work of history
this is built around a certain set of
concerns a certain set of questions it
excludes and includes things bases what
what is what
I Define as the importance of the
project and I tell the history of the
2010s in this book as if the most
important thing to happen in that decade
is the protest that gets so big that it
becomes something else a protest that
gets so big that it either overthrows or
fundamentally destabilizes an existing
government so that's the Criterion that
I come up with I invested in myself but
that means that almost all of the all
the cases are outside of the traditional
First World um they're all either in the
global south or in countries that are in
somehow moved between what used to be
the third and the first world but that's
the Criterion that I come up with and
the question around which I build the
book is how is it that so many mass
protests led to the opposite of what
they apparently asked for in the first
place so that's the project My Method
I'm a journalist so what I did is I went
around the world and I did a bunch of
interviews um over the course of four
years in 12 countries I interviewed
around 200 250 people asking them what
happened why do you think it happened
that way what what did you learn from it
and I
constructed a global history around
those questions with those interviews
and then I always you know as with my
first book which was also powered by
interviews I would
check the interviews against the
scholarly literature so I did my best to
read the best expert analysis of what
had happened and then identify voices
that would give a subjective and human
um perspective on events because in
these strange revolutionary moments what
it feels like for three seconds as a
crucial decision is made Might matter
quite a lot whereas usually in history
uh Split Second decisions don't matter
so
much
um so the answer to that question how is
it that so many mass protests led to the
opposite of what they apparently asked
for I hope is the story itself um one
thing this book tries to militate
against is the idea that there's one
weird trick to do a revolution um one
easy answer to explain what happens over
10 to 13 countries so I hope that the
answer is the book and I've been uh very
gratified to hear so far that people
come to the story and Come Away with
different conclusions based on different
perspectives different National analysis
that they have different experiences
that they've had hopefully the story is
Rich enough that it is because it is
really by necessity indeterminate it's
too recent to to have a conclusion that
is that is final about what
happened um so while it'd be very easy
just to say oh please I hope you read
the book you can figure it out um there
are a few things that I could draw out
in a talk like
this there are it is possible Identify
some themes that emerge it is possible
to outline the framework that is
constructed through these interviews
that I think can be used more or less to
understand that can be used more or less
to answer that question and hopefully
there are some elements I can highlight
today which which which relate in some
way or another to law and political
economy because that's I guess the that
is that is the theme of the
day um so as a
beginning of an attempt to explain those
Frameworks I came to the conclusion
first of all that in the 2010s a
particular set of responses a
particular package of tactics a
particular
recipe becomes hegemonic if not indeed
appearing as the natural way to respond
to Injustice or government abuse when in
reality there's always many many ways
that we can respond to government abuses
and the sociological literature this
would be a repertoire of contention that
comes together in the alter Glo
globalization Movement by the beginning
of the 2010s and by the 2010s this seems
as really if not the easiest thing to do
the thing that really must be done sorry
if that's backwards if not the thing
that must be done at least the thing
that is easiest and most ready to hand
in the face of government abuse so this
package this recipe this set of tactics
is the Apparently spontaneous
leaderless horizontally structured
digitally coordinated Mass protest in a
public square or a public space now very
briefly at the beginning of the book I
try to explain where each of these
elements come from but more important is
that they come from somewhere they are
not indeed natural they are not written
on the soul of man um they all emerge
historically and ideologically and think
there are both material and ideological
reasons for this package becoming
hegemonic because it is the types of
organizations that would have carried
out other uh types of movements in the
20th century were often destroyed social
media helped to make things easier and
then there there was I think as I say in
the book an elective Affinity between
what was easiest what was made possible
by the material structures in place in
the 2010s and a set of pre-existing
ideological uh
affirmations but that's the that's the
package right and as I said they all
came from somewhere so protest itself
Mass protest is relatively new you don't
really get it until the emergence of
mass media in the middle of the 20th
century now if you can think back to an
imaginary state of nature wouldn't make
a lot of sense to go to the center of a
nation which there weren't Nations yet
because of media is required to create
nations in the first place but it
wouldn't make sense to to March the
center of town and demonstrate to the
nation if really the only people that
could see were those that were literally
standing right there so Mass protest
itself emerges mass media which means
that it is always already mediated or
you would not do it if you did not know
consciously or unconsciously that
mediation would occur so I reject some
um attempts to separate mediation at
least when it comes to protest I think
with politics there's other types of
political practices you could separate
from mediation but protest never and
then another one of the just to to to to
briefly explain these these prehistories
horizontalism is a word that gets a lot
of attention in the Brazilian context
and one which is a lot of protest reject
by the end of the decade and this comes
from certain practices that come
together in the alter globalization
movement and then a set of global
activists being inspired by what they
saw in Argentina 2001 when it all of the
concrete when all of the representative
structures in the society collapse
people take action by forming assemblies
in which everybody can speak at an equal
level and no action is really taken
after that but this is where
horizontalism comes from it all comes
from
somewhere um what happens with this
package is that to a degree that was not
anticipated by the protesters and I
think definitely not anticipated by the
people who put together this this
repertoire back in the early
2000s is that this recipe is far more
successful than expected at putting
people on the
street this package this repertoire of
contention gets so many people out into
public squares or public
spaces that there is apparent and
euphoric success
so many people come to the streets that
as I said earlier this isn't really a
protest anymore often you've generated a
revolutionary
situation often the dictator gets on a
plane and flees to Saudi Arabia or in
less pronounced cases the ruling Elites
are so scared of the
streets that they really want to give in
to the protest they want to find a way
to give something as a concession to go
back to the status quante to somehow
satisfy demands for whatever it is that
being
demanded uh in order to because they're
so afraid of losing power now as I said
this was not
expected but when you get the creation
of these power vacuums either an actual
power vacuum there's no more government
or a state that is so weakened that it
wants to do something to strengthen
itself it turns out that this particular
that a
protest especially a protest of this
particular type is very poorly
constituted to take advantage of a
revolutionary situation
or even to elaborate the set of Demands
that would allow things to go back to
normal that that would allow for uh the
movement to extract concessions from the
state so on the one hand if you have the
government fleeing and again I'm
oversimplifying to to explain the
framework that that allows us to answer
the question in a very broad way if you
have a dictator that fleas a protest
that may concretely consist of millions
of individuals with Millions if not more
ideas as to what the protest is doing
cannot form a revolutionary government
or a sort of a revolutionary committee
or a transitional
State and in other cases the less
pronounced cases like the Brazilian one
where the government was really trying
to give something to the streets often
could not even elaborate in a way that a
union might okay we want a b c d and e
and
f we would take ABC and d and this is
crucial and we can make you the credible
promise that if we get ABC and D then
this is over because the the bad guy and
you know you would never be protesting
in the first place if the bad guy wasn't
bad is not inclined to give in just
because it's right um he or she usually
he wants to needs to believe that
something will be resolved by giving in
this concession so as a very simple way
of understanding what does happen how
things go so poorly in so many cases you
just have to look at who does enter the
power vacuum um in some cases it is
National Elites some cases there's an
imperialist counter attack some places
it is the enemies of the original
movement in some places like Chile South
Korea some extent Ukraine the people
that step forward and insist that they
represent the movement all is in some
way somehow a dishonest way because you
can never really represent a movement
like
this if they are like Chile South Korea
some to some extent Ukraine more or less
on the same side as the original
protesters that's where we see the Su
success
cases
um so that is the easiest way to
oversimplify the answer another thing
that I want to highlight um
today and this is relates to my own uh
involvement in the in the work is the
role of the media
so I'm in this book more than I would
like to be because the media plays a
larger role in the outcome of so many of
these episodes than I would like to be
the case uh instinctually ideologically
I like uh explanations that are material
and structural and points to deep shifts
in a society but it seemed impossible to
tell the story of this DEC decade
without telling the story of the choices
that were made by particular media
outlets and the ways they represented
what was happening on the streets and
the choices made the ways that these
Outlets were represented um by the media
not only changed the way that the rest
of the world understood what was
happening in X or Y country they changed
the thing itself so in the Brazilian
case as I said the new people that came
to the streets they came with the ideas
that they got from the media because
with mass protests you never are really
going to find out about the protests you
know you're never going to get scaling
up of the type that we did in the 2010s
without people finding out about it on
the media whether it's social media or
traditional media so people came with
different ideas that were supplied to
them by the media's representation of
the original protest and that changed
the the thing
itself so there are two sides to this
coin I think when when I asked the
interviewees at the end of the book what
did you
learn one side of this coin is that many
of them came to the conclusion that this
particular form of protest this
particular repertoire of contention is
especially vulnerable to the imposition
of meaning from the outside that just
that as there are power vacuums there
are narrative
vacuums and when a m a movement cannot
speak for itself somebody unfortunately
someone like me often shows up to speak
for us say this is what they really want
this is what's really happening so many
of them came to the conclusion that this
form is vulnerable to this type of
imposition of
narrative and the other side of this
coin is that when people like me were
handed this world historical task that I
don't think that we should have ever had
any business uh handling we were both
materially and ideologically incapable
of rising to it we failed my my class
failed repeatedly the class of foreign
correspondence at doing a good job of
reporting with Nuance on what was
actually happening on the streets in
ways that were ultimately
disastrous and then finally the third
point and this is I might uh ramble on
here because this is a newer one because
I'm trying to related to the question of
law but I think William Davies at Gold
Smith
University in London for pointing to
this as something in the book that I had
get paid a lot of attention to but he
thought
was novel and worth expand expanding
upon
but
there's in the
book it becomes clear to me that there
is something about this form of
protest and the technological forms
that also made these forms of protest
possible and most easy and and so easy
to scale up that meant that for a while
that meant that in the mass protest
decade police appear to be synonymous
with the
state police stand in appear to be the
state
until it appears very clearly that they
are
not so people that are ex my age or
older might remember a song called by
The Clash called I fought the law does
anybody know this song so the chorus is
I fought the law and the law won and
obviously in this song the law is is
cops right you can only fight cops and
in this case he tries he robs something
or and he loses right I fought the law
cops and the law won and this metonym is
not new right we think of like the law
man what's a law man that's a sheriff in
the old west or something the idea of
identifying in some cases the police
with the state is not entirely new it's
not related only to this Punk tradition
Punk by the way matters a lot in the
book because Punk reintroduces a lot of
anarchist principles in many of the
countries in the book the Brazilian
example again uh is is is at the center
of my investigation because of my own
experiences but setting aside the
importance of punk fighting the police
was something that was seen as
a necessary part of the struggle with
many of these
groups and in moments when they're being
a little bit less generous with their
own previous ideological formations they
might have even said like the Brazilians
might have even said for example
actually we never really thought we were
going to get
reforms we were just getting in the
business of fighting the cops like the
ultimate goal of this thing we were
doing the Taos was actually just the
Glorious battle with the police in the
streets we didn't we would have never
considered any other type of struggle
and kind of really deep down we knew
that that was supposed it was supposed
to end that way we were supposed to have
a protest cops were supposed to crack
down we were supposed to fight them
prefigure some kind of a society without
cops and that was
it so before the
2010s it was already true in any state
in the entire world any country you can
think of it is possible to get the
police to destroy your
body in the final instance in every
existing society that I can think of
at the last moment of the the true
violation of the law there is a man that
will beat the out of you that will
really hurt you that will destroy your
body you can be this ultimate
power is present in any society that I
can think
of now some societies might be really
defined by police brutality which is
well known by amongst the population as
something that is a huge problem
something that might be racialized
something that might be that might
happen AC on class lines other societies
might be more or less okay with the
level of policing that exists but in any
case you can get a cop to beat you up
you can get a cop to fight you if you
want
to however and this is a horrible thing
right I mean this is if you see if you
see what it looks like when the law in
the final instance actually asserts
who's in charge here it is a horrifying
image but until recently first with the
emergence of Photography in general most
most importantly with the emergence of
social media which selects images and
posts for the emotional reaction that
they can generate most people would
never see what this looks like most
people unless you were actually on the
margins of society or part of these one
of these classes that was constantly
repressed would never see what it really
looks like when the state in the final
instance destroys someone's body to
assert the Primacy of this given order
of
things in the 2010s As We Know it became
very easy to see that something that
most people are disgusted by that that
the human body uh recoils at Naturally
was presented to all of us on our phones
all the time
right so in this book even though the
narrative might be simplified to say
other
things that it was really about
democracy that it was really about
joining Europe in the majority of cases
if you look carefully enough it is
actually a police
Crackdown police brutality that allows
the protest to scale up quickly
in Ukraine small number of people care
about joining the European Union they
have legitimate concerns that are very
easy to sympathy with sympathize with
but as historical question it is the
police Crackdown that gets the the the
protest to become huge same thing in
Brazil in Egypt the most famous of the
cases of the soc calleded Arab Spring it
is initially a protest against police
brutality okay well what do I mean when
I describe this dynamic in which the
police take on the appearance of the
state until that it it becomes clear
that they are not well we'll try to
illustrate that in three cases
quickly the first is Egypt so the
protest marked for January 25th 2011 was
not about bringing down the dictator
Mubarak they had not even planned to
make this demand to let alone do it it
was a protest against police
brutality but far far more people came
than uh expected partially because of
the the example of Tunisia partially who
knows why partially because of social
media who knows lots of people came out
and on the night of January 28th they
went to battle with the police and the
police lost the police ran away the
police stripped off their uniforms and
disappeared into the night on that night
Egyptian protesters burned down 90
police stations the police basically
disappeared so in that moment the
Egyptian protesters could have taken
anything they could have done anything a
lot of them say now that they should
have occupied the centers of power they
should have taken over the television
station if not uh the legislature but at
least taking over some sort of the
actual government Ministries but instead
what they do is they do what they
already know how to do and this is this
is built into the literature of the
sociological literature of contention
that people tend to do with what is
familiar uh in moments of Crisis so what
they do is they take the square which is
what they thought they wanted to do when
the stakes were much lower and they end
up in a strange way just continuing to
protest when really the state's gone
Mubarak is badly weakened um the people
could have taken over and really but
over here waiting off off uh off screen
off stage are the military that
ultimately can beat you in a battle if
they want to and when push comes to
shove two years later after the the I'm
skipping a lot here but after the
election which puts the Muslim
Brotherhood in power there's a police
crack down sorry there's a military
Crackdown there's a military coup and
they assert the ultimate right to to
rule the country so there was a strange
moment back in 2011 when the cops just
disappeared but then there was this kind
of a protest which was directed at them
which had for years had always been in
opposition to them did not know what
step to take after that because the
police go away but yet still the society
is still the same as before the fight
with the cops so how do you actually
restructure the society in the in the
wake of a victory over the police so
that's one case where the police
actually
lose in Brazil in
2013 on the day of the Crackdown June 13
2013 which the media asked for which the
state asked for which everyone wanted
everyone asked the the Brazilian
military police to crack
down they cracked down as was asked of
them and everyone got mad at them this
is this is the way that they they
understand or they they would tell the
story everyone got mad at them so on the
day of the next protest June 17th they
just didn't they just didn't show up
they just did nothing and there was a
strange feeling that I experienced and
many other people in the book report
experiencing that we always thought that
there was going to be this final battle
with the police they just went away so
we didn't know what to do we just kept
walking back and forth for hours until
everyone got tired and went home some
people smashed up a bank or two some
people attacked uh the the political
offices of the may but like we didn't
know what to do when the police just
kind of went away and then very
strangely when this huge amount of
people are on the streets in the rest of
the
month neither the original protesters
nor the state know what to do with it
because it turns out that actually the
military police in Brazil was opposed to
the sector of the state that actually
raised
the bus fair and so you have this fight
happening between the protesters and the
police where the original organizers and
the state are off screen or off stage
again trying to figure out how this is
supposed to help with the transportation
thing and then in in Hong Kong and this
is as I said a second ago there were
there's a spectrum along which every
there are are people will tell you that
the cops are really bad or the cops are
not that bad Brazil Egypt United States
are places where a lot of people will
tell you the cops really bad in Hong
Kong if were to ask a lot of people in
2013 they would not pro on that Spectrum
globally accepting that police brutality
is is is a fundamental part of any
society it would have been on this the
the end of the spectrum where people did
not have huge problems with with the
police but again this Global repertoire
of contention which is
reproduced and allows for this positive
feedback between the media that knows
about things they've already covered
before and will give positive attention
to certain types of actions Police
become the center again of the Hong Kong
protest we do not know exactly what
Beijing which was very far away from
Hong Kong and is responsible for a much
larger territory than just Hong Kong
itself actually decided to do but one
speculation is they just let the Hong
kongers have the
city they just let Hong kongers
disrupt um the order of things in this
one city that's far away and just waited
for them to get tired and then waited
for everything to calm down and then
crack down on the
organizers it seemed that some uh uh
protesters in Hong
Kong well let's say let's put it this
way there were not any martys as far as
we know but they said that they were
anyways so there was rumors spread like
oh um the police have killed this person
and killed that person but as far as we
know it seems like the Beijing police
sorry it seems like the Hong Kong police
were instructed to just not kill anybody
because eventually they're going to run
out of steam eventually they can sort of
take over the territory that we
nominally control for a while but this
is not going to be sustainable in the
long long term and
eventually authorities back in the
capital of the PRC can crack down on
whoever they want because in the
end the police are just some guys that
we have enforcing the order and even if
you can beat them or take over the
territory that they're supposed to be in
control of we ultimately have the real
power so it seemed that what happened in
this decade often if the the chorus of
that song was I fought the law and the
law one is something more like I fought
the law and I won and then nothing
happened or I fought the law and I
won and then it turned out that I didn't
really fight the law I was fighting some
guys that were hired by the state to
enforce a particular set of rules that
are not synonymous with the state itself
and again this is something that like
everything else emerges and becomes
possible as a result of the particular
material and ideological conditions of
the
2010s um you cannot change those
conditions just because you would like
to have a different one so there's
there's ways that opportunities that
open up as a result of this Dynamic um
and also I think limitations that emerge
with a hindsight with it with the
benefit of a hindsight that someone like
I has because I shut up here uh 10 years
later to ask everyone what they think so
that's my attempt to relate the book to
law and I thank you for for your
attention
thank you so much for that um so I think
you touched on this a little in what you
said but in the book you talk a lot
about the Brazilian social movement the
MPL which organized the uh strikes
around the transit hikes and initially
were very successful in sort of seeing a
reversal of that but you also speak to
the disorganization post those initial
sort of protests and how right-wing
groups filled the Gap once you know sort
of that dissipated and the initial
victory was had and how this led in part
to the impeachment of president Dilma
Rusev in
2016 so I guess looking at MPL you noted
in the book that they were sort of a
party um and didn't endorse candidates
and didn't work particularly closely
with any political candidate do you
think that there are lessons from MPL uh
in how movement should sort of engage in
electoral political work or is it like a
lack of commitment in general to
electoralism in itself as an issue or is
it more like a lack of clear demands for
uh politicians so to see yeah yeah the
interaction between yeah Street
movements and and
electoralism um I guess there's two
things I could say there uh both relate
to the Brazilian
context um no one is more General and
one is more Brazilian the first is that
I would say that you can one of the
points as I said in the introduction one
of the points I think of this book is
that there's no one weird trick um for
improving Society things might be very
very different based on where you are in
Hong Kong or Egypt that you like
electoral option just wasn't there right
in Brazil the Electoral option was there
indeed there was a popular elected
president but this particular group saw
it is only that their their tactic which
they really
privileged regardless of conditions was
the streets prefigurative
action so
my response to a question about the
importance of electoralism would be the
same as my response to the to the
question of the importance of hierarchy
the question of any organizational form
you can come up with any tactic that you
can come up
with which would be
to use it for you but don't be consumed
by it so just like hierarchy is
something that can be very dangerous
that you can get swallowed up by there
hierarchy can create a permanent
bureaucracy that exists only to
perpetuate itself uh you can get caught
fetishizing any tactic as the only the
beond and in the end all rather than
using it for you and realizing when it
is appropriate to a particular um
more or less appropriate but in the
Brazilian
case it's useful to contrast the MPL now
with other social movements in Brazil
and I don't think that they would mind
this comparison now uh another threel
acronym in Brazil the MST the ment s the
landless workers
movement is
also very radical also uses some kind of
direct action they
occupy uh unus farms and push for land
reform they set up their own Farms they
refused to be co-opted fully
into support of even the parties that
they most want to
win but they do believe that it is
possible and useful to extract things
from the state and then go back to the
streets so sometimes I've been told that
North American radicals Cod to Brazil
and they're quite shocked because they
thought oh well the MST is radical that
must mean that they refuse the state at
all times or actually what they do is
they take direct action and they use it
to extract something from the state but
then in that process of extraction they
don't become the state they just pull it
they just pull it out and use it to go
over here and build back better so they
they sometimes support candidates when
they think it's important but they they
don't they're not consumed by it so
that's one that's that's the answer in
the Brazilian
context that's super helpful um you also
talked about the media a lot in your
talk now and in the book and I think you
articulate a very important theory on
how the media and I think specifically
the West Wern media plays in co-opting
transnational Uprising you note in the
book that foreign powers will use
legitimate or apparently legitimate
uprisings as an excuse to push their own
agendas and cover coverage of uprisings
is often framed in a way that fits those
agendas so allows sort of a media type
imperialism to be projected on moments
that maybe are very different in reality
um I think given your experience as a
journalist we'd be interested to know in
uh sort of what are the positive ways
that you've seen media interact with
that I think you also mentioned in the
book that you know if the whole media
industry was to go away tomorrow that
would one probably not be feasible and
two would leave a vacuum that would have
to be filled by someone I think it's
going away anyways and what we're
getting is olig arks filling the vacuum
yeah yeah so interested to know what you
think are the positive ways that
journalists have kind of covered this
work and have been Mindful and sensitive
to the movements that are happening in
their particular like societal and
cultural context yeah thanks for that
and thanks for also drawing attention to
the the the dynamic of foreign powers
using legitimate or apparently
legitimate uprisings for their own
purposes because that matters a lot in
the book and I didn't talk about it that
quickly um in some cases what happens is
just the biggest guy in the neighborhood
or the biggest guy in the world system
the United States sees a set of
legitimate demands being elaborated in
some part of the world and uses it for
their own purposes so you know in the
case of the so-call Arab Spring one
really easy way to understand how it
ends is that in Bahrain a a movement
with clear majority support is just
simply crushed by Saudi Arabia and the
rest of the GCC they drive over the
bridge into that Island onto that island
nation and crack down with support of
the Obama Administration after that it
becomes clear like this is not going
this is not going to work out or in
Libya the NATO uses the legitimate
complaints about the Gaddafi government
as an excuse for a regime change
operation which destroys the country
Russia of course in Ukraine responds
quite quickly pushing its own interests
um the and the European Union are
involved from the beginning but you know
this Dynamic is is crucial so on the
question of media
representation again there's two sides
to this coin one is the sides one is the
side of the people that constitute most
of the interviewees the the people on
the streets
um the conclusion that a lot of them
come to is that you must anticipate this
as the terrain of as a Terrain of
struggle like there will be a fight over
the meaning of the streets and if you
are truly trying to change Society
radically probably the dominant media in
the final analysis is going to end up
disagreeing with you at some point so
the the bigger microphone you can bring
yourself the harder it's going to be to
lie about you the more clear you are
about what you can are are asking for or
not asking for the better you're going
to be in the struggle but the struggle
is going to be there you can't will your
way out of it just because um you've
done things right in the street and then
on my side the answer is like stupidly
obvious but yet really hard to uh really
hard to attain for some reason we need
to be honest and and pay attention to
detail so often what the only thing that
people like me did in the 2010s rather
than actually asking with the Dynamics
were on the streets what the
possibilities for Success were what
success would look like like if it were
to take place often the only question
that was asked is is this movement
against a good guy or a bad guy is this
movement taking place in a way that's
going to hurt an ally of the United
States or help an Aly of the United
States and often and this is something
that we internalized I think just like
protesters say that they internalized
people like me reached for quick and
easy narratives that would do well on
social media or do well with audiences
or do well with our editors because we
are keenly aware uh that our jobs are
disappearing and that some things might
do quite well when it comes to retweets
and faves whereas a more nuanced
analysis if there are even people in
place that speak the languages well
enough and know the actors well enough
to try to produce one may not be as
advantageous in the marketplace uh well
what's left of the marketplace in the uh
uh uh in my dying industry so it's it's
it's easy but it's like a lot of the
conclusions in this book it's
unfortunately easier said than
done absolutely so I'm going to do one
more question and then we'll turn into
student
questions um I think that we would be
remiss not to mention the relevancy of
the book to the current political
climate uh we've seen an explosion of
protest across the globe against the
largely unimpeded killing of more than
30,000 Palestinians in Gaza uh the
current Pro protest uh related to The
Siege and occupation of Palestine cannot
be neatly squared with the examples you
review in with in if we burn I think
many many many factors are different
including the clarity of the demands the
receptivity of the state the
transnational nature versus domestic
nature of certain conflicts among other
things um so it's very different but
despite this what do you think that this
particular moment in history has to
learn from accounts and if we burn and
yeah are any lessons translatable yeah
there's three I think there 's a few
ways that they can be connected
indirectly but all I think
importantly first is that one of the
conclusions I come to about protest in
the book that I didn't mention is that
protests are fundamentally
communicative so you're always sending a
message to someone um in this the case
of the book uh they got so big that it
became more about more than just
communication but they're always
fundamentally communicative so so far I
think that the wave of very significant
Pro Palestine protests still fits into
an older template that I remember from
2003 when I I protested the war in Iraq
it sends a message to leaders who get
the message then ignore
it it is made very clear to certain
actors that quite a lot of people are
against x or y action they say oh good
to know I'm G to do it anyways um I
think in the case of someone like
Benjamin yahu you could make it very
clear to him that 98% of the world's
population was against what he's doing
right now and he would still do it it's
not and this is something else that
comes up in the book that raising
awareness or proving your right works on
some people but it's often not enough
you actually either have to take power
away from the people doing the thing you
want them to stop or make it in their
best interest so that they do stop so I
think that so far it's more reminiscent
of 2003 than
2011 but it's very related to
2011 because I said uh in Egypt the
people that protested in January 25th
they uh were initially aimed at police
brutality but what I didn't say is that
those people
actually that actually made the uprising
in Cairo happen came together through a
decade of organizing in support of
Palestinians or in opposition to US
foreign policy in the
region so they experienced this
horrifying moment where they had always
believed that a movement for democracy
in Egypt would necessarily challenge the
partners of the United States in the
region Israel and Saudi Arabia that was
obvious to them I think it's 95% of
Egyptians maybe it's 85 it's a lot of
Egyptians oppose any kind of relations
with Israel they they're totally opposed
to diplomatic relations with the current
Israeli government so it was always
obvious to the organizers that came
together over a decade of
organizing that there was theirs was a
movement that would P
challenge the us partners in the region
so they were very shocked and horrified
to find as I I gestured at this Dynamic
earlier in the talk of those that cannot
speak for themselves are spoken for they
were often horrified to find that people
like me or Anderson Cooper showed up and
said this is a pro-western movement this
is a this is a group of people that are
trying to join America like they want to
be like in the minor leagues of America
whereas they thought that they were
really in opposition to US foreign
policy in the region and very much the
way that the so-called Arab Spring ends
has a lot to do with this fundamental
question what happens if you have
democracy in a region where the vast
majority of the population in all the
countries is adamantly opposed to the
way that Israel is conducting itself
right now this is one of the there are
many many other reasons but this I think
is one of the the best reasons for
explaining why uh democracy in the
Middle East has not materialized is
because it is impossible for it to
materialize and for the current Nexus of
us Israeli Saudi power to continue um as
it is currently constituted and this
this you know and and if you look at why
you know Obama talks about this why it
isn't didn't in the final analysis um
the CC C in 2013 is
allowed gets the support ultimately
maybe support in advance we we'll find
out later uh of Washington this question
um is at the center of it this
contradiction between what almost
everybody in the Arab world
wants and what is needed for the
geopolitical order to stay the same that
as it is and then
finally um there's the now quite you
know elephant in the room
that the North African Uprising started
with the self-
imulation um and one commonality I see
between Muhammad
bazizi and what is happening now the
conversations about Aaron
bushnel are that when Muhammad bazizi
passed away in City boo and I went back
back and I spoke to his family and
people that were there at the time and
uh people in his his hometown everyone
began to argue about what it meant and
what to do next just like everybody
started arguing here they argued in the
Town Square and and and on some people
on Facebook but we're arguing on social
media but it was not actually the self-
imulation that caused the beginnings of
the protest because other people had had
had taken that action in Tunisia at the
time it was the family members and
friends around him that decided to that
argued about it and came to a certain
conclusion and decided to take a
particular action in the wake of it so I
think actually his his action is
probably more clear it's more it's more
politically legible what what he was
trying to accomplish than Muhammad bu uh
in the first case but that is another
quite obvious parallel that I think
everyone is still sort of you know I I
don't know what I think about it but um
not knowing what I think about it and
this this conversation about what it
means is something that was that took
place back then as
well thank you so much would love to
turn it to student questions for the
last 15 20 minutes Gustavo we have a mic
here if you want to take
a
um thanks so much for coming uh to Ys
today uh I was very happy to read your
book it was so interesting um it might
be interesting to you so a lot of your
analysis actually dovetails quite
precisely with um a lot made by uh
Scholars who are much closer to like the
typical foreign policy establishment so
uh Sarah Chase is an anti-corruption
scholar say that again um the name Sarah
Chas is an anti-corruption scholar who
was has been in like you think thanks
for well and she wrote a report about a
lot of the same stuff called fighting
the Hydra and it arrives at a very
similar conclusion to you which is what
she calls the conceit of
leaderless uh sort of allows um exactly
what you described this this opportunity
for like right-wing sort of like um I
don't know the adjective but like
Merchants to sort of come in and hijack
what's going on yeah yeah mercenaries
like a
uh movement entrepreneur or something
like this precisely yeah so so um what I
really liked about your book is that you
come at it from a much more ground level
perspective and I think that provides a
really valuable contribution to the sort
of broader literature on this kind of
social change um but she emphasizes the
role of anti-corruption motivation and
then also concludes by um like trying to
point out that there is a role to play
for uh like Elites frankly to sort of
um or the necessity of political organiz
ization of some kind often in the form
of Elites to prevent these sort of
right-wing mercenaries from coming in
and taking over so I'm curious if you
could just speak a little bit more about
like do you see like you know this might
have a historical parallel with like
leninist vanguardism or something like
that although that's a little a little
crazy for this this discussion right now
um and then another thing that I'd like
to ask you about is uh what role if any
for uh pressure from other governments
um uh point that Sarah Chas makes is
that um many protest move uh Mobil much
mobilization in Guatemala actually asked
the United States to support the
anti-corruption office there the cig the
UN an there um and I'm thinking also
recently of um like there's been some
reporting although I'm sure you're quite
skeptical of it that the Biden foreign
policy establishment put a lot of
pressure on the Brazilian military to
allow the Lula transition no I'm not
skeptical yeah yeah that yeah I'd just
be curious to hear you speak about those
you want to do one at a time or you want
to go collect what's your what were you
going to do before I stopped you from
doing the normal
thing okay so yeah thank you so much I
thank you for that I'm gratified also
always to hear that there is sort of
scholarly Works doing the same thing I I
care a lot about that um and there are a
lot of thinkers that I draw upon that
kind of in different ways and in
different parts of the world come end up
in similar places most of mine tend to
be from the countries involved so
someone
something similar to what you just
outlined was you know that's a journey
that happened that was undertaken by
hrio Nunes in Brazil and Gian toal who's
from turkey and like from very different
perspectives they come around to the
same kind of conclusion
that this
leaderless well this is an older this is
an older debate really but I think that
fundamentally really what you the the
the the real historical reality whether
we like it or not is that there's always
leaders the question is whether or not
they're selected or imposed um there is
always Elites the question is whether or
not there is a democratic mechanism for
them putting them in place or they are
people that just kind of snatch up the
power that is made available the the
entrepreneurs or mercenaries and so on
um and that is a conversation that goes
back to the middle of the 20th century
but I think a lot of it has been lost
with the the death of the organizations
that would have seemed natural in the
20th century is this this this mechanism
for the transmission of lessons you know
that you come into a movement in all
their generation say well this is make
sure to avoid this or or even at a more
basic level like cops love this street
as a way to attack you know be be ready
for it but we're so individualized and
our memory is so short these days that
these lessons don't get passed
down anti-corruption matters a lot in
the Brazilian case and in many other
cases and I think that's because there's
a real overlap a real elective Affinity
with with the
anti-politics that arises often uh in
these Mass protest movements when there
are so many people with so many
different demands and when they end up
sort of reproducing common sense in a
given Society often that is a kind of
like you know the kind of thing that is
like you know like Thanksgiving Uncle
type political analysis like ah they're
all the same throw throw them all out
well like actually that's been tried
over and over in the last 20 years and
like that doesn't work it doesn't make
things better to put in an actor or a
reality TV star or you know I'm from
California Arnold CH we were one of the
first ones to try this you know we lik
to Arnold CH shener as Governor uh which
kind of is the reason that the UC system
is much worse than when I attended um
and in the cas you know why why does
anti-corruption fit in with with
anti-politics because being
anti-corruption is topological
everyone's anti-corruption
corruption is a bad thing it's written
into the word like the anti-corruption
Crusader that ends up being Justice
minister in Brazil to prove like how
like absurd these toies get when he's
Justice minister in the bolsonaro
government he puts forward a law which
is called the anti-me
law all laws are anti-me right
everyone's against
corruption
so this it makes sense why this would
bubble to the top it's something that
everyone can agree on because it's
literally nothing but then in reality
there's always a concrete form that an
anti-corruption Crusade is waged there's
always a concrete form that
anti-corruption politics takes there's
always a a particular guy that gets
takes power as a result of an
anti-politics uh uh uh uh uh uh mood in
the country it might be Arnold schinger
might be zinski might be mrcon might be
Donald Trump um and so obviously
anti-politics just like leaderless the
closer you get to it it's not real uh
there's always a real type there's
always a real anti-corruption and the
anticorruption that Brazil got was a a
far-right anti-corruption crusade which
broke a lot of laws while working
secretly with the United States
government so maybe let's take both the
questions at the same time since we're
coming towards the end of time so if you
want to and then I think I saw a hand in
the back as
well
thank oh thank
you

frame
social the could
that's no that's a great question which
I think is a set of questions which are
all really um worth answering
one as a procedural matter I
chose to answer an impossible question
which is what is really successful for a
social movement um because you can never
really determine what it was as
answering for asking for but what I
tried to use was the movements like it's
you know an imminent critique I tried as
much as possible this is always
difficult especially with this type of
protest to use the actual demands
elaborated by people at the beginning of
the movement and so that's what I try to
do even though it's very impossible to
complicate that even further I will say
that even the most successful
Revolutions uprisings of all time did
not go the way that they were expected
from the beginning some people might
come to the conclusion that a given
Revolution was a fantastic success and
it's almost always very different than
what was expected or what was hoped for
so that leads me to the very good point
you make which I think is the third part
of the question is that can an apparent
failure now turn out to be actually part
of a longer success in the future and my
answer there is I really hope so so many
of the people in this book would not
have sat down with me if they did not
believe that that were possible many of
the people that sat down with me for
this book did so because they H that in
2030 or 20
240 they will look back on 2011 or 2019
or whatever it was that there were their
particular experience was and be able to
see that then as the beginning of a
bigger victory that was not expected or
or seemed out of sight in 2022 when we
had our interviews for 2021 Etc but they
believed that for that to be possible uh
a very serious Reckoning had to be uh
undertaken with what had happened what
had gone wrong what could be done better
next time um and absolutely in the case
of Hong Kong like
the even in the most optimistic analysis
that movement was had the lowest chance
of a clean success the odds were really
really stacked against I think um the
Hong Kong protesters so that's another
area where a more complicated the more
complicated analysis of what
success constitutes is is
welcome I think we have time for one
more
yeah I want to ask you about
the social movements and the potential
of success of the social movements so
you mentioned that social movements are
always resisting capture right they are
always resisting someone saying that
they represent the social movement but
in the account you mention as successful
that captur kind
of because you need someone
to propose a viable institutional
alternative for something to be
successful
right so I'm wondering
whe
atree
some degree of determining how
successful those eles
are
right we should think a little bit more
on how these Elites should be preparing
themselves to be
use and capture them right in a way way
a way that actually you know provides
tools right and so I think a different
way of putting what you've just said at
the end of your question ironically has
to do with what he gestured at earlier
the the old the old theory of the
leninist Vanguard party because back
then even that those theorists would
have said that actually the elites the
Vanguard should be in constant contact
with the masses and actually should be
the reason they're Vanguard is because
people are following them there's
actually they're leading because people
are behind them and they're all moving
as one but some people are in the front
some people are behind and then in other
theories it is actually the protest
itself the people that put together the
the the street movements that are
supposed to play some actual concrete
role they're either supposed to become
the new Society or play a real role in
creating that new
Society in the 2010s the reason I think
that there's only limited successes is
that neither thing happens in every case
there is more co-opting there is Co-op
so even The Limited successes are
co-optation that is more or less
accepted by some people but is never the
actual
streets effecting the final outcome so
in the case of of borch which you
mentioned is really classic example when
the SI social is happening in late 2019
when there is real chaos in the center
of Santiago when labor action shuts down
the export of crucial minerals um the
minerals that are crucial for the
reproduction of of the Chilean economy
and the political Elites behind closed
doors come up with an a piece Accord the
people in the streets say this is a top
down imposition of meaning on
us this is an somehow an
authoritarian imposition of
narrative that we did not that did not
arise from the streets and I think that
is right they are right that it is
somehow imposed from the outside but I
think that with this particular form at
least in every case that I analyzed in
the 2010s that will always happen now in
other hisorical in other historical
cases if you think back to the the
movements that really kind of cemented
Civil Disobedience direct action and
protest as part of the Contemporary
repertoire the very inspiring civil
rights movements organizations like core
and SNCC Snick they would have really
been set up to play some role in the
final mediation in the final
um the final resolution just like Martin
Luther King would have been able to say
this is what we're asking for this is
not what we're asking for and would have
been in constant negotiation with um
people in the state
um because neither that sort of Elites
in contact with the people or the more
anti-authoritarian left Theory where the
the the streets themselves will generate
the final outcome because neither of
those things actually happened you got
somehow or another some kind of an
co-optation or hijacking in every single
case some coopts were more or less
acceptable to the original protesters
even though they felt it was imposed
from outside and some cooption were
worse than
nothing awesome well thank you so much
for being here
today thank you everybody for
coming


## Keywords:
