---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AoTN8W6xOc8
---

# Video
In Conversation: Vincent Bevins and Vijay Prashad
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AoTN8W6xOc8)

## Transcript:
so I'm just going to situate our
conversation today and then I'll
introduce our speakers we'll have a
conversation and then we'll have plenty
of time for discussion and a robust
question-and-answer period so today is
May 29th 2020 protests continue in
Minneapolis Minnesota following the
police killing of George Floyd with
protest against police violence
spreading across the country in
Louisville Kentucky
Los Angeles California Albuquerque New
Mexico and New York City just last night
the president threatened military action
against protesters saying that quote
when the looting starts the shooting
starts end quote so how do we get here
how did the u.s. develop the largest
cultural regime the most extensive
surveillance program and the most
violent police force in the world
how could the president threatened to
deploy military force to protect
property regimes over human life such
violence has of course been present
since the country's bloody inception
through Indian Wars and through the
consolidation of capitalism the rise of
us back nationalist and violent
reactionary nationalist forces is not
accidental to the survival of capitalism
its foundational the apparatus of state
violence we are seeing today was formed
through a broader project of US
imperialism and of militarism we can't
understand the persistence of militarism
and violent repression within the US
without an understanding of US
imperialism abroad earlier this month
cow brands of Johns Hopkins and American
Enterprise Institute publisher priest
and Bloomberg suggesting that the new
cold war with China quote may put the
u.s. back in the coup business unquote
prompted by the failed attempt to
overthrow the government of Nicolas
Maduro in Venezuela
Rand's argues that the US should return
to covert action in foreign policy quote
just as the u.s. sought to topple
unfriendly regimes in the Cold War he
declares it may have to look to such
methods again close quote
a brand's comments should be cause for
concern according to Vincent Bevins
author of the new book The Jakarta
method Washington's anti-communist
crusade and the mass murder program that
shaped our world which is out
public affairs and pajetta Prashad
author of the forthcoming book
Washington Bullets I have a copy here
out from left word books and Ally and
these two new books document the
pervasive and persistent violence that
cia-backed coos assassinations murders
torture disappearance mass extermination
and mass imprisonment that have been
used to crush third world Liberation and
communist movements across global South
during the Cold War this long history
reveals anti-communism to be a central
force in the maintenance of class power
in the face of persistent resistance
from political and social movements as
the Bevans argues the cia-backed coos in
brazil 1964 indonesia 1965 the massacre
unleash their marked critical turning
points in the consolidation of a system
of us-led capitalist globalization
democratic and socialist forces were
violently repressed in a present moment
of us-backed cruise in bolivia and
efforts to spark a low intensity war in
venezuela u.s. support for the far-right
in Brazil India the Philippines Columbia
and bulla beyond OJ Prasad's incites the
US imperial power is exercised not only
through conventional warfare but perhaps
most insidiously
the economic barriers to trade and
political training and support for quote
local police and military forces
hybrid Wars it's critical he provides
insights into the multiple facets of
hybrid war and the sanction regimes of
our time US sanctions and hybrid war led
to the premature death of tens of
thousands of civilians the u.s. no
longer has to resort to solely covert
military actions and mass murder
programs although is how brands comments
remind us that option is still on the
table
hybrid Wars though pursue to demonstrate
the cost for refusing to bow to the
confines of capitalism to understand the
roots of this project we'll explore how
the defeat of anti colonial and
socialist movements in the twentieth
century created the political foundation
upon which capitalism
flourishes in the 21st so fortunately we
have these two very important analysts
here with us today to explain how
anti-communism has shaped our world I'll
introduce them in the order that they
will speak today excuse me
hmm Vincent Bevins is an award-winning
journalist and correspondent he covered
Southeast Asia for the Washington Post
reporting from across the entire region
and paying a special attention to the
legacy of the 1965 massacre in Indonesia
he previously served as the burrell
brazil correspondent for the los angeles
times also covering nearby parts of
south america and before that he worked
for the Financial Times in London he's
the author of The Jakarta Method
published by public affairs the Jay
Prashad is historian journalist the
director of tri continental Institute
for Social Research
he's also the chief editor of left work
books he's the chief correspondent for
globe's Charter and a calmness for
frontline in India he's the author of 30
books including the darker nations a
people's history of the third world the
poor nations a possible history of the
global south and now Washington Bullets
which will be published by leftward in
July great title Vijay I love the
clashed first
Vincent Bevins will discuss the Jakarta
method then the Jay will discuss
Washington Bullets then we'll have a
discussion so without further ado
Vincent Evans
for for having me and for that
introduction yes you said I moved to
from Brazil to Southeast Asia a few
years ago to cover the entire region for
the Washington Post and I didn't go
there with the intention of staying
paying special attention to the legacy
of the 1965 massacre I just found that
there was no other way to do the job it
was behind everything that I was
reporting on it was under the surface no
matter where I looked and it was not
only a massive and horrible in-concert
consequential violent event in that
country's history it is it was an
entirely unresolved and underappreciated
one in the West and I realized not only
that people really not understand what
had happened outside of amnesia even in
Indonesia it's not legal to tell the
truth about what did happen to this day
I realized that there were connections
with other parts of the world that I
understood and where I spoke the
languages and I and I wanted to come at
this event again from a very global
perspective and try to make the case
that it's very that it needs to be
recognized and that it was one of the
most important turning events in the
20th century so essentially the book
tells the story of the US assisted
slaughter of approximately 1 million
innocent people in Indonesia in 1955 and
this is one of the most important
victories if not the most important
victory for the project that was
ultimately successful in the 20th
century the construction of a us-led
capitalist order and this this project
at the time and this victory at the time
the the case of 1965 in Indonesia
although we've forgotten about it almost
entirely in the english-speaking
countries today was very important at
the time and everybody was paying a lot
of attention to what happened and the
victory was so obvious to allies of the
United States other anti-communist
forces other potential allies in this
project of the construction of a us-led
global order that they took lessons from
it they began to create copycat programs
or to invoke the legacy of quote-unquote
Jakarta as something that they might do
or some
they might do to you if you were on the
wrong side of history according to them
so in the early seventies in both Brazil
and Chile you saw the deployment of the
word Jakarta signify the intentional
mass murder of leftists under the
government of Salvador Allende
supporters of that government were
socialists and employees in IMD's
government began to receive postcards in
the mail saying Jakarta is coming all
across the streets of Santiago graffiti
popped up on the wall saying Jakarta is
coming or simply just Jakarta and what
that meant was very clear to anyone
paying attention to global politics at
the time it meant we're going to kill
you and in 1973 after the cia-backed
coup that overthrew IM day in installed
Pinochet Jakarta did come and for those
potential allies and allies of the
United States and in the construction of
this new global order that might have
thought that they could get away with
doing something like what Indonesia had
done that thought it could be a success
they were quite tragically right and
looking at these events from a very
global perspective over the entire
period of the Cold War in the years
afterwards I found that at least 20
countries that were allied with the
United States carried out intentional
mass murder of civilians either because
they were leftist or because they were
accused of being leftist and I am NOT
trying to be claimed that this was going
to go the reason the the West won the
Cold War but it was such a fundamental
part of the way that the Cold War was
fought by Washington and its allies that
it reshaped society almost everywhere
around the globe and this is this is the
real
I think lesson that emerges from the
story that I tell through interviews
with over a hundred people that I
collected in 12 countries is that this
the legacy of this intentional violence
against civilians it's so important that
it needs to be recognized that it needs
to be reinserted into the history of the
20th century and it's absolutely
essential for us to understand if we're
going to make decisions as to how we're
going to live in the 21st century
thanks very much I look forward to
following up on some of the things that
you've put on the table Vijay did you
want to talk for a moment
yes first I wanted to say that I'm very
happy to be here I'm grateful to be here
and Vincent I think this is a super book
the Jakarta method I think it's very
important it's a very important book you
know I've of course known about this
massacre for very much the length of my
life because what you mentioned just now
is something that was not just chilling
warning to the peoples of South America
but to all communist forces around the
world in left forces and in India as
well the suggestion that something like
this might occur was not far away in
1957 the first communist government
democratically elected in the state of
Kerala comes to power and in 1959 it's
forcibly removed this occurs in 59 which
is five years before what happens in in
Brazil and six years before what happens
in Jakarta in Indonesia
this was also a CIA operation and it was
where the CIA very deftly utilized
social divides in Kerala that should not
be used for politics you know divides
between Christians and others and so on
the the kind of attitude towards
politics that you see in Brazil where
Christianity is mobilized against the
Communists and the Communists are for
you know haters of tradition and so on
just as you see in Brazil and so I think
that what you've written is the story of
most of our countries where the Central
Intelligence Agency in alliance with the
worst kind of oligarchies the most
repulsive political forces used force
use violence to shape the world in their
image and at the end of the day you get
false Inara you get not in the movie
you get repellent characters like this
because they are the direct product of
this history they are not accident
people asked how did we get here we got
here because you allow and prosecuted
the genocide or politicize against the
left and I think that's a very
significant thing as far as I'm
concerned um I decided to write
Washington Bullets after at least three
coos bothered me greatly in our recent
time the first crew of course most
recently in Bolivia and I was actually
quite astounded to find sensitive decent
people offering justifications for the
violent overthrow of the government of
Evo Morales and that to me was
unbelievable it was not easily to
understand that sensible people with an
understanding of the history of US
imperialism would come out and say but
Morales did this Morales did that as if
doing this or there was justification
for the military coming and telling an
elected leader it's time for you to go
but the US Embassy to have a role behind
that and for a minor political force to
take power with the military's backing
you know it was astounding to see people
behave as if this was a legitimate
action that was just in 2019 ten years
before that there was a similar coup in
Honduras against the government of
Xillia ridiculous operation you know
back not by the right-wing in the United
States but by Hillary Clinton and Barack
Obama it was a coup against the people
of Honduras and see what happened right
after the left people fled for their
lives I mean they were afraid of the
Jakarta method you know in Honduras not
in 1973 not in 1978 but in 2009 and then
you had Japan where the people of Japan
democratically elected a government led
by Hariyama with the mandate of removing
the US base at Okinawa that was the
mandate of autonomous government to
remove the base in Okinawa Hillary
Clinton arrives in Japan Barack Obama's
team tells the Japanese that we will not
honor you at all in there will be no
state banquet were not interested they
punished the Japanese put pressure on
the Japanese political class and
Hatoyama is removed from office now
nobody call that a coup d'etat they said
you know it's internal politics Japan
it's so confusing it's not confusing the
Japanese people elected a government
with a mandate to remove a US base in
Okinawa
and instead of allowing that Democratic
mandate to be put forward the United
States government meddled in Japanese
politics then remove that we honor you
know I found it remarkable that in the
United States this such innocent
innocent feeling of meddling in the u.s.
election Russia meddling innocent the
United States for over 200 years has not
meddled in other people's politics has
shaped them you know what happened in
Indonesia in 65 you know as Vincent
argues very well in the book that was
not meddling in Indonesian politics you
know by bringing general military
officers to train in Kansas and
god-awful places where they were trained
in counterinsurgency what is called
counterinsurgency but is really they
were trained in dictatorship they
trained in dictatorship in these
military bases in the u.s. that's not
meddling in Indonesian politics that's
shaping the political culture of
Indonesia which lasts basically till
today so you know this innocent thing oh
my god they did this so what I wanted to
do given that these crews happen now
Japan Honduras Haiti before that you
know the removal of Maya varisty cell
twice removed from office this is now
this is not in the fifties and sixties
but I decided at the heart of my book
which is a manual of regime change
should go back to Guatemala because in
my opinion and by the way Nana travela
this is for you
in my opinion Guatemala sex the manual
for what comes for decades you know it
says some manual it's a cliche you know
what they do and I'll lay out nine
points of that in Guatemala from
basically deleted maizing the government
you know assassination of key P and in
the middle of that you know you have the
typical things building up strength with
the most bilious sections of the
military encouraging popular unrest
again by in this case not the CIA
operating
own but by what at least in the case of
british guiana was quite chillingly cold
not the afl-cio that's the american
trade union federation but what they
call it the afl-cia
because the afl-cio operated with the
CIA to build up right-wing unions and do
strikes to paralyze the government this
is a cliche everything you see in
guatemala in 1953
you know when Che Guevara was sitting
there and thinking man we have to do
this revolution business a different way
you can't allow ourselves to be
outflanked like in the way you know our
benz was out flying and che is sitting
right then watching this and think what
is going on
what happens in Guatemala in 54 is
essentially what continues to the
present day it's a cliche and that's
what I wanted to bring up and I want to
tell our friends who look at Bolivia and
2019 and say well you know what Alice
deserved it I want them to recognize
that in American coos from the fifties
onward people like them have always when
confronted with the coup justified it
people like them are always justified it
and I don't mean liberals I mean people
on the so-called metropolitan Left have
always tended to justify the coup at
that time only later when the evidence
finally trickles out they say as if they
always said it that the coup was a bad
thing but that's always with hindsight a
huge amount of hindsight
so the reason Vincent's book is so
important the reason I wrote my book was
to tell people it's no longer acceptable
for you in the middle of a coup to
essentially provide soft ideological
cover for it and then later 20 years
later rehabilitate your reputation by
saying we always thought it was a bad
idea sorry that's not allowed anymore
when the United States now and this is
the last thing I'll say Jordan when the
United States now goes after the
government of Venezuela I think it's
incumbent upon people to understand that
what the US is doing to Venezuela is
exactly what the US did to Chile in 73
actually not 73 sorry what they did to
Chile from 1970 to 1973
that was a long suffocation of that
country you know yesterday when I was
following what's happening in
Minneapolis I saw a picture of a Malcolm
X code which are very much like Malcolm
X says I don't have a chip we don't have
a chip on her shoulder we have your foot
on our neck
that doesn't just apply to people who
are you know suffocated by the police in
Minneapolis that applies to countries
when his whele currently doesn't have a
chip on its shoulder it has the Yankee
boot on its neck and at this point in
the middle of history if you are unable
to look at the structure of imperialism
if you are unable to make a moral choice
now basically I feel you lost the plot
and we will not allow you to
rehabilitate yourself 25 years from now
when you finally see the terrible things
Pompeo is writing in secret when those
are leaked or revealed after a certain
period Thanks thanks a lot
Vijay and Vincent you put a lot on the
table and both your books I think really
should compel us to think about the
straight lines that you trace between
you know the early Cold War and the
present you know just a side note that I
want to follow up with a question for
Vincent but you talk about
counterinsurgency training it worth
Leavenworth in Kansas and I think it
should be noted one continuity is that
the counterinsurgency Field Manual
published by the University of Chicago
Press and 2720 2007-2008 was born of
meetings at Fort Leavenworth so there's
a lot of institutional history to trace
as well so I wanted to follow up Vincent
you know kind of where you ended and
that is the legacy of these mass murder
programs in the global south I mean one
of the things that you know your book so
brilliantly is to put the events of 1965
in this global context and to trace it
out these extermination programs as it
started you mentioned Chile and Brazil
but really around the world in the
appendix you've got maps that document
this operation Phoenix being one and in
Vietnam one of the most well known and
so I wonder if you could kind of draw
out a little bit more the legacy of
these programs meaning when you go to
Indonesia two people talk about this
openly what's the kind of political
culture and climate around the events of
19
85 so that's one part in the second part
is to draw it a little bit more the
global portrait that you paint well the
short answer to the question when
Indonesia is that no you you can't talk
about this I mean there is a slow
rebirth of interest especially among
younger Indonesian to try to talk about
this but officially technically it's
illegal to defend communism or Marxism
Leninism in any way this is by the way
something that Olson ro sung in here in
Brazil said that he wants to copy he
explicitly said that Indonesia could be
an example of a country that abolished
communism and made it illegal so that so
he this could be an example for Brazil
and of course you know that would mean
imprisoning a huge part of Brazil's
political class so in both of the cases
that I discussed
it's absolutely still active and - when
I went through the work of just when I
decided that I wanted to tell the book
through the stories of people that lived
through this era in Indonesian history I
took me quite a lot of time to meet all
of those survivors and to slowly gain
their trust and to very slowly disappear
out who without reach Ramat izing
anybody actually wanted to talk about
this because very very few people feel
comfortable speaking about this era
still at first I wanted to use an
interpreter but I realized I could not
see that I had two theories in
Indonesian because a lot of elderly
nations will not speak about these
issues and Friends of another Indonesian
that they don't know who it is or what
how they might judge them so in the in
the one very gaping wound that is still
Indonesian politics there's no there's
been no there's been no there's been no
change in the ability to speak about
this these things really deep President
jokowi when he was elected there was
some hope that he might apologize or
recognize the crimes but it seems that
the military again the military that was
u.s. trained and installed in power in
1965 apparently is too powerful to allow
that to happen I just want to respond
though to what which I said that I think
it was
I was looking up to see his a copy and
early copy of his book and I think he's
absolutely right to step back even
further than I do in to trace US
imperialism back to the conquest of
North America not only just the period
of imperialism that starts in our he us
history books in either the Philippines
or Cuba but the very conquest of North
America itself and also to point to the
ways that it continued that these
patterns continue to this day because
often in stored of mainstream acceptable
English language discourse and I have my
whole career for better or worse has
been in mainstream journalism there is
kind of a move that's allowed where you
can be like that's a hand-wavy where
it's like I well that was the Cold War
so the Cold War of course we all know
that was a little bit bad and as if
number one is if it doesn't matter just
because it was the Cold War but number
two is if it was a special exception and
Bolivia was is a really great example I
mean I and other people that know Latin
America well including South American
liberals and people in the center-right
were very shocked at the response from
much of the so-called defenders of the
so-called international liberal order
the the international english-speaking
young punks hunts beyond pounce on
liberals their reaction to Morales being
forced from office by the military last
year was a very unwelcome proof of the I
think that the thesis that he just
before word that the pattern that we
have in Western journalism in discourse
about US power is that at the time
everybody lets it happen and then 20
years later everybody comes out with the
Declassified files and everybody goes ah
well that was such a horrible thing and
then you know in the same breath that
they denounce what happened 20 years ago
they say that the thing that's happening
right in front of their eyes must be
different because we the United States
by its nature must always reset to being
a benevolent power
just by its nature right and so to enter
finally it's for the other question
about the international connections of
the Chicago method it was not only the
right the global right wing that
realized they could copy what happened
in Indonesia the laughs does he points
out noticed what happened in a lot of
movements radicalized I spoke to the
founder of the communist part of the
Philippines and he said that this was
very influential in leading him to
choose the armed the path of armed
resistance rather than me the moderate
electro path and this is a very common
thing around around the world that a lot
of people came to the conclusion that
well US imperialism is of the type that
if we leave ourselves open we might be
murdered and the flipside of this was
that people in South America or Central
America realized as long as we tell
Washington that we were doing this to
stop communism we will get away with it
not only will we there will there be no
consequences for us the most powerful
country in history will play defense for
us and you got that in Operation Condor
which united most of South America in a
international murder Network which is
very underappreciated in Central America
in parts of Southeast Asia where the US
had set up sort of anti-communist
bulwarks Taiwan South Korea being the
best examples and when the cold war ends
all of the spotlight is on the Berlin
wall and all of the spotlight is on the
triumph of what is presented as a
natural progression of the world's
peoples voluntarily choosing a us-led
capitalist order and I'm I'm not sure
what it is about this moment that allows
us to to look at it but I'm very
grateful that they let me look at this
in this way at this I mean I'm coming
here's what everyone else thinks if
there's something about 2020 which makes
it possible to re-examine this legacy or
or or urgent to reexamine estate
well thanks and that's a good prompt
anyone that has questions can ask on the
QA function on zoom' or you can also on
YouTube and we'll address them soon so
please do I see some are starting to
come in and we can take up some of the
questions that you know Vincent is just
put on the table for us don't want to
follow up with the J and you know I mean
you you've established yourself as
something of the historian of the third
world project
what do you famously say you know the
third world is not a place it's a
project and how you know one of the
things that you suggest in this book is
that you know the way that we've thought
about the Cold War is often wrong you
know we see the main contradiction is
between the US and the USSR but you say
this is misguided but actually the main
contradiction is between the forces of
decolonization and of imperialism so I
wonder if you could elaborate on that
argument and then the second part of
that is just that you also in making
that argument kind of challenge the
standard periodization of the Cold War
that makes it end in 1989 and kind of
begin in 1948 and so this suggests
there's some continuity why is that
important for us to grapple with very
good Jordan that's a great question um
well look the Cold War I don't think
ever really began and it didn't end it's
an ideological category I mean it's not
useful to understand history frankly you
know people who are scholars of the Cold
War
constantly try to period eyes the hotter
versions the colder versions I find
they're missing the point here they have
accepted a narrative that the Cold War
was a fight between the free world and
the authoritarian world you know this is
Hannah Arendt's nonsense from 1951 a
book by the way origins of
totalitarianism which does the CIA's
work for it because it essentially
recasts communism as another form of
fascism and it's a very disturbing book
because it's gets promoted and so on but
we can talk about that later
there is a much more fundamental issue
at work and that goes back to the
Haitian Revolution the Haitian
Revolution is the first real you know
successful attempt of the words people
to fight off the forces of imperialism
you know in the wake of the French
Revolution the people of Haiti rise up
they demand for themselves universal
human would but they are denied that the
French tried to squash them and there's
a direct line that goes from the French
trying to squash the Haitians all the
way to the French trying to take back
Indochina in 1945 after Ho Chi Minh
declares the independence of Indochina
as Nam and the Ducks returning to
Indonesia in the late 1940s to reclaim
it I mean it's a straight line
these forces of imperialism and
colonialism simply will not acknowledge
decolonization in 1961 as a consequence
of the decolonization movement in the
United Nations they put a beautiful it's
actually my favorite UN General Assembly
resolution where and I quoted all the
time because I very much liked it they
said that liberation is irresistible you
cannot resist the forces of liberation
and freedom it's not resistible you know
you we will continue to fight you know
this is the work of fanon we are
creating humanity in our struggle so
that's the principal contradiction
it runs all the way from then when the
Haitian people said look we are going to
determine our destiny we are going to
grow things be able to live we are not
producing sugarcane for you we are going
to live for ourselves that runs all the
way to Bolivia last year when the
resource socialism of Evo Morales said
we we have lithium okay in an ideal
world we wouldn't take it out of the
ground we don't want to ruin the earth
and so on but we are also stuck I mean
people are starving there's illiteracy
this lack of electrification we want to
improve the livelihood of people if we
take out the lithium from the ground
it's on our terms we are going to
control it there is nothing that
differentiates for me the struggle of
the Haitian Revolution to the project of
the Bolivian government
under Evo Morales i'ma it's a direct
line and against that is iterate the
very same forces the French government
in the 1791
is identical to the United States and
it's you know it's a kind of group of
oligarchies in in 2019 it's a direct
link between the two there is no
difference so for people to say
something changes in 45 which changes in
89 okay that's fine but to my mind it's
spacious because behind all that is a
much longer trajectory of struggle which
is the demand of people's who are
treated as lesser and that's important
this is not merely the struggle for
human freedom I do not accept that it's
not merely the struggle for human
freedom because somehow accidentally
turns out that all these people who have
most fundamentally denied their rights
are not white and so therefore we have
to understand in a very cross-cutting
way that the question of race is on the
table we have to understand that it's
not incidental that it's Haiti that is
penalized and has to therefore pay
reparations to France right into the
20th century Haiti paid for liberating
you know people who had been enslaved
and Bolivians are going to be I mean
especially indigenous Bolivians you know
inside Bolivia this was a coup of the
settlers against the indigenous let's
not forget it Morales is trying to
create a floating Nash to Bolivia these
people essentially want to create a
settler colonial Christian Bolivia that
is not liberation you know that is going
to be overthrown in time I mean I'm a
fundamental believer that the future is
ours I don't think everything is going
to be gloomy human beings do not
tolerate oppression and therefore when
that UN resolution comes that you know
it's irresistible I truly believe that
thanks so much for general to come back
in a moment to the question of the
theory of the future but before I do you
know Vincent
there's so much that we could so many
directions that we could go but you know
I'm thinking with
J about the question of of racism of
anti-communism and you know the ways in
which what you see is the us-backed
cia-led
effort to you know crush the kind of
secular socialist and you or pains to
point out nonviolent you know mostly
electoral path to making change in favor
of backing the most you know Kenneth no
nationalist religious you know what
Richard calls kind of cruel cultural
nationalist forces and so you know what
what do we need to know about you know
that program of change in the global
south and you know relatedly what do we
need to know about the anti-communist
extermination programs I mean you know
it's always taught difficult to talk
about imperialist violence and murder
but I wonder if you could just you know
touch into a little bit of what those
look like yes so first of all I
absolutely think you have to situate the
way that the United States foreign
policy establishment acted in the third
world after World War Two in the long
history of race the settler colonialism
and this it's like you know in in
western discourse especially in the
United States we have drawn this line
where like all that's supposed to have
stopped but it wasn't it was very clear
to the peoples of Indonesia or Vietnam
in the 40s and 50s that the United
States was by its nature a racist
country and so though even though people
like Ho Chi Minh in sukarno tried very
hard to appeal to the Revolutionary
legacy that the United States professed
everywhere there was a very it was it
was inescapable to the people of these
recently the up decolonized or country
that were so struggling for their
independence really it was very hard
inescapable for them to realize that
okay well there was Western Europe
racist empires that have been
intimidating us for hundreds of years
and he's this there's the new white
country that obviously is racist and
but maybe they'll be different to us but
you know they paid a lot of attention to
what happened in Iran a 93 a lot of
attention what happened in Guatemala 954
they paid attention to the fact that the
United States was helping to reconquer
Vietnam along with the French and they
came to the conclusion that this was
another racist imperialist power and now
we know if we just look at the ways that
US officials were talking about these
movements behind closed doors we knew we
know the racism was a part of it so I'm
not gonna repeat everything they said
but the way that the 1955 Von Doom
conference was discussed in Washington
was horribly racist when one of the main
characters in the book Francesca moves
from Indonesia to Holland after her
husband is in prison and never gets out
but she she does manage to escape she's
shocked that in in Western Europe
communist parties are allowed to exist
no one's murdering them and so I said
well what do you think the difference is
between the way the Western Europe is
being treated in the way that Southeast
Asia is being treated and she's didn't
take her very long because she had grown
up under direct colonization she said oh
it's racism you know we're treated
differently because we're seen is less
than by the new white hegemonic power
and to um to answer your question as to
just just precisely how it worked I
really turned it to dwell on the the
actual violence in the book cause I
don't I don't like works to do that but
I think it is important to briefly
explain how how the massacre actually
happened in Indonesia and for the best
warning majority people I met and in
many many cases the way it worked was
that members of the Communist Party or
people that were somehow affiliated with
the Communist Party
now whether in a cultural organization
or teachersí or just a trade union of
any comment we're told that they should
probably report to the police for some
kind of an interview or just to check in
and people went in thinking that it was
going to be an interview people went in
thinking like oh I never did anything
like I'm a peasant and I joined the the
youth wing of the party because they're
very active in my in my part of the
country there was no idea that they were
part of some kind of a clandestine
struggle that would put a target on
their backs and when approximately 2
million people went into prison 1,000
ever came out because at some point they
were taken out at night or in some time
when no one was watching and just
executed and thrown into a river and a
historian John Russa I have to thank for
putting me on this path he believes that
this was the first time in Asia that
there were quote-unquote disappearances
practiced as a means of state terror and
if we look at when disappearances arrive
in Latin America and this is Greg
Grandin that's made this connection it's
one year later and there are US
officials that have been moved from
Southeast Asia to Guatemala in this
exact same period so I think it's some
very it's it's tough to it's it's
difficult but important to recognize
that this is a special kind of mass
murder where your family didn't know
what happened to you this made it much
more light much less likely that your
friends were gonna rise up and demands
to know where you are or to to try to
hold the new dictatorship to account
because nobody knew where you were and
this this tactic of disappearances
is very well-known now in Latin America
and I mean and it was like the
anti-communist International which is
something we totally forget exists
because it's very easy for us to point
to everything that has ever been done by
a communist government and group them
all together especially in that
mainstream english-language media the
anti communist international traded
technologies and tips and propaganda
stories and conspiracy theories across
the world once they learned what was
working and this is unknown precisely
because they were so good at but because
they ended up winning or now at least
yeah thanks and you know it should be
noted that you know your book the
Jakarta method traces out that
continuity between the settler colonial
history of the US and the anti-communist
violence that you're you know primarily
focusing on in the post-world War two
period and you know I think just as to
our audience should be read or alongside
a range of new works a lot including
Blue Jays but loudly khalili Roxanne de
barro T's Manu carrucha Nick guest is
Gerald Horne and others Vijay I wanted
to come back for a moment you know to
where you ended and you obviously
welcome to respond to Vincent before I
asked Vijay the question we have some
questions on the table we'll come to the
questions after this round so thank you
very much and anyone else that wants to
pose them please do in the Q&A function
of zoom so did you I'm interested you
know tricot no no the Institute that you
direct does a lot of work of elevating
the perspective of political and social
movements and the kind of alternatives
that they're facing and so I
alternatives that they're proposing
sorry so you know how might we envision
a world where bullets aren't the
solution to all of our problems and what
kind of visions are being articulated
out of the movements themselves well I
mean
let's just look at Cuba it's a great
example you know people will wonder why
was there a coup in Chile why couldn't
the Americans overthrow the government
in Cuba I mean that I think is the
question on the table if you're a
serious historian of this period you
have to ask the question why were they
not able to overthrow a country's
government just 90 miles you know from
that from Florida you know what what is
the issue here well you know there's
incredible scholarship on Cuba and I
think it's quite clear what happens if
you look at even Bay of Pigs firstly
it's difficult to overthrow a government
if the government comes to the people
and says genuinely we are with you if
the government does what the Cuban
government did in the first few years
where they expropriated big capital and
they said we just simply don't want a
society in which people are exploiting
others at this rate and drawing
accumulating profits and taking it to
the United States we just don't want
that you know you don't see that taking
place in other places you know it is
actually instructive that che guevara
was in Guatemala in 54 and watched the
overthrow because what I've been just
trying to do is to tell United Fruit by
the United Fruit is a company whose
shareholders were also people who were
the head of the CIA and so on they were
materially invested in protecting United
fruits control over Guatemala but
Herman's basically was trying to bring
the resources to the people use it to
better the lives of the people he was
overthrown so what they do in Cuba is
they aren't the people they armed them
not only with guns they armed the people
with ideology you know from 59 to 61
Castro has already taught the people in
those incredible speeches you know he
was basically the professor of Cuba you
may not understand if you've never seen
Castro speak in Havana you do not
understand that Castro didn't give
three-hour speeches to crowds overboard
he gave three hours speeches to crowds
scintillated because he was the voice of
Cuba he was explained
things it was a political report and it
was very interesting they aren't the
people with ideology with a commitment
to the Cuban Revolution and they aren't
them you know it was the committee's in
defense of the revolution that part of
the ridiculous invading force that the
Bay of Pigs in 61 that's how they did it
they said to the people we are genuinely
and immediately going to cease allowing
exploitation to take place we will try
to create society on a different
foundation on volunteerism and so on
that example should be with us today
you know governments have to have the
courage basically to stand up against
this pressure from global capitalism and
say no we will not allow us as I just
want to give you a statistic Journal
that adding amplifies this last year 120
countries out of 193 spend more money
paying off their servicing to debt you
know debts that they had taken from
commercial lenders from governments
multilateral lenders 120 countries in
the world out of 193 spend more on
paying the interest on their debt then
they paid for health care and then you
are surprised when countries are
unprepared for the coronavirus I mean it
is a absolute criminal situation that
countries are essentially forced to pay
the precious surplus to service debts
among people who don't need those debts
so there should be debt
cancellation you know that is actually
the way forward unless you immediately
cancelled it you cannot create humanity
in the world and I'm very sorry to say
that it's not just the ridiculousness of
the Trump administration or whatever
that's the problem here you see this in
the so-called frugal four in Europe and
these are also called liberal countries
you know Sweden and so on they don't
even want to allow Italy which is
struggling to survive now two mutual
eyes the debt forget the developing
world so there's no conversation Jordan
that can begin unless you take that off
the table every single I am F coup that
took place you know from the 1960 round
and that's a different kind
it's not a coup like what you see in
Jakarta but it's a coup nonetheless it's
a I am F coup every single coup that you
see over the last 50 years is around the
question of debt and debt servicing and
so we need to have a robust discussion
to simply say we're for the cancellation
of debt not suspension not haircut we
want a cancellation you know it is a
absolute crime that the British
government until recently was paying the
descendants of slave owners for the
expropriation of their property in
Jamaica but the British government never
paid reparations to Jamaica put that in
your pipe and smoke it
thanks to live the day I mean you know
this your comments underscore one of the
important things that you note in the
book which is if the CIA was the acronym
for the history of the u.s. Empire from
the 40s to the 70s then the IMF has been
you know since the 1970s see you notes
so thanks for putting the question of
debt cancellation and the Jubilee on the
table for for our own times
so we have some questions from our
audience and I'd like to turn to them
now and either of you are welcome to
respond but the first one is for those
trying to understand the role of the
state and of capital what are some
specific examples about the interplay
between the US government and big
corporations that have you know come to
play or you know the relationship within
corporations and the government in
fomenting such violent mass oppression
and genocide
take that yeah I think I just want to
agree with what Vijay said earlier that
Guatemala 1954 really was paradigmatic
in it and it did inspire it was
considered such a success by these by
the way
upper-class cosmopolitan liberal CIA
guys that they try to redo it all over
the place and what you had was two
things coming together at the same time
you had the exaggerated threat of
communism even though the Arbenz was
very much just a liberal reformer but it
was what it was there on one side and
then the other half side you had United
Fruit Company which as everybody knows I
mean you don't have to be a radical to
point this out I do have a lot of
economic power in the US political
system you have a lot of control over
the state and there's 38 these there's a
lot of back and forth debate us but
which was it that caused the u.s. to go
after Guatemala was it fear of communism
or was it pure economic motives and I
don't I think that's a false binary I
think it's just it's both when you have
both things on the table it's going to
make intervention very very likely you
might get it with one you might get it
with the other one only but if you have
both it's very likely and Indonesia 1965
I was another example so sue karna was
not only very strategic he was not only
causing problems or the new hegemon and
its allies in Western Europe especially
Britain in 1965 it was a very important
source of natural resources and in the
middle of the mass killings the United
States exerted very serious pressure
over the Masand military regime to make
sure that oil would be exploitable by
the United States by US corporations and
it's like kind of a cliche thing it's
like kind of like what you know high
school you know sometimes it is the
odious things sometimes oil really
matters and you see this coming back
over and over but III think that
it interacts the the pure economic
motive interacts with ideological in
geopolitical motives and when you have
them all working on the same side that's
when you're in real trouble
thanks a lot the J did you want to take
this question on no let's keep going
okay so the next question is you know
thanks for your presentations and the
work behind them
you've both touched on this but can you
say a little more about why we need to
understand this history in order to
better understand the nature of
imperialism today
but there I mean I think I've actually
answered that to some extent that this
is not a let me just amplify to answer
this what Vincent just said about oil
and you know how instead people always
say well come on they roll their eyes
you know it's not just oil it's
democracy right it's not oil it's
democracy it's not lithium in Bolivia
it's not indium it's democracy you know
I mean I we heard that just a few months
ago it's democracy if it was actually
democracy in Bolivia why was Morales
removed in November of 2019 because he
got elected the third time and his
mandate for the third election was to
run till early 2020 when he won the
election again in 2019 that election
mandate should have begun in 2020
January or February so he was removed in
November 2019 the Liberals should at the
very least have said let him finish his
term till January or February no they
didn't they allowed the removal in the
members even procedurally you see I'm
coming to the point when people say well
it's about democracy not resources if
it's actually about democracy then why
don't you honor your own procedural
principles they don't it's not about
procedural ism it's not about democracy
this is a fraud if you take the case of
how Lula faced law fair and was not able
to run in the election when it was clear
to everybody he was going to wipe the
floor
I mean also narrow is the buffoon you
know you should never have been elected
I think even the elites in Brazil were a
little bit you know stunned that this
buffoonish character this thug became
the president of a very great Brazil um
you know Lula's removal was not on
procedural grounds either and then we
learned that shenanigans of Mauro and
Americans and the money that was
transferred and the fact that there was
no evidence against Lula and there was
no apartment really you know here that
he had taken possession of the whole
thing was a joke but it wasn't a joke
because liberals in the name of
procedural ISM easily violate procedure
he
it protects their interests then we must
ask the question what are the interests
and I think that's significant you know
in a place like Bolivia it does come
down to the fact that it has an enormous
enormous holding of lithium and unlike
Chile where the lithium is you know much
harder to get out of the ground in good
EBX easier what happened in Libya I mean
come on in Libya and 2011 overthrow
Gaddafi
I don't want anybody to tell me that was
about bringing democracy to Libya I've
been first went to Libya in the 1970s I
can tell you that there's never been an
interest in the West to bring democracy
there there's merely an interest to take
hold of that oil it's the best oil in
the world it's right across the waters
from Italy you know the Europeans they
want the oil they don't want the people
we've seen that in our own lifetime
we've seen how Europe has behaved
towards human beings trying to cross in
boats into your they don't want people
to come but they want the oil to come
and that I think just to underscore what
vincent said earlier the fact that
they'd rather have the oil that people
tells you something about the nature of
imperialism thanks for Jay the next
question is for you Vincent it says
you've discussed the legacy of the
Jakarta method in both Linares
positioning towards the left how can we
think about the Jakarta method in the
broader 21st century war on terror
both days us Imperial policy and it's
adoption elsewhere
yeah I think the answers right there in
the question I think that's the right
way to think about it so people have
asked me sort of what happened to their
discard no matter there's a Carter
method you know do these mass murder
programs continue and I think that it's
not only radicals that have pointed out
I mean liberal historians of the Cold
War even ah darn well has dad is a very
good example slots the Cold War into
this broader pattern of u.s. pattern of
u.s. behavior in the world stage and he
points out west ad that the US has
always been an aggressive and
militaristic power it has always been
trying to maximize its influence in a
war with somebody and no in the first
decades of the 21st century the US did
not oversee the anti-communist
extermination of hundreds of thousands
of people but we did invade Iraq and
kill hundreds of thousands of people so
I do think that once the big bad enemy
of Soviet Union went away there was a
kind of there is a period of kind of
like a chicken with its head run a cut
off not knowing who to be or with and
radical Islam or terrorism fell right
into that position and as we all as is
far too obvious I mean even like liberal
commenters in the last couple weeks have
been tweeting out things like oh now the
amount of people killed by coronavirus
in one day is the total that I've got
the tide in the war on Iraq of course
very conveniently forgetting that the
amount of people that died in war in
Iraq was overwhelmingly Iraqis it was
not a couple thousand it was a hundreds
of thousands and and why do those people
not count because they were associated
with the new big bad enemy and I think
finding and exploiting than the big bad
enemy in order to justify violence
overseas and to avoid looking at our own
problems at home is as American as apple
pie it goes back to the very foundation
out of the country thanks a lot
so our next question is about connecting
the extermination and state violence
that you
both studied in in the third world and
the global South to to North America and
so you know how can organizers and
activists trying to understand state
violence that they're seeing on the
streets of US cities today think about
that differently or more capacious ly by
understanding the long history of
counter insurgency hybrid war covert
foreign policies
would either of you like to take this
one on
I mean look it's a very big question
John it doesn't deserve glib answer I
think we have to understand that the
Jakarta medal was used in the United
States as well and before it happened in
Indonesia you know in when the Russian
Revolution or the revolutionist Azaz
Empire takes place in 1917 you have an
attack on the American left that is as
severe as anything I mean the Palmer
Raids the 1919 attack on the left all
the way it doesn't just start with
McCarthyism I think it's a very
interesting thing that we know the
McCarthyite period after World War two
but the anti Left goes back in fact it
predates the Russian Revolution in back
into the 19th century
trade unionists I mean I would highly
recommend you go and people go and watch
mate 1 a terrific film by John Sayles
you know about how it was so hard to be
an organizer you listen to the poetry of
Martin his father when he writes about
you know the factory struggles in in New
Jersey
and where young John Reed is just
astounded by the violence of the
Pinkertons and the private security
forces against labor authorized violence
against the working class go back and
look at you know how any type of
organizing whether by Native Americans
or by Latinos or African Americans
ruthlessly put down you know the amount
of state violence inside the amassing is
incredible how the trade union movement
is bought in with business unionism and
what happens when you dist win an
imperialist country destroys opposition
inside the country is that then you know
whatever you do abroad you don't pay a
price at home you know because at home
people will not rise up against you you
don't be a price you can do anything
abroad at home you will be able to tell
people we're just doing it for democracy
we're doing it you know that phrase
violence is as American as apple pie
we're doing it for apple pie you know
we're doing it so that you live well I
mean this must be seen I don't want
people to believe that what happens
abroad like in
yuneisia didn't happen in the United
States I mean the Communist Party was
destroyed in the United States
deliberately okay they may not have gone
and killed a million people but they
destroyed people's lives I remember
talking to a child of a communist leader
in Connecticut who said that when the
FBI came and arrested his father they
turned to him and his sister and said
you know you will make sure you never go
to college you know things that were
aspirational in America it threatened
these little kids this is the FBI in the
United States so yes I mean the stories
you read in Indonesia with people who
wiped out you know or in in Argentina
where they were taken on helicopters or
planes and thrown into the into the
ocean you don't see they're in large
numbers in the United States that kind
of killing okay you don't I mean yes you
see Medgar Evers shot and you see people
kill it's not that killing doesn't
happen you know we know Malcolm X was
killed we know Martin Luther King was
killed we know assassinations happen in
the United States yes they happen to
trade unionists whose names we don't
know but there's also intimidation
there's you know it terribly hard to be
a leftist in the US you know I I have
great compassion for people who continue
the struggle because the price of the
free price that the US government gets
to operate overseas they must not get
that free check anymore
you know if they're going to try to
obliterate Venezuela they need to be
mass demonstrations in this country
saying we will not allow you to do it
without paying the price at home but
they don't pay the price aproblem which
is why Joe Biden can put out that racist
advertisement about China which is what
Biden can make the comment saying that
I'm going to continue sanctions on Cuba
which is where Biden says I am going to
support you know who who is he going to
support kwon do I do of Venezuela it's a
joke man I mean it's a joke the world
will laugh at you but what do you care
about the world laughing at you because
the world is also scared and scared of
you you know as they say it's better to
have fear then to have admiration and
the United States of America is
certainly more feared than admire you
know despite what Americans sometimes
believe about themselves
thanks and Vinson I don't know if you
wanna take that question on and respond
to Vijay's comments I'll be agree I mean
perhaps I spent too much time in like
the deepest darkest moments of American
foreign policy last couple years the the
answer I would give to somebody who you
know questioning about the implications
for activism is I would say especially
people from my class which is a white
middle class white college educated
middle class American I would caution
against believing that the roles really
are the rules because we people from my
class the rules tend to stay the same we
end up being taught that what is on the
chalkboard is really how things are
going to work and if we follow the rules
its we will be ill how to that the rule
will the game will proceed according to
those rules but as was a twitch I said
earlier when push really comes to show
up when the interests of very powerful
people are at stake the rules don't
matter anymore it's I would yeah I would
caution skepticism is my answer okay
well there's a there's a lot more
questions on the table we have about
five minutes left
I mean I'll point to one but they don't
want to just ask him or apologize that
we can get to everyone there's there's
such great questions and provocations
but you know one thing that was on the
table was you know if you could talk
more about the anti-communist
international that I think Vincent
mentioned and this is just a Cold War
phenomena or if it persists and so on
but I also just wanted to say to you is
there anything that you know either I or
the participants haven't asked that you
would like to add today
well you know there's there's no doubt I
mean I'm going to just say this is my
last words Jordan if that's okay there's
no firstly I would I really want to say
please read Vincent's book the Jakarta
methods very good very important book
it's important because we should never
forget people who have you know given
their lives for a beautiful idea and you
know as they say said in in in France in
1968 they said under the paving stones
is the beach actually in Washington
Bullets I take that line and I say under
the paving stones are immortals who have
been killed for that beautiful idea and
I really you know as you read Prince's
book one part of reading these kind of
books is not only to arm ourselves for
the present and for struggles in the
future but it's also to remember that we
don't always stand on the shoulders of
people who have made history we also
walk on the graves of those who've
sacrificed themselves for a different
kind of history which we were not able
to live in and you know it's a real
terror for people in places like
Indonesia who suffered after 1965 the
lack of a beautiful history and I really
you know one of the reasons I'm very
grateful that you have done this book
and that Oppenheimer made that film you
know the reason I'm really grateful for
all that is it's brought worldwide
attention to the history that could have
been and was not allowed for that reason
I think that people need to have
discussions about the immensity of the
sacrifice of people in the past and what
this demands of us now you know it
doesn't demand half-measures I think
that's a big error
Amata we live in a politics of
half-measures you know you're supposed
to compromise here compromise there you
should stand for something you know as
they say if you don't stand for
something you'll fall for anything
and I think that's an issue people need
to stand for something and you know I
very much recommend stand for the
beautiful idea thank you so much
Vijay I just a note for listeners the
Oppenheimer is Josh
who is director of two important films
the act of killing the look of silence
which Vincent explains he offers global
context for those two works so Vincent
anything that we haven't asked that you
would like to add
you know quickly respond to that the
question the anti-communist
international so there were a number of
formal organizations that operated
across countries the most important the
most famous was the W a CL the world
it's a communist League and this brought
together neo-nazis far right terrorists
death squad leaders congressmen from the
United States and leaders of u.s. allied
countries and in Asia and this is a very
underappreciated part of 20th century
history but I encourage to didn't have
time to pick up the book you know
there's just enough on those
organizations you can follow the
footnotes and dive in because it's a
really dark history and I think that it
was it was a Croatian man that brought
Jakarta to Chile which means there's a
very decent chance he was part of the
anti-bolshevik bloc of Nations which was
formed with Croatian fascists and the
way people world war ii so this is a
history that i hope other people pick up
and run with um but i would just say
that i really appreciate any interest
that any anyone might have into the book
and i appreciate any all the kind words
that have been said and although it's
like it's it's sort of a difficult
journey to go through with the people
that I met I hopefully it's an
ultimately empowering one because it
allows for a sort of clarity
understanding of where we came from and
the stakes in the future well thanks to
you both I really am grateful for the
opportunity to heaven spoke with you
today
I grant we couldn't do as we initially
planned to have an in-person lunch but I
will look forward to in the future when
we can be in the same room without
killing each other having a conversation
at the people's forum everyone please go
out if you haven't already and purchase
a copy of Vincent's bold and important
new book The Jakarta method which is out
for public affairs and it's a the first
of July will have Washington Bullets by
Vijay Prashad leave if i'm not wrong
there's a foreword by evo morales if I
write Vijay so very important
book congratulations to you both and I I
just want to thank you on behalf of my
colleagues that the the People's forum
for the labor that you put into this the
serious questions that you've put on the
table and I think it's a challenge for
us all to really you know delve more
deeply into this Cold War anti-communist
and history and imperialist violence and
see how it continues to shape the world
we live in so thank you very much


## Keywords:
