---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ZDqgqW5J40
---

# Video
Invited Symposium 1.2 - Human Diversity Human Elasticity Natural Languages of Speech and Sign 1
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ZDqgqW5J40)

## Transcript:
uh we're gonna switch to online and the
next presenter is Wendy Sandler
thank you

wow
are we are we okay
yep okay great thank you very much thank
you very much for inviting me this is a
great opportunity
um today I'm going to talk about uh
diversity that's the topic of this
conference
um and basically what I'm going to do is
compare spoken languages in sign
languages two forms of natural human
language and uh make the claim that
diversity is not really diversity that
instead it's it's cognitive elasticity
so um human language is an anomaly of
nature because uh humans are the only
species with language other species
communicate but they don't have Language
by any normal that's any reasonable
definition of language but we have two
kinds of language we have spoken
language and sign language
um much of the early research on sign
languages was trying to demonstrate how
similar the two of the two are
surprisingly
um so uh sign languages have phonology
they have derivation and inflection and
morphology they have prosody syntax and
all these things that you see here up
here on the screen have been argued for
successfully in Sign Language
um but what I'm saying is what I would
like to say is that this is not the
whole story
um
the main points I I want to make are
these In classical Linguistics diversity
was really important looking at
diversity among human languages and
language families and I would say that
one of the main contributions of
generative Linguistics is that there are
core universals across language even
though they seem to vary a lot there are
core universals but the points I'd like
to make here are the sign languages
exhibit both core universals but also
substantive differences from spoken
language and what I want to say is that
this diversity that is two types of
natural language is powerful evidence
for the unique elasticity of human
cognition
uh so these are the linguistic
universals that I'm going to touch on
very briefly just to sort of uh convince
you that sign languages also have them
symbolism we the words symbolize uh
Concepts duality of patterning which
means that there's a meaningless level
which as we usually call phonology and a
meaningful level which is quite amazing
actually in itself and the meaningless
level allows us to make a huge
vocabularies linear combinatoriality
that is elements combined with one
another linearly to make more complex
elements recursion has been a very
important one in the last 10 years I
guess in particular and it's been argued
that all languages have recursion it's a
kind of um
embedding a one one linguistic element
into another element of the same kind
and finally uh very recently well more
recently in the history of study is
multimodality that is that language
requires gesture
so when you think about this and first
you think well how can sign language
have gesture if gesture is usually
manual when the hands are already very
busy signing I'm going to show you
let's start with symbolization
um Terence Deacon called us a symbolic
species he's right so here are some
signs in an Israeli sign language which
I'm going to use most of my examples
will be from Israeli sign language
cat asked interesting character I chose
these randomly but they demonstrate that
there are both concrete and Abstract
symbols in in sign languages and that
were these are words of sign language
and they have phonological properties
and also syntactic properties like the
words of spoken language
duality of patterning is usually
demonstrated through minimal pairs that
is words that are identical with one
another except for one element so mother
and noon you see here are identical
except for hand shaped features the hand
shapes are different
send and title are identical same hand
shape same movement but different
location features send us from the chest
and tablets from the mouth and finally
escape and betray are different because
of movement features Escape has a
straight movement and betray has a has a
Arc movement but in all cases we have a
canonical form of the word in Sign
Language so there's one hand
configuration that moves from one
location to another and the most uh sign
language linguists consider movement to
be a nuclear syllable nucleus so that
sign language words are overwhelmingly
monosyllabic
we're moving quickly to combinatoriality
um and the example I'm giving is a very
simple one of the compounds where you
put two words together to make a new
word and especially lexicalized
compounds where the new word come goes
into the mental lexicon so we have pan
we have cake and we have pancake but in
pancake we no longer think of it as a
cake that's made in a cake that's made
in a pan we just think of it as a
pancake and one of the other properties
in addition to the change of meaning
from the two individual elements is that
the sound can change so the n in pancake
assimilates the dealer place of
articulation of the following K so that
we say pancake and also the stress is
different so a cake that's made in a pan
is a pan cake whereas a pancake has the
stress in the first syllable I hope
you're with me
uh in sign languages we have a similar
phenomenon for example here's a compound
in Israeli sign language that consists
of the signs think
and stop and together it means shocked
but what happens the hand configuration
the handshape assimilates from the
second sign stop onto the whole compound
and there is only one movement as a
result so that we have
shock looks like this
and it conforms to the canonical form of
a word in Sign Language one hand
configuration and and the hand moves
from one location to another
we also have recursion I'm going to show
you this sentence which is going to
become very familiar to you throughout
the course of this talk I'm only going
to show it to you now so that you can
see that there's a relative Clause
inside this longer sentence the relative
Clause is that I found last week so she
says the little dog that I found last
week ran away and here's what it looks
like
so these are some of the properties that
are shared by sign languages another one
is gestures
um well you think the hands are pretty
busy but how are they going to have how
are they even able to express gestures
these are what uh what ephra and Kendon
call emblems so these are all gestures
that are made of a palm up gesture in
particular that are made in various sign
languages but I think it's possible for
all of us to interpret the meaning of
these these hand gestures because they
are emblems they are conventionalized to
a certain extent so I would assume that
this this particular type of gesture is
borrowed from the ambient culture but it
it is included in Sign Language it is
included within the signing Stream So
gestures are also part of uh
sign language
Now we move on to diversity in what ways
is sign language is different so I think
that what is new about this work and
work of many of my colleagues is that
we're now focusing more on the diversity
on the things that are different about
sign languages and yet that sign
languages all have in common with each
other so they're they're important
um and these are some of them iconicity
versus arbitrariness at all levels so in
sign language and sign languages many
Expressions look like what they mean and
in spoken language even though there is
iconicity it's much less common
also in sign languages there's an overt
relation between the body articulations
and linguistic functions as we will see
very shortly
simultaneity versus linearity so spoken
languages are typically linear at all
levels of structure because of because
of the nature of the medium but it's a
fact that spoken languages are linear
both in their phonological form
morphological form and in their
syntactic form
um and also uh uh whereas in spoken in
sign languages there's much more
simultaneity which I will demonstrate
and finally the non-linguistic gestures
uh of spoken language are typically
Visual and in that sense are in a
different physical system than uh than
the rest of the language whereas in in
sign languages the gestures exploit the
same visual system as we will see so I
think that the uh I I have a whole paper
showing that um not all gestures are
manual in spoken language but we'll put
that aside for now because most of them
are and that's what we're used to so how
are sign languages different
well in contemporary spoken languages
the relationship between foreign form
and meaning is mostly arbitrary so book
in english's book in French it's Libra
in Hebrew and sephir and in Arabic it's
kitab and all of these uh Concepts cat
eat and drive
um all have arbitrary forms not uh
iconic forms in spoken languages
but in sign languages uh you can see
here that these forms are quite iconic
so book
mirrors the opening of a book cat
whiskers eat putting something in your
mouth and driving moving moving the
steering wheel so these are just some
examples but trust me there's a lot of
iconicity in sign language as opposed to
spoken language so this I think is a
concrete difference it's an important
difference
I said that sign language linguistic
functions correspond to visible
articulations of different parts of the
body and I'm only going to give you one
example because it shows that it's not
only the hands that are linguistically
employed in Sign Language so here we
have three different signers describing
the same Tweety cartoon in which
Sylvester the cat is falling through the
air holding the Tweety Bird and they all
use a conventionalized mouth shape that
has a verbial function so the mouth
shape means for a long time
these are just some of the ways in which
different articulators convey linguistic
functions in Sign Language I'll give you
a moment to just look at that I won't go
through them all
instead we're going to go back to that
complex sentence with the relative
clause and we're going to break it down
into its parts
here's the sentence
okay hands that's not a surprise but the
hands are important the hands convey
lexical items such as dog and Escape
at the prozotic level the head is very
important it it uh it can distinguish
the topic phrase the small dog that I
found last week by having the head move
forward and down which is systematic
from the comments phrase in the sentence
in in which there's a very Salient
change in the head position what that
changes depends on the nature of the
comment
at the prozotic level we also have the
face you know the face conveys
intonation in sign language and the
meanings are simultaneously
compositional so for example brow Rays
indicates continuation something like
high tone in spoken language and squint
in Israeli sign language indicates
shared information
but the two can can and do co-occur in
this relative Clause to indicate the
continuation to the rest of the sentence
and shared information which is the
relative Clause the dog that we both
know about
finally at the discuss level the Torso
comes into the the picture and we see
torso shifts now this sense same
sentence is discourse in itself because
it was it was uh elicited in isolation
so bear with me and we'll think of it as
a discourse now
and we can see that the the Torso shifts
from the topic phrase to the common
phrase comment phrase and this kind of
shift of torso shift is active also at
higher levels of the discourse
finally the two hands now the two hands
can't they can be together in a sign
um such as just then but they can also
be torn separated and act independently
so the the non-dominant hand can be a
discourse continuity marker in this case
it it marks a small dog and it stays
present in the whole stretch of
discourse until the small dog is no
longer the topic
let's put it all together here here it
is again now that you know what to look
for
in slow motion
okay we I talked about simultaneity and
we saw one example in facial expression
but there's also simultaneity in syntax
whereas in spoken language syntax is
quite has to be linear so for example in
a setting for example context in which
we're at the Museum and we're looking at
the painting we can say well I looked at
a painting someone walked over beside me
now these are this is one simultaneous
event but we have no choice but to
convey it linearly in two Clauses also I
looked at the person as she walked over
beside me
spoken language requires us to lay those
those two events those two simultaneous
events out linearly
I asked her what do you want
but in Sign Language again we have two
hands so the two hands can
simultaneously behave syntactically
um in in in such uh situations where we
want to convey
um uh one simultaneous event that has
two parts to it using the two hands this
is presented at fifty percent of normal
speed and the signer is signing exactly
the same sentences that that are written
on the screen
here goes
it's so efficient that you wonder why we
don't do it that we don't all do it
um what's happening you can see here
that each hand conveys a different
reference and for this reason we can um
we can we can convey uh different parts
of the same event simultaneously in sign
language
moving to gesture I showed you gestures
that were emblems that were borrowed
from the spoken ambient language but
there are also gestures in sign language
which are unique to sign languages so
this is an example of a spoken language
gesture this is a um my friend who who
uh was describing a Charlie Chaplin
movie and she said the bar that locks
the locks the cage Falls and she made
this gen this iconic gesture at the same
time and this is kind of a plastic
iconic gesture in spoken language
but sign language has its own kind of
gestures in addition to those emblems
which occur occasionally the the Palm up
influence that we saw in particular sign
languages use the mouth for gestures and
in some papers that I've written I've
I've explained why we can call them
gestures comfortably and not call them
words or signs
let's look for a moment to this cartoon

(Laughter)
foreign

ER describe this watch his mouth
now in some of my work I have explained
why these elements these mouth gestures
are gestures and not linguistic elements
they're idiosyncratic people can use the
same gesture to mean different things
all the criteria that McNeil put forward
for gestures are characteristic of these
mouth gestures in sign language and not
and and I've seen these gestures in
American Sign Language in German sign
language too and also in the outside
Bedouin sign language The Village sign
language that my colleagues and I've
been studying for for many years so you
see a mouth gesture that indicates here
water spring out from a tap
so this is a very very common feature of
sign languages which means which means
that all languages have to have uh
imagistic gestures which accompany the
linguistic stream but sign languages
find their own way to do it namely with
the mouth
so what I want to say is that sign
languages are not just the marginal
purview of deaf populations
sign languages belong to all of us so
you and me if we didn't happen to have
uh auditory input we would create a sign
language with all of these
characteristics
and I uh this slide I I put together on
an Impulse but I actually love it um
because it it tells a big story some of
the sign languages here are are
Community sign languages that belong to
large communities such as Britain the
United States and uh Korea also Israel
in the sense that it's also a
community-wide sign language but all the
other sign languages pictured here are
Village sign languages that arose simply
because there were a number of deaf
people that had an opportunity to get
together often enough to create a
linguistic system so we all have it the
point is that we all have it in us to
make a sign language
so these are some Universal
characteristics which I've mentioned
these are some so-called diverse uh
um characteristics that distinguish
spoken language from sign language
and uh from this my conclusion is as
follows diversity in a complex system
like language does not merely reveal
variations that just happen to occur it
shows how elastic our cognitive
capabilities are
and this election I think that this
elasticity is an enormous Advantage for
our species our species and I would hope
that uh that this idea would spawn
further research on different uh uh uh
and diversity as a kind of elasticity in
in humans and can comparisons to other
species
and I thank all these people and funders
for their help
so as before if you have any questions
in person you can come to the microphone
if you have any other questions on the
chat you can just type them in
oh
mm-hmm
so if nobody has oh yeah there's
somebody coming down one second
hi thank you for the very interesting
talk I learned a lot uh I wanted to ask
uh now did you spoke of how prosody he's
conveyed uh through head movements and
some facial gestures if you know stuff
for example in the clinical literature
that points to prosely defects like you
know in in normal language you know you
may have a lesion on the right side of
the brain that conveys difficulty to
convey porosity so I was I don't know I
was curious about evidence in how that
would manifest in in sign language
that's a great question I'm not an
expert on the brain uh and sign language
um the early studies on brain and sign
language showed that uh classic deficits
like Broca's and Wernicke's uh uh
deficits uh affected the same part of
the brain in sign language which was
pretty interesting but later research
has shown that there's much more diverse
City in the way the brain is organized
for sign language so
the predictions are clear right that we
would we would if we would we would want
to see uh
Well we'd want to see what's affected in
the brain by different sorts of deficits
and I can't answer that question um I
refer you to Karen Emery and David
Carina who've done a lot of work on
brain and sign language
I don't know if they've lost a president
that's a great idea for future research
thank you thanks for the great talk so
we have a question from Shelly Zia from
the chat and she's asking do we take
into account the history of the two
types of languages
yes but could you follow up on that do
you have any uh predictions we
definitely take into the yeah our
findings uh are the sign languages
developed gradually they don't spring
forth full-blown with all the linguistic
characteristics that we find more more
established sign languages but do you
wanna did you want to ask something
she's not following up on it but I'll
have another one from the chat so Jenny
colbertson is asking
basically saying great talk when the I
was interested in what you said about
this being something that we all have in
us to create what about learning do you
think this tells us something about our
flexibility to learn
absolutely because uh all the evidence
uh
from deaf children with deaf parents
where they have the same kind of input
that hearing children have which is only
about 10 of the deaf population they
acquire language without it without uh
explicit instruction through interaction
on the same timetable as uh as hearing
children
so yes uh we we can do we can do that
the same way well thank you so very much
um
we are moving on to the next virtual
speaker thank you Wendy



## Keywords:
