---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=014fW8nKEsI
---

# Video
Is Incrementalism Toward Universal Healthcare a Good Strategy?
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=014fW8nKEsI)

## Transcript:

I'm making a um a slightly less
ambitious argument which is that um that
in some
respects uh and and and maybe like I say
this could be circular but
Obamacare um in some way made the
argument for
incrementalism in so far as look it was
what you could get at the time the most
you could get at the time but what it
did is it had that impact where it made
people aware that really Health Care
should be a right right which includes
all those premises that you made about
why you know what there there's there's
no if it's a right there's no logic to
having uh you know having it to be just
Out Of Reach from a from a deductible
standpoint or a co-pay standpoint or uh
just Out Of Reach and so far it being
Universal and I guess um what I'm saying
is uh
does you know the idea of let's say a
Medicare buyin for everybody or um you
know I think what uh uh Holland
suggested was automatic enrollment in uh
a Medicare system at Birth that you can
only lose if it is uh supplanted with uh
employer-based um uh Healthcare or
something to that uh effect I mean I
guess that's what I I'm getting at is
you know is that litmus test um should
in your opinion how hard and fast should
that lpus test be how much of the
argument for Medicare for all should be
seen as sort of a journey or a process
or should it be this is something that
has to happen this has to be the next
step I think for too long we've been
going down the incremental Road I think
this is the next step I mean what are we
going to wait for you know we're going
to do some incremental move and then 20
years later be back at you know I'll be
back on your show talking about this
again I mean we need to we we we the the
the debate over Healthcare reform in the
United States has been going on for more
than a hundred years we've tried
Obamacare it was an incremental step it
did not take us to Universal healthare
it um attenuated some of the injustices
of the United us Healthcare System the
next natural step is for national health
insurance something that people were was
in the centerpiece of the democratic
platform back in the 1970s this is a
sort of right word regression that we're
having now if we're going to talk about
abandoning a national health insurance
program now things these sort of more
aggressive forms of incrementalism that
you're talking about you're born into
Medicare for instance but you lose it if
you get a job you know get employer
sponsored coverage I mean you can talk
about these arguments but the reality is
is that something like that is going to
decimate the Private health insurance
industry they're going to fight it tooth
and nail as strong as they're going to
fight Single Payer and it would wouldn't
have many of the same benefits in terms
of the administrative savings uh in
terms of the systemwide drug savings so
why should we fight to get into this you
know death struggle with the Private
health insurance uh industry over a
incremental sort of step that's not even
going to take us to where we want to be
if we're going to do that if we're going
to go all the way then we might as well
go all the way with what we want and
what's the optimal solution now if you
take something like a very narrowly
Define public option that's just
available to people buying insurance on
the exchanges yeah I mean you might be
able to achieve that it's going to
affect so few people's lives it's not
going to really develop allow you to
accumulate the political Capital
necessary to actually do much more right
and you in that uh proposal in other
words if you're going to have a proposal
that's going to have the full force of
uh opposition you might as well offer
the most obvious and uh beneficial and
politically
communicable uh proposition that there
is uh why why convolute things if you're
still going to have the same level of
resistance to it I agree I mean imagine
trying to explain the Medicare thing
buyin thing to people they're not going
to get it you know they you're you get
it and you lose it if you get a job and
then what if you just say no we're going
to create something like Medicare A
Birthright to the US Health Care System
uh everybody's enrolled no co- payments
no deductibles you can't you don't you
know lose it until you're dead uh that's
something you can actually communicate
these rather convoluted um sorts of
systems I mean part of the problem is
they don't generate the kinds of
efficiencies that we need but even
putting that aside they're not as to use
your words politically communicable
right like how are you going to actually
get that out there uh this is going to
be a huge fight and we need a simple
clear very obvious and very effective
message to actually get this across and
Medicare for all means something to
people um and I think that it's because
of that it's a winable battle Adam
Gaffney um the we will link to your
pieces in the Jackin making very similar
arguments I appreciate you're coming on
today uh and taking the time I really
enjoyed the discussion thank you for
having
me hi folks Sam Cedar here we still need
your help on our patreon page YouTube
ads have come back but not nearly as
much as we had before so if you can help
us out any little bit helps head over to
our patreon page right at this URL and
you'll help us keep helping you
by making
videos


## Keywords:
