---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yn8cCDtVd5w
---

# Video
Kuhn's Cycle: Paradigms and Criticism
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yn8cCDtVd5w)

## Transcript:
have you ever wondered why doctoral
degrees in chemistry biology physics
psychology and mathematics are PhDs it's
a degree as a doctor in philosophy what
the core ideas underlying scientific
pursuit are philosophical in nature many
research methods courses cover this only
in cursory detail not here let's dig
into it to begin to observe and explain
phenomena requires a set of beliefs
about how knowledge and reason apply to
this problem these are the assumptions
of science every scientific discipline
has them we often take these for granted
during the normal course of normal
science Thomas Kuhn developed a theory
of scientific paradigms around this idea
of normal science and its tendency
toward a set of assumptions taken for
granted and not actively challenged
notice that biology research papers do
not begin by explaining the theory of
evolution by natural selection doing so
would be redundant and biologists have
largely agreed on that theory as well
validated and worthy of accepting as a
core assumption underlying the field
physics papers do something quite
similar introduction sections aren't
littered with explanations about the
standard model of particle physics
chemistry papers aren't repeatedly
explaining atomic theory psychology
papers don't repeatedly explain the
brains of the source of motivation and
behavior at any given time point our
scientific pursuits are built on a set
of assumptions we don't actively
challenge those assumptions we don't
feel that we need to but wait I thought
scientists were supposed to be critical
of everything after all didn't popper
say that if we are uncritical we shall
always find what we want the core of the
issue is about what we take for granted
taking for granted certain methods and
theories allows us to advance the
science kuhn wasn't being critical when
he argued that normal science is built
on a set of assumptions he thought this
was necessary for any advancement to
occur he argued that we take for granted
our paradigms kuhn defined paradigms as
the universally recognized scientific
achievements that for a time provide
model problems and solutions to a
community of practitioners if we were
excessively critical about our paradigms
we could never make any advancement
every paper would still be debating and
analyzing the structure of a cell
Adam the core nature of any individual
theory or the basic philosophy of
science itself we would never advance
accepting certain assumptions allows us
to be critical of the more nuanced
issues which flow from that set of
assumptions if we accept that the theory
of evolution by natural selection is
accurate we can debate precisely what
types of fossils we should expect to see
in which regions of the world at what
time in history if we accept the theory
of tectonic plates we can debate with
what frequency we should expect to see
earthquakes in which regions and what
their intensity may be if we accept the
brains of the source of human motivation
we can debate the relative impact of the
insular cortex versus the amygdala in
recognition memory assumptions are great
they let us pull ourselves out of the
muck and get on with new discoveries we
have cell phones airplane spaceships
neurosurgery working artificial limbs
cochlear implants computer chips and the
internet because we keep assuming things
assumptions are also terrible we engage
in confirmation bias and have pet
theories because we make inaccurate
assumptions I've come to view science as
a community-wide fight over what to
assume if you can convince enough
scientists to assume something it will
be embedded into the fabric of that
fields paradigm until challenged by
another plucky interlocutor but in order
to convince any scientist of anything
you have to begin your argument with a
fundamental understanding of the
existing paradigm this shouldn't sound
like an all ideas are equal argument it
should sound like a challenge basic
ideas in the language and logic of those
who hold them argument the introduction
section of nearly every scientific paper
sets out to tell us what the field
already believes this is intentional the
point is to try to ensure that we're
clear about specifically which
assumptions we're accepting and which
were challenging



## Keywords:
