---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-KRi9nF8BiA
---

# Video
L. Randall Wray - Modern Money Theory: Intellectual Origins and Policy Implications
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-KRi9nF8BiA)

## Transcript:
welcome to the international and
comparative Law Center seminar series
2015 we're absolutely delighted today to
have with us Professor Randall Ray not
only professor of Economics at the
University of Mississippi Kansas City
but also senior scholar at the Lei in uh
economic Institute of Bard
College uh has a lot of accolades from
the past you can go on Wikipedia if you
would like to find them today he's going
to be talking on money market theory
intellectual Origins and policy
implications and I would encourage you
if you're interested in that you can
find that in the Paul grave dictionary
as well as check out his uh primer on
money market theory that came out in
2012 and I believe got reissued in
2015 so without further Ado Professor
Randall
Ray okay well thanks for the invitation
and for you coming out I guess we first
started talking about this four years
ago it took a long time to
arrange uh to make it here and what I uh
circulated was an entry I wrote for the
new Paul grave dictionary of Economics
the idea is to sort of summarize modern
money Theory uh for a general audience
um not uh strictly for
economists and first I'll just tell you
a very brief personal history of this
approached
economics uh it began in the early
1990s the when uh the internet was
relatively new I get we were talking
earlier uh Al Gore had invented the
internet as you know um a discussion
group uh online was created maybe one of
the first maybe the first I don't know
it was called post keian thought and
post canian economics follows John
mayard KES and it's what we call a
heterodox approach to economics it's
outside the mainstream but all the the
top heterodox economists around the
world were on this uh discussion group
and this guy came on and he started
saying things that um on the surface
seemed very strange very
bizarre but I as I read his comments and
thought about him I I could see that he
was just using different
terminology that a lot of things he were
he was
saying existed in various branches of
heterodox economics and so
online uh he would say things and most
people respond this is crazy and then a
few of us sort of started catching on
say oh yeah that sounds like okay I and
Minsky that sounds like George Frederick
KN and so on and so he started
communicating uh with us and one of the
ideas he had um that became very
important uh to opening up this new
approach to economics is he was a hedge
fund manager who specialized in trading
bonds and sometime in the early 1980s he
said you know the FED sells bonds we
call it monetary policy it's called an
open market operation and the treasury
sells bonds we call that borrowing we
say it's part of fiscal policy he said
functionally they are
identical they're the same operation by
the government just two different
branches the central bank branch and the
Treasury Branch
but for the non-government sector the
impact is exactly the
same okay and so when he wrote that it
just opened up our minds we say we've
been looking at government
Finance
wrong okay and virtually all economists
have got it wrong so I'll come back to
that
explain uh why this was so important uh
he wrote a little p well a thick
pamphlet called Soft currency economics
that was the first publication that
started to lay out this approach to um
economics and specifically to government
finance and and um then I wrote the book
that uh John mentioned understanding
modern money in 1998 that came out and
so that was the first academic
publication of this approach to
economics and I we used to meet every
year uh with
Warren and we would say how many people
Now understand what we're talking about
you know it took about 5 years to get up
to the fingers on one
hand and 10 years we were up to we had
to use both hands okay uh it was very
rough going very slow um until the
blogosphere now just when you go home
tonight Google modern money
Theory you're going to get literally
millions of hits there are thousands of
people around the world most of them not
in academics okay uh vast majority not
economists who could give a pretty good
summary of what modern money theory is
all about so and there actually are
political movements now that call
themselves modern money Theory okay for
example in Italy there actually are
several rival political movements that
all call themselves modern money Theory
um which reminds you of Monty Python
right so anyway when I saying it's just
it it took off with the um blog of here
and uh 2012 I uh wrote a book I call it
the primer so it's a modern money primer
where I tried to explain it to a
non-academic audience and uh that has
been updated in for 2015 and I'm told
the book is out I don't have a copy
because they mailed them all to Kansas
City uh but I think it is now for
soale let me first summarize the basic
conclusions then I'll very briefly
go through what we call history of
thought that is the intellectual origins
of the ideas uh because actually most of
what's in modern money theory is not new
it was just forgotten it was lost it was
lost over the past 40 to 50 years they
got lost uh and then finally the policy
implications so I don't remember how
many points there are but I just these
are the
conclusions where the theory takes us
the first is
that Sovereign
governments issue their own currency and
this makes a big
difference a sovereign currency
issuer uh can behave much differently
from a sovereign currency user you guys
are all
users okay Uncle Sam is the issuer it
makes a big difference whether you're a
user or an
issuer
The Sovereign
government chooses the money of account
in the United States called the dollar
okay in Canada confusingly they call it
the dollar in Australia they call it the
dollar in the UK they call it the pound
and so on the unit of
account The Sovereign then issues a
currency denominated in the same unit of
account so in the United States
confusingly we call little green pieces
of paper dollars okay we use the same
term well one is the currency the other
is the unit of
account um they impose taxes in the same
currency okay so you owe dollar
taxes they accept their own currency and
payment of
taxes okay in the old days you actually
would deliver the currency to pay your
taxes nowadays mostly you do it
electronically or maybe you write a
check prices generally are denominated
in the same money of account maybe not
all prices but most prices okay most of
the time uh contracts are written in the
same money of account and enforced in
courts in that money of account usually
not
always
um when you have a sovereign
currency there is a spectrum of exchange
rate regime
that you can choose them
on and what we argue is that a floating
exchange rate provides the most domestic
policy
space you can manage your exchange rate
which is what China does and that might
reduce your domestic policy
space you can Peg your exchange rate
which many countries do they Peg to the
dollar that further reduces policy space
you can adopt a foreign currency as your
own currency some countries have
dollarized so Ecuador adopted the US
dollar that severely constrains domestic
policy space you can adopt a gold
standard uh you can adopt the
Euro okay those reduce your domestic
policy
space so if you want to have maximize
your domestic policy space you adopt
your own currency and you float okay
that will provide a maximum uh domestic
policy
space the um problem with fixing your
exchange rate is that you need the
foreign currency that you have fixed
to or if you're Ecuador you actually
need to get US
dollar that constrains your domestic
policy space space because you have to
operate your economy in a way that
ensures a flow of dollars into your
economy usually this means what you want
is a trade
surplus if you want to trade surplus you
usually have to adopt some form of
austerity you have to keep wages low you
have to keep domestic agre demand low so
that your population won't buy imports
because you're trying to run a positive
trade balance that's why it reduces your
domestic policy space now a country like
China today has an
unassailable foreign currency Reserve $3
trillion of foreign currency even George
Soros will not attack them okay and part
of the reason why they've accumulated
that amount is because George Soros
attacks countries that Peg and don't
have enough foreign currency Reserve uh
George Soros brought down the United
Kingdom one guy brought him down they
had to abandon their Peg okay um so that
is the danger and that is why your
domestic policy space is reduced you
can't pursue things like full employment
policy because full employment could
lead to your wages rising and could lead
to your population importing which
reduces your trade
surplus
someday China will float their currency
someday China's trade balance will turn
around probably a lot sooner than what
most people believe why because they
they are allowing their wages to rise
they actually have a policy of wage
increases and so they're not going to
very long be a lowcost producer so they
will float their currency in order to
protect their domestic policies SP
that's a prediction of course and the
Inc coms are often wrong but I I think
that that is what we're going to see all
right uh finally final topic on
Sovereign currency if you issue your own
currency you can't run
out Uncle Sam can't run out of his own
currency he never needs to borrow his
own currency and in fact if you think
about
it borrowing your own currency would
make no sense it would be like you've
written an IOU to your neighbor I owe
you a cup of sugar and you find out you
need another cup of sugar are you going
to go try to borrow that IOU back from
your neighbor in order to get another
cup of
sugar no you're going to write another
IOU okay so I'll come back to this but
Sovereign
countries don't need to borrow their own
currency in fact there's no balance
sheet operation that you can show me in
which someone borrows back their own I
you okay and this is was a Warren Mosers
brilliant observation Bond sales are not
a borrowing operation there's something
else entirely so I'll come back to
explain what that is now sometimes
countries borrow in foreign
currency okay uh and you can borrow
foreign currencies again the problem
with
borrowing foreign currencies is that you
have to pay back in the foreign currency
and so that will constrain your domestic
policy space so I would say almost
always it's a bad idea for governments
to issue debt in a foreign currency
because that is similar to adopting a
fixed exchange rate you're going to have
to operate your economy in such a way
that you can get the foreign currency to
service the debt so it will constrain
your policy
space okay the second
Point taxes Drive the currency this is a
shorthand way of saying that that
Sovereign government that chooses a
money of account and issues a currency
in that money of account needs to create
a demand for the
currency the way they do that is by
imposing an involuntary obligation on
the population the citizens or subjects
depending on whether it's a democracy
they impose the tax or some other
involuntary obligation in order to
create a demand for the
currency okay historically
the main obligations were fees and
fines but from the 19th century forward
taxes have become the most important
obligation that you have to pay in your
nation's own
currency from inception if the
government
announces we're going to have a new
currency we're going to call it the
dollar and here I want to buy something
from you with
dollars you would ask but why do I want
the
dollars okay govern says Ah because you
have to pay taxes at the end of the year
okay the
obligation is necessary from inception
in order to drive the currency to create
a demand for the currency now what we
say is that taxes are a sufficient
condition they might not be a necessary
condition sufficient condition means
that if you have to pay the tax in
dollars you will demand some dollars to
pay the tax so it will create a demand
for the currency at least up to the
amount of the tax
obligation taxes might not be
necessary to drive the currency okay we
can be agnostic on that uh you might be
able to come up with another explanation
for why people would demand a currency
even if there was no obligation that
they had to pay in that currency I
haven't heard
any the typical answer I get is the dup
a
dope well I accept currency because I
think uh Buffy Bob will accept it that's
dupid dop I think I can pass it along to
someone dumber than me I'll accept the
currency that's the typical uh
explanation for why people accept US
Dollars we can dup dopes with it okay
that's not satisfying to me I think the
reason we accept dollars is because a
lot of Americans have to pay taxes in
dollars um but we can say that I taxes
at least are sufficient and they might
even be necessary in order to drive a
demand for the
currency um from
inception you can't pay your dollar
tax unless the government has provided
some
dollars
what this means is the government needs
to spend the dollars so that you can pay
taxes in other words the logic tells
us that the spending comes before the
government can collect the
taxes because you can't pay your taxes
until you've got the dollars if the
dollars come from government spending
the government needs to spend before you
can pay your
tax so
logically the government doesn't spend
taxes logically the government spends so
you can pay taxes the spending has to
come first what that means is taxes
actually don't Finance government
spending okay now of course if the
government has has been spending for
years and years and years a lot of
dollars can
accumulate in the hands of the
non-government
sector okay and so that you have
accumulated dollars that you can pay
taxes with however they all came from
the government spending
originally so once we've developed a
monetary economy and there's lots of
dollars in
circulation then the um this logic
becomes less apparent you say hold a
second I have a lot of dollars I can pay
my tax I don't need to wait for the
government to spend but the government
had to spend from inception in order to
get the dollars into the economy so that
taxes could be
paid The Sovereign government that issue
oh third one The Sovereign government
that issues its own currency cannot be
Revenue
constrainted because it issues the
dollars as it
spends if it wants to spend more IT
issues more currency it can't be Revenue
constrainted um it can't run out of its
own currency
it does face
constraints the main constraint it faces
is the resource constraint can run out
of resources to
buy it can push up the prices of
resources so too much government
spending can cause
inflation as people have long
argued but it can't cause
insolvency it can't cause insolv of the
government it can't cause the government
to run out so the fourth point is there
is no solvency risk for a government
that issues its own
currency there is no possibility of
bankruptcy when President Obama tells us
that the US government has run out of
currency he is
misinformed can't
happen the US government can always
issue more it's not possible to run out
there's no chance that running budget
deficits spending more than tax revenue
is going to bankrupt the United States
government can't happen because we can
always issue more we can always make all
payments as they come
due the um uh second kind of constraint
is that the government can put
constraints on itself the United States
has a very bizarre constraint the debt
limit okay no other country that I know
of has one of
these uh so Congress imposes a debt
limit on uh the US government and we've
had this since
1913 whenever we came up close to the
debt limit in the past Congress almost
always really without debate raised the
debt limit so it never was an issue it
was a constraint that was never
constraining okay uh a few years ago the
Republicans decided to make it an
issue to try to enforce policy changes
that they want by saying we won't
approve an increase of the debt limit so
it became a big political football and
we're going to hit it again okay very
soon and so what I'm saying is you can
impose a debt limit constraint you can
refuse to raise it and you can force the
government to default on its promise to
pay interest on the outstanding
government bonds and other promises it
can be forced to break its promise to
Social Security recipients say sorry we
hit the debt limit we can no longer
write the checks for your Social
Security but that's a self-imposed
constraint we can remove the constraint
anytime Congress can either uh raise the
debt limit or just get rid of the stupid
debt limit altogether and say that was a
bad idea okay and it was a bad idea and
most other countries haven't imposed
this kind of constraint so what I'm
saying is you can impose
constraints okay but the market doesn't
do it okay there actually is no no
reason why the US government can't
continue to spend and meet its
commitments pay interest to the bond
holders and pay social security payments
to the
retirees uh simply by issuing more
currency fifth Sovereign government
doesn't need to borrow and in fact
really can't borrow its own
IUS um some people uh think that the
reason that the government is borrowing
is because it needs to finance its
deficits but actually the bond sales
come after the government has deficit
spend the deficit spending
creates the what we call high powered
money which is currency plus reserves
that is used to buy the government
bonds so this was the inside of Warrant
Mosler everyone knows
that the reason the FED sells bonds is
to drain reserves out of the banking
system okay this is not controversial
everyone accepts this okay it's in every
money and banking textbook an open
market sale is to drain reserves from
the banking system so Warren is sitting
there and he's but hold it what happens
when the treasury sells
bonds it drains reserves from the
banking system exactly the same they are
identical operations just by different
branches of government and once he
realized that he
said then Bond sales are not borrowing
operations has nothing to do with
borrowing it has to do with draining
reserves why do you need to drain the
reserves because deficit spending means
the government has credited more bank
accounts than it
debited when the government spends it
credits bank accounts nowadays
when taxes are paid the government
debits bank
accounts that means if the government is
spending more than taxing it is net
crediting bank accounts it's
increasing the recipients bank
account and that bank's Reserves at the
FED get
credited excess reserves in the banking
system Drive the overnight interest rate
toward
zero excess reserves Drive interest
rates down the reason the FED sells
bonds is to drain the reserves out so it
can keep the overnight rate fed funds
rate on target so the purpose of bond
sales is to allow the central bank to
hit its interest rate target and it
doesn't matter whether it's the treasury
or the
fed the problem for the FED is that
normally it has a very small stock of
treasuries if the government is deficit
spending over the course of the year it
will be adding dollar for
dooll reserves for every dollar of
deficits if you think back a couple
years ago the budget deficit was $1
trillion a$1 trillion budget deficit
will increase Bank Reserves by a
trillion dollars dollar for dollar in
normal times Banks held about $50
billion in reserves adding a trillion
means a massive amount of excess
reserves you have to train them out you
do that by Bond sales okay so this is
why the FED has to coordinate with the
treasury and say we need you to sell
more bonds because we're running out so
the treasury will sell
bonds uh that drain the reserves out of
the system because the central bank
doesn't issue
bonds okay we get envision different
ways of draining the reserves you could
have your central bank issue the bonds
rather than the treasury the point is
it's not a borrowing operation it's part
of monetary policy is to allow the
central bank to hit its interest rate
target notice the logic here again is
the spending comes first then the bond
sales spending goes first then the tax
receipts the source of the currency is
the government the currency has to come
first before you can collect the taxes
or sell the bonds in order to drain the
currency out of the
system
um next Point central banks are never
really independent they have to
coordinate their operations with the
treasury okay there are several reasons
for this one I've just gone through
every Monday morning the fed and
treasury talk
okay the FED has a projection of what it
thinks will be added to Bank Reserves
okay and this depends on how many people
are going to cash their checks from the
treasury how many welfare recipients and
Social Security recip recipients will
cash their checks this week because that
will lead to reserve
credits and how many taxes will be paid
this week you can imagine the week
before April 15 a lot of taxes are paid
okay that means a lot of reserves will
be drained out of the system you might
have to put some in okay which means the
FED will buy bonds instead of selling
bonds anyway they have to coordinate
their operations because the federal
government is by far the largest
economic entity in the United States its
impact on Bank Reserves is by far the
largest of any entity okay and if they
didn't coordinate their operation the
FED would be stuck with either adding or
draining reserves to offset the treasury
by massive amounts every day hundreds of
millions of dollars every single day in
order to make sure banks have the right
amount of
reserves um the FED is the treasury's
bank modern treasuries don't spend by
bringing wheelbarrows of C cash up to
buy the stuff that they're buying from
contractors they don't deliver
wheelbarrows of cash to your home if
you're a social security recipient they
use the banking system okay so the FED
is the link between the treasury and the
entire banking system the FED makes and
receives all payments for the treasury
the FED is the treasury's
Bank okay and for that reason it can't
be independent this idea that
somehow the FED will prevent the
treasury from deficit spending by saying
no sorry no money in your account today
we're going to bounce your checks is not
going to happen never has happened never
will happen if the Central Bank started
bouncing treasury checks because of
insufficient funds the president will
call in the Fed
and tell them stop doing this you're
messing up the payment system okay The
credibility of the US government it
doesn't happen so because they are
responsible for making and receiving
payments uh from the treasury they can't
be independent they have to accommodate
the treasury and they always do that and
the
um uh final reason I already went
through has to do with the bond sales so
they got to coordinate the bond sales
and possibly Bond purchases with the
treasury treasury doesn't buy bonds but
it retires bonds which has the same
effect as buying bonds has to coordinate
with the treasury to make sure banks
have the right amount of reserves the
only real Independence that central
banks have is that they can set the
overnight interest rate target without
political
pressure
okay they can't be called into Congress
and told what interest rate to set I
mean they can be but they are not
Congress has given them that
Independence so they are free to set the
uh overnight interest rate and then the
uh chairman of the FED has to go to
Congress sometimes and answer questions
about it Congress if it wants to could
pass a law and say from now on
the FED funds rate will be 1% forever
and this is what the FED must do they
can do that but they're not likely to do
that so they they've granted them that
amount of Independence but that's all
there is to
it okay and I think uh two more
points um for every Surplus there has to
be a
deficit if you think about an economy
that just has me and you
if I spend more than my income by
accounting identity you must have spent
less than
yours
okay if we look at the uh economy we're
actually
in for uh because income in the
aggregate has to equal spending in the
aggregate it must be true Again by
identity that all of the
surpluses of households firms and
governments are equal to all the
deficits run by other households
businesses and governments okay so it's
very convenient to divide the economy up
into
sectors and we can divide them up any
way we want you know we could have blond
haired people and redhaired people and
blackhaired people and brown haired
people the deficits of one of those
sectors got to be matched by surpluses
of the other ones
okay that would be a silly division so
what we normally do is we say let's take
the private sector households and firms
taken together let's take the government
sector all levels of government taken
together and then let's take the rest of
the world okay all other countries taken
together okay that's a
convenient um uh breaking up of our
economy again this must hold true if one
of those sectors runs a deficit at least
one of the others must have a
surplus the normal situation for the
United States is the private sector
taken as a whole runs a surplus spends
less than its income and that makes
sense why because households generally
want to save for the future they're
saving for kids college education
they're saving to buy a house they're
saving for retirement so nor normally
the private sector runs a
surplus the government sector taken as a
whole almost always runs a deficit okay
you can go all the way back to
1789 uh the US government has run a
deficit in all periods except for seven
very short periods in which it ran
surpluses all other periods it's run
deficits okay and the federal government
deficits are big enough to more than
than offset the surpluses that are
typically run by uh lower levels of
government okay so that's the normal
situation for the United States and uh
for most
countries our rest of world sector runs
a surplus against the United States
since the days of Ronald Reagan okay you
you hear about this as a trade deficit
and we run a trade deficit with the rest
of the world uh more technically it's
the current account
deficit our current account deficit is
offset by the rest of the world's
current account Surplus they run a
surplus against us so take these three
things together it balances identically
okay I can show you a picture it's a
mirror image the surpluses Run by the
private sector um as well as by the rest
of the world are matched by the deficits
of the US government okay since 1983
before that we actually ran current
account surpluses but they were pretty
small you can pretty much ignore
them what this means is that it is
impossible
impossible from
accounting for the US private sector to
run a
surplus and for the US government to run
a
surplus can't
happen okay it could only happen if we
ran currently out surpluses but we don't
and we're not likely to in the in the
not even the near future in the
foreseeable future we're not going to
run current
GES so if we want our private sector to
save which almost everyone thinks is a
good idea we must have our government
running a deficit
must as I said we've only had seven
periods where the US government did not
run uh
deficits the first six of those
were followed by our only six
depressions the seventh was under
President
Clinton followed by a severe recession
and then by the Global Financial
collapse so I'm not a depression but bad
enough
deficits are very bad for the US private
sector because we achieved them by
having the private sector spend more
than its
income for 10 years the United States uh
before 2007 for 10 years the US private
sector was spending more than its income
going deeply into debt okay and in my
view this is why we had the collapse the
last time the US private sector ran
deficits was in
1929
followed by the Great
Depression private sector deficits are
really
hard uh they're very
destabilizing so for every Surplus there
has to be a
deficit um
the we can think of it this way the
federal government
deficit
provides the uh private sector service
in the United States and in most
countries some countries run current
account
surpluses they are able to run a
balanced budget or even a government
surplus without having their private
sector deficit
spending but countries that either run
balanced trade or current account
deficits need their government to be
running a deficit that provides the
savings for the private sector to
accumulate net Financial
assets those net Financial assets take
the form of
currency and government
bonds okay so you know in Time Square
there used to be this debt Clock they
moved it a little bit off Time Square
I'm not sure why uh you've all seen it
right you know when I'm talking about
the the numbers are just flipping like
this it's showing the outstanding US
federal government debt it's supposed to
scare the heck out of
you okay because it's increasing every
minute of every day right except dur
years uh you could just as well say here
is National savings over our private
sector okay uh because the government
deficit is creating the private sector
savings and so it's not debt it's wealth
government's prad uh creating our net
Financial wealth in in the safest form
there is us
treasuries what the whole world wants
that's what our government is doing for
us last Point
um if you've got your own currency you
can't run out of it you can always
afford to spend
more this means you can always afford
full
employment you can always afford to hire
the unemployed to create jobs for the
unemployed so one of the policy
implications of modern money theory is
full employment is completely
affordable you can't run out the
potential danger is it could be
inflationary okay so we need to deal
with that issue but affordability
running out of money as President
Obama's claims we ran out of money we
would like to do more okay during the
global financial crisis we had a
stimulus package that lasted only two
years President Obama said we would like
to do more but we just can't afforded
we've run out of money the piggy bank is
empty this is false could have done a
lot more we could have rather than
having 25 million people unemployed we
could have put them to work we could
afford okay so now let me just quickly
give the um intellectual foundations of
modern money Theory I'm not sure how
much this will interest uh you you know
uh dead economists um contribution that
they had made that were
forgotten um so the uh the
areas that uh modern money theory has
adopted are um work in the
uh past in the areas of credit credit
money What's called the
circuitstudio
um functional Finance Financial
instability
hypothesis uh and the state theory of
money so just very briefly I'll talk
about um each one of those and the the
main
contributors that we drew
on so the um first is uh George Fredick
nap uh who wrote a book the state theory
of money so so what he argued is that we
need to um look at the role of the
state in um choosing the money of
account and issuing currency in that uh
money of
account this was picked up by uh John
Mayor
kees before he wrote the general theory
he wrote a two volume work called the
treaties on money
1930 and uh
in that book he explicitly credited
nap uh but he also long before that uh
nap wrote in German it wasn't translated
till
1924 but long before this KES was the
editor of the most important economics
Journal even though he's a very young
man at the time uh The Economic Journal
uh he wrote a review of two articles
published by uh written by the um
Queen's Ambassador uh to
Washington uh guy named Mitchell
inis uh who wrote a book on uh
imprisonment called martyr martyrdom in
our times he's very opposed to uh using
prison to
punish and uh beekeeping for the queen I
I guess it was her
interest uh his only other two
Publications but he wrote two articles
on
money that were published in a banking
Law Journal they are the two best things
ever written on l in in my opinion
clearer than
that KES reviewed the first one 1913 in
The Economic Journal in 1914 he said we
might quibble with some of the arguments
here but the overall argument seems to
me to be correct and what inis did was
he started off his article saying here's
what econom here's the story economists
tell about money and it's the very
typical one that is still in every
textbook and if any of you took an
economics course you heard this before
you have Robinson cruso in Friday
they're on an island they're bartering
fish for coconuts it's very inconvenient
so they decide to use seashells as a
medium of exchange so that's supposed to
be the story of the origin L and it says
that that this is all completely false
okay there is no evidence for this and
it's completely illogical okay so
instead he presents a very different
story of money that heavily influenced
canes uh in uh the late teens in
1919 uh canes had a perod called his
Babylonian
Madness investigating what they knew at
that time about the development of money
in
Babylonia okay and uh it is very similar
to nap story that it had to have come
from the
authorities so Cain spent this period
studying the the earliest money units
and he was sort of surprised to find
that the earliest money units all of
them that we know about always were
weight units and they always were grain
weight units uh so the Mina the she call
every early uh money the pound the L uh
the term always was a weight unit and so
the hypothesis was that these came out
of uh
recordkeeping by the
authorities okay uh and so anyway
uh kaines picks this up and he says uh
I'm going to quote just very briefly uh
the state therefore comes in first of
all is the authority of law which
enforces the payment of the thing so
this is what I'm saying the taxes which
corresponds to the name or description
in the contracts but it comes in doubly
when in addition it claims the right to
determine and declare what thing
corresponds to the name and to vary its
declaration from time to time when that
is to say it claims the right to re-edit
the dictionary the right this right is
claimed by all modern States and has
been so claimed for some 4,000 years at
least
so kees is
pushing the
origins of money back 4,000 years at
least into the hands of the authorities
not Robinson Cru on Friday okay not it
did not come out of markets it wasn't a
replacement for inconvenient barter okay
it had to do with authorities who want
to move resources to themselves okay um
and the uh our understanding of the
origins of money is better today than it
was in K's time because we've had more
work by historians and by
anthropologists and uh if anything canes
was um
uh too conservative and only pushing it
back 4,000 years it looks like it goes
back farther than that okay it goes back
to before writing in fact now the
historians of the development of writing
think that writing was invented to keep
track of
money okay all the earliest writing is
about
debts and so we're never going to
discover the origins of money because
we're not going to find you know the
record so right today I invented money
this is how he did it and so on because
money already existed before writing so
there is speculation involved in it but
it certainly looks like it came out of
the authorities the the
best uh
explanation that uh uh I know of comes
from greerson who was the most uh famous
uh expert on coinage coinage by the way
is not old coin age only goes back to
about 700 BC so money existed long
before coins
um he argued that it probably came out
of the tribal practice uh that in the
case of Germany is called ver Guild and
that is the payment of fines so in
tribal Society if you injure somebody
you owe the family and there's
enforcement of the payment of the fine
so the hypothesis is that gradually over
time the authorities wanted to get some
of that payment of the f
and so now we say you pay your debt to
society what does it mean you pay the
government right you don't pay the
victims anymore you pay the government
all of this is in inis it's part of this
is a critique of
imprisonment anyway uh but what does
that mean it means money didn't come out
of the market it came out of the penal
system it came out of punishment it came
out of fees and Fin and then
taxes taxes are punishment for what
original sin you're born guilty okay so
what do we always say you can escape
everything except death and taxes right
uh there's a lot more you can say about
that okay it's all bound up in religion
almost all the terms everything
everything that has to do with money and
debt comes out of religion the first
authorities almost certainly were
religious religious authorities that
enforced these um payments um to
themselves so anyway going back to M
what is it it's
recordkeeping what is that green piece
of paper it's a
record what are wooden tally sticks
which is the way most Kings of Europe
spent they issued a tally stick it's
record
keeping it is the the
debt of the
issuer and this is what inis made very
clear all money is
debt it's the debt of the
issuer okay what do they promise you
when they issue debt they
promise that you can redeem
yourself in payment of that debt back to
them
the issuers of debt must take it back
okay that is the promise of every issuer
of debt they must take back their own
debt in payment so what is currency
currency is the debt of the government
the government must take it back in
payment to the government what is a bank
deposit a bank deposit is the uh debt of
your bank they must take it back in
payment of any debts you have to the
bank so you repay your loans with Bank
debt so the same is true for all money
what is unique about the state's money
is the state can put you into
debt okay you owe them taxes then they
say oh here here's my I you you can use
this to pay your debt okay so only The
Sovereign can put you involuntarily into
debt uh in all the other cases you are
more or less voluntarily getting getting
inent and you can say but hold it I
really needed that bank loan right but
uh there is at least some voluntariness
in you choosing to become indebted to
the bank you don't have a choice whether
to be indebted to the government you owe
taxes so the um uh State's money
is the state's debt coins are the debt
of the
treasury uh paper money is the debt of
the
fed and the government H has agreed to
accept it back in payment to the um
government
itself skip over some of these
things when we go around the world today
and we go back uh Through Time Kane said
4,000 years at least but probably now we
can push that back to 6,000 years
ago um the typical case is uh as Charles
goodart who worked at the bank of
England at and at the treasury at one
point um put it one nation one currency
rule this is good heart Rule and it's
almost always true when you go back in
time you will find that each Nation had
its own currency when you go around the
world you find it's typically true when
the Soviet Union broke up into pieces
each piece chose its own currency which
is also typical you will find
historically exceptions to the rule
where countries adopt a foreign currency
for domestic use uh you will find today
a huge exception to the rule
euroland okay so euroland is a big
deviation from what we see around the
world and also back uh through
history um but these are exceptions to
the general rule that um usually we have
the state issuing its own
currency from
inception
um in modern
economies the state doesn't directly
spend the currency as I was saying the
Central
Bank um stands there to make and receive
payments for the treasury so it really
will be reserves that are created which
are the liability of the FED rather than
green paper notes which is the liability
of the fed the Central Bank um stands
ready to supply and drain reserves in
order to keep its uh interest rate on
Target and this uh idea was adopted in
the endogenous money approach from the
uh late
1970s uh postans were arguing That
central banks can't control the money
supply and what they mean by that is the
money that is created by
Banks they argue
that when banks have good customers come
in that look creditworthy that want to
take out loans what the banks do is they
credit their demand deposits which is
the bank
liability and that the idea that the
central bank can constrain that by
constraining reserves is just wrong it
doesn't understand the way the central
banks actually have to operate if they
want to hit an overnight rate Target
they have to supply the reserves that
the banking system needs if they want
the payment system to function um
smoothly they have to supply the
reserves the banks need for clearing so
actually Banks can't con constraint
central banks can't constrain the
quantity of reserves they need to supply
It On
Demand in the80s when postan was writing
this um this was very much against the
mainstream in which the the main
mainstream argue Central Bankers uh can
and do control the quantity of money
there's something called a deposit
multiplier so the banks can multiply the
quantity of reserves but the central
bank can always control it over
time this view That central banks
actually can't control the money supply
has come to be accepted by um virtually
everyone who studies Central Banking and
by Central Bankers themselves so for
example last year the bank of England
put out a piece that says central banks
cannot control the quantity of money
what we do is we set interest rates so
out of the various heterodox approaches
that modern uh money theory was built on
um this piece became widely accepted uh
within the past 20 years the other piece
is not so widely accepted
the uh next
um uh early
precursor is Aba learner who developed
what he called the functional Finance
approach and he counterposed this to the
sound Finance approach the sound Finance
approach basically sees the
government budget as being similar to a
household
budget and this is you know widely
uh accepted you hear politicians all the
time saying if I ran my household the
way that Uncle Sam runs his budget I
would go broke which is true okay
households cannot continually deficit
spend okay they will go
bankrupt um abaar said but this doesn't
apply to a sovereign government issues
its own currency it cannot go bankrupt
and in fact it should not run it budget
the way a household runs its budget
because its interest is the public
interest okay and balancing the budget
the government budget has no obvious
public purpose to it okay the the
government can and
should um run its budget differently
okay and this is what he means by it
should be a functional Finance approach
try to pursue the public interest well
what's the public interest Ober said
that the two uh most important things
the government can do is to pursue Full
Employment and relative price
stability okay and what that means is
that you use the
budget in order to achieve full
employment if there's
unemployment either taxes are too high
or spending is too low so you need to
adjust those
need to increase spending um and reduce
taxes in order to move the economy to
Full Employment of course if spending is
too high and taxes are too low you go
beyond full employment you get inflation
so the solution to that is to uh reduce
spending and raise taxes so this is
functional finance that is his fiscal
policy
recommendation his monetary policy
recommendation is
that if the public has too much
money then the government ought to
supply more
bonds if the public doesn't have enough
money the government ought to supply
fewer bonds you can see that this is
very similar to what I was arguing
before the purpose of bond sales is to
drain excess reserves out of the banking
system okay the purpose of bond
purchases is to put reserves into the
banking system so this is exactly what
of a learn was recommending for monetary
policy in other words you want to hit an
interest rate target and you make sure
the banking system has the right amount
of
reserves
um Beardsley ruml which is a a great
name uh was the uh president no
sorry the uh name of the office in uh
the 1940s was chairman of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York we changed it
they're now presidents the chairman of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and
he's also the father of income tax
withholding uh wrote two interesting
papers at the end of World War II in
1946 one of them was
titled um taxes for Revenue are
obsolete
the purpose of taxes is not to raise
revenue for the
government okay he says in the paper
World War II has taught
us the government doesn't need tax
revenue to spend okay how did it teach
us that because during World War II the
budget deficit was 25% of
GDP okay that's five times bigger than
it is now has a percent of GDP the
government was 50% of GDP the government
debt ratio was 100% of GDP okay he says
we learn in World War II we don't need
tax revenue to spend okay um taxes serve
other purposes you can use taxes to
fight inflation you can use taxes to
punish bad behavior you can use taxes to
change Behavior you can use taxes to uh
reduce the income of the rich but taxes
are not for Revenue
okay this is the chairman of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New
York uh Heyman Minsky uh who was my
dissertation
advisor uh was famous for financial
instability hypothesis so this is also
Incorporated um within modern money
Theory the most famous line from Minsky
is stability is
destabilizing
so if the economy appears to be
operating in a very stable manner the
problem is that people will change their
behavior they will assume that it's safe
to take more risk as they take more risk
the stability disappears and you get a
financial crisis okay so in one sense
that's the the
theory and so by using the the
understanding of sovereign currency okay
which came from nap inis good heart and
so on uh we were able to to beginning in
1992 uh to write about the coming crisis
in Europe land that the way that the
Euro was set up by trying to divorce
fiscal policy from The Sovereign
currency as each country adopted a
foreign currency called the
Euro we said that um this system will
not be able to deal with its first
serious financial crisis and then
following Minsky we said aha we have our
chairman Greenspan and banki famous for
eliminating risk okay when Greenspan was
the chair of the FED we said oh there's
the greenpan put in other words you can
go ahead and take all the risk you want
because you know that no matter what
happens greens span won't allow anybody
to fail Bernan even wrote a paper called
the Great moderation Central Bankers
know what they're doing now you can
trust us therefore there is no risk
anymore
Financial crises are a thing of the past
we're not going to have them anymore
okay so we said you know this is exactly
what Miss was talking about the
stability will create the instability so
we said we're going to have a major
financial
crisis compounded by the Clinton budget
surpluses that put the private sector so
heavily in debt by the deregulation
pushed by Greenspan Larry Summers Bob
Ruben um we're going to have a massive
financial
crisis which the US will be able to deal
with because we're a sovereign currency
euroland will not be able to deal with
it they will face a crisis they cannot
get out of and so in addition to the
creation of the blogosphere being right
about these two things you know also um
increased The credibility of the um
modern money
Theory the the last piece
uh in the um uh history of thought that
led to the development of modern money
theory is the idea of employer of Last
Resort so Abner says if there is any
unemployment at
all it can be eliminated by the
government spending more now the problem
is that you can get
inflation learner thought you get
inflation
only when you get go beyond full
employment now in the 60s he changed his
mind on this but writing in the 40s his
prescription was just spend more okay
the problem is we get inflation long
before we get to Full Employment and so
the government has to cut back its
spending raise taxes slow down the
economy before we ever get to Full
Employment so hman Minsky who's known
for financial instability in the 1960s
worked to develop a proposal of employer
of Last Resort so he argued that only
the government can afford to hire all
the
unemployed and so it must be the
government's
responsibility in order to maintain Full
Employment and we do that with what we
now call a job guarantee you called an
employer of Last Resort so what you want
to do is design a new
deals
style jobs
program in which the government takes
workers as they are
pays them a wage which will become the
minimum wage throughout the economy
hopefully it's a living
wage and then finds useful things for
people to do just as the New Deal jobs
program did I I know that you're all
young and maybe you don't know too much
about this 13 million people were
employed in the New Deal jobs program
the biggest was the WPA which employed 8
million people uh you can still see the
out out put of these workers all over
the country they built thousands of
schools they built probably tens of
thousands of bridges hundreds of
thousands of miles of Road they uh built
public buildings all over the United
States they brought a country that was a
developing
nation into the 20th century it's not an
exaggeration to say that they developed
America they made America a developer
Nation the the New Deal jobs program so
this is what Minsky had in mind uh when
he talked about it I won't go anymore
into the the you know tiny details of
how you run the program uh to make sure
that it is not inflationary but Minsky
argued this path to Full Employment will
not cause inflation whereas just having
to government spend more could be
inflationary long employment so anyway
those are the the
foundations to just quickly conclude the
policy implications are first we need to
stop saying we can't afford things we
can always afford them okay uh there
probably are a lot of spending uh
proposals that are bad ideas okay so we
we can always afford to spend but we
need to to spend on things that make
sense we need to spend in in a way that
is not
inflationary um we need to
leave enough of the
resources for the private pursuit of
private interests okay Americans like a
small government so I'm not necessarily
arguing for a a bigger government than
we have now um we need to uh preserve a
large private space but it doesn't make
sense to leave resources unemployed if
the private sector doesn't want to
employ them we ought to be employing
them and there are things that the
private sector cannot do um such as
public infrastructure which is
uh M much of that is not profitable so
this needs to be undertaken by the
government um the second uh implication
is you know we need to stop uh talking
about the central bank as if it were um
completely independ depent of government
it's not and it should not be it's a
branch of government uh it has um some
uh Independence but every uh Department
of government has some Independence we
want them to be independent of you know
the day-to-day uh uh political games
that can be played and it's very good
that we insulate our policy makers from
uh that but they are not independent of
Congress they were created by Congress
they're a creature of Congress and
Congress can change the laws if they
don't like what the FED is
doing
um see
else we need to um understand that
balance is balance and it would seem
like this is an obvious thing to state
that at the agre level the Sur is have
to equal the deficits but in
1999 there's a the front page of the
Wall Street Journal I could show you uh
if I had the PowerPoint on the left hand
column there's a graph which shows the
uh government
sector running a surplus and they the
headline is isn't this great for the
first time since 1929
the US government is adding to National
saving by running a budget surplus they
show the picture then on the right hand
side they show the private sector okay
and of course it's running a deficit and
the headline is isn't it terrible the
private sector now is running a deficit
reducing National saving okay there's no
mention in either of the Articles to the
other article that it's an identity you
can't have the government sector running
a surplus without the private sector
running a deficit okay so if we
understood this a lot of
nonsense um would disappear from public
debates okay if you like private sector
saving and accumulation of wealth then
you love budget deficits okay because
it's the other side of the coin it's the
mirror image of the private sector
savety and so uh we would you know uh I
think if people understood this we could
change the nature of the debate about
deficits and debt and whether government
debt is a Bad Thing whether it burdens
the F future generations and all that
because all based on not understanding
that the balances have to balance that
the deficits accumulate to private
sector accumulation of wealth which most
people think is a um good thing yeah I
don't know what time is I have no kind
no watch whenever you know well it might
be good to take questions so why don't
let's thank Rand Ray
for so why why don't we do this anyone
who needs to leave for a a class or has
anything it can leave and we'll go for
10 minutes Randall and ask whatever you
want let's go till 5 till for anybody uh
who wants to stay so we got about 12 13
minutes and then we'll cut the video and
we'll go there I'm just and what I
thought we could do is we could thank
you sir we could just sort of like maybe
have a few questions and then you could
decide how to field it maybe I'll write
them now all
right does anyone so I've got I'm going
to I'll one and then Gordon's got does
anyone else want to ask
one rich definitely
will all the old professors all of old
old professors I'm going to just throw
myself in there for feel good about
myself so I just have here's here's my
question but we'll just go around so uh
and this is speaking as someone who's I
wouldn't even say a noice really just
learning like for me this talk was
beautiful and like putting a lot of
things together in a nice package for me
so first is one is well so just thinking
in terms of you made a statement about a
a state cannot go
insolvent well what I can imagine a
situation where a state uh dissolves so
the state literally stops being a state
so that might be a way of talking about
insolvency like and that could be due to
political pressures that take the form
of economic stuff like if if Greece had
gone another you know something like
that so I'd like to so that's my first
question to you how would you engage
that and then the uh the second uh the
second question I have for you side of
three the second is uh this seems like
so logical you put this to someone it's
very difficult to think how someone
doesn't at least internalize a number of
these points so what is it in the social
social epistemology of Economics or
something that's stopping people from
doing this other than just sort of like
humanist arguments of oh you know it's
blind or oh it's just corruption or and
then my third question for you is uh you
talked uh about the idea of taxes as
punitive for me just just blew me away
to think about the theological nature of
that and you talked about how there's a
and we talked there's a ranking of taxes
and and the worst type of taxes and and
like how that H would you be able to
share just a little bit of of that
conversation which is fascinating about
thinking about how taxes would be
levied thank you
rord you're
up uh how much of a misunder
understanding do you think comes from uh
well intentional
misunderstanding uh I unfortunately or
fortunately sometimes I begin to think
unfortunately read a lot of history and
I haven't seen much
indication uh that people in power
really give uh much uh concern to Little
Folks uh they tend to give most of their
concerns gaining more wealth and power
and uh given the fact that uh you know
beginning very early with the Pharaohs
claiming to be God Kings and owning the
entire Land Of The Nation just wondering
really uh how that plays into what you
see going on in the current economic uh
debate because I'm quite suspicious uh
that folks uh who are shown things that
are so
univocally uh true and obvious and
refuse to acknowledge them have got some
other
motive mine's the World War II example
cuz I I I keep thinking about the third
person you're talking about the
government surplus and the private
sector you also say there's the in the
National the rest of the world you know
as you mentioned China has this three
trillion Surplus so I go back to World
War II but for the fact that every other
economy and world was destroyed during
the war thereby allowing the United
States to operate on a tremendous Trade
Surplus
was if there hadn't been a war
theoretically all that debt that we
acquired could couldn't you reach a
point where a country that depends on
imported goods to function no longer has
a currency that other country will
receive and therefore is the equivalent
of insolvency because they can't buy no
matter how much currency they issue they
can't buy the things necessary to
continue to function doesn't I mean that
third party is is what concerns
that's it
okay all right I guess I'll try to go in
order um
so currency sovereignty is only one
dimension of sovereignty right so yeah
governments can lose
legitimacy and um uh dissolve and
disappear um
so uh
we need uh to
have many other aspects of
sovereignty right and currency
sovereignty is just one of them it's a
very important one because it's the way
that
States move most of their resources to
themselves there are other ways to do it
the draft is
one uh and uh charity is another um
we you we've used both in the United
States uh the draft wasn't too popular
and the charity doesn't work I mean
every time you file your taxes you have
a chance to reduce the government's debt
you know I don't know how much the
government gets from that I think it's
hilarious uh and I think probably most
people do too they never check it and
they never
contribute anyway so um yes governments
can disappear
and uh too much spending could be a
reason uh so too much spending will
cause
inflation I don't think that that
actually explains the hyperinflation so
the the story is always about Weimar and
Zimbabwe are that the problem was the
government caused hyperinflation I think
this is completely false and there are
several good analyses of both of these
situations that show that that actually
was not the CA the Hy inflation it will
be true that the government will be
printing a lot of money and spending a
lot why because all the prices are
rising really fast and the deficits will
be pretty big but that's an effect of
very high inflation not the cause of the
inflation in both of those cases but
government can spend too much uh
government can spend on the wrong things
uh taking resources away from the
private sector bidding against the
private sector causing inflation so that
could be a big problem and it could be
the reason why they lose legitimacy and
maybe get overthrown or
invaded and once you're overthrown or
invaded yeah probably the currency is
going to be
valueless which by the way is uh part of
the story of gold
standard my uh view is that the the
reason why we went through this period
when governments issued gold
coins uh was yeah um because it was the
the era of
um Conquest so getting the gold uh of
fighting each other of hiring mercenary
armies who were not going to accept IUS
because you're fighting for a country
first you really could care less about
them but second they could well lose in
which case currency would have no value
so you demanded gold coins which
couldn't fall below the value of gold so
it all made sense right um so anyway
yeah if you if you're worried about the
the state surviving you're not going to
accept
I uh
well there's less Inc the the study of
the Confederacy actually is really
interesting because you would think uh
that as the Outlook got more and more
dire the um uh Confederacy would have
had greater and greater trouble issuing
currency and having people accept it and
turned and bonds too turned out not to
be true so patriotism may you know
offset all that second um obvious yet it
seems and I'm not just putting down
economists there's a reason for it it
seems more obvious to people who haven't
studied
economics and there's a reason
because economics uh the study of
Economics um changes the way you view
the world and makes it harder to
understand what I'm talking about and so
it's much easier to explain all of this
to anyone who works in financial markets
they're very easy you know they they see
it
usually very quickly uh when you say
bonds are Reserve drain you think about
it for 10 seconds yeah you're right you
know because they know they they know
how the market Works um economis don't
actually know much at all about the
markets financial markets about uh
macroeconomics macroeconomics is not
taught anymore in the prestigious
institutions there aren't any
macroeconomist if you um study
macroeconomics and at Harvard or MIT
your textbook in the macroeconomics
course not the micro will be about the
representative agent your economy has
one guy in it and he's maximizing
utility through time that's
macroeconomics now okay so they they
don't actually learn any
macroeconomics they don't learn macro
accounting and they don't learn balance
sheets um it's a chronic problem
when when I was Minsky student I would
come to to him to try to discuss
something and he would say hold a second
he's said go go back to your office and
go through all the balance sheets then
come back and talk to me and very few
economists can do a balance sheet it's
funny if you uh watch them try to do it
I'm talking about even post canian
heterodox economist get up on the
Blackboard put the assets on the right
hand side and just it's hilarious
um so I think that that is uh part of
the
problem um then I also related to your
question there there probably also
reason why they don't want to understand
it so I think that that is a big problem
um that uh so when you talk to policy
makers
um it seems
like the
all the oper the top operations people
at a central bank probably understand
all this the in the US we have this sort
of strange uh way that we select the the
head of the FED okay so a lot of
times these people don't really know
much at all about financial markets so
you got Ben
banki um who I think learned a lot on on
the job but going in he didn't know much
and it's a strange system where you
select a
um uh someone from completely outside
the financial sector to head head the
head of the financial
sector uh we've got um political
appointees that are heading the fed and
so I think that um they probably really
don't understand
much but I also think that part of the
problem is in how you explain it and I
think that we're guilty for not always
being good at explaining it so over 20
years we've gotten better at explaining
it and the
um uh and it probably still can be
improved a lot when I wrote the first
book the understanding modern money book
I said sent the draft to Robert H Broner
who um I think sold more uh economics
books than any other
author very uh nice guy he called me up
and I was trying to get him to write a
blur for for the book and he told me I
can't write a blur for this book he said
I'm not saying this wrong he
said um you know money is the scariest
topic there is
and he
said and your book is going to scare the
hell out of
everyone and he was being completely
honest right when you hear the federal
government
spends by issuing currency and can't run
out the first reaction from everyone is
not oh that's
good we can afford full employment the
first reaction is you know
Terror let's not tell anyone right
please don't let them know because
there's this great fear that the elected
representatives will use that
information and start spending like
crazy okay I think this is completely
wrong and it's not because I love
politicians I just don't think there's
any evidence for this whatsoever I think
that the the thing they fear more than
anything is
inflation because the population hates
inflation
and so I think that the knowledge that
you could spend more is not going to
cause them to go crazy spending more
okay and and I'm not trying to argue
that they ought to be spending a lot
more uh I think we do need to be careful
about inflation and if we decide to
spend more we always need to think about
how might this impact the rate of
inflation because people hate inflation
it it might be a largely irrational fear
and so so we can work on that we can try
to make people understand that uh
actually inflation is not the worst
possible um outcome that we could face
that actually unemployed resources that
lead to economic waste deteriorating
families higher crime rates
incarceration is much worse than having
inflation of 2 or three percentage
points more than what we have
um but that's really not the way people
are thinking right now so you don't want
to
scare and we need to be a lot more
careful in how we phrase things
depending on who you're talking to so
that you don't scare them so they'll be
open to understanding what you're trying
to
say um the about the the people in
power um oh well I will come back to the
the tax thing
um it's hard to be optimistic I have to
admit and it's very hard to be
optimistic about uh
the state of democracy and whether our
elected
representatives actually are trying to
do things that benefit the people they
represent
um I I think you can see places where
they are I I'm extremely critical of
Obama in lots of areas but I think there
have been some areas in which he has
tried to improve things and I think
things have
improved um I would say even uh from the
1950s when I was a kid to today there's
vast Improvement in
America I think there are lots of areas
where there hasn't been much improvement
and maybe even deterioration poverty is
worse today than it was in the ' 50s for
example but uh the um
socially things have improved
tremendously the environment my kids
lived through school is completely
different from what I lived through so I
think we have
improved um so it's not completely Hess
I think policy makers have played a
positive role in some
areas anyway that's completely outside
of what I do I'm not a political
scientist at all taxes as um punitive
well I mean you know nobody wants to pay
taxes um say taxes are the cost of
civilization that's what people say I
would say you know if if you want a
monetary
system we need something to drive it and
duping dopes is not going to work I mean
if duping dopes will work Bitcoins will
succeed because that is a system based
strictly on duping
dopes so if if Bitcoin succeeds which
many people think it will and it will
gradually take over and we won't use a
dollar anymore okay then duping dopes
will drive a monetary system I think
this completely wrong I think the dupes
are going to
lose um that system will not
function uh so anyway we need something
to drive the tax system now some taxes
uh as we were saying at lunch I think
are really bad taxing work is a really
bad idea the payroll tax it'd be very
hard to think of a worse tax it's not
Progressive everyone pays the the same
rate up to the cap and then there's no
tax at all so if you're high income you
know you can start celebrating I guess
if your income's high enough in March or
April you don't pay any more payroll tax
okay so it's bad in that sense it taxes
work but we want people to work so why
are you taxing them it taxes employers
who employ people but hold it you want
them to employ people so why are we
taxing them it favors moving jobs
outside America and why would you want
to do that it favors replacing people
with robots why would you want to do
that so it has lots of bad effects so
that is a bad tax taxing corporations is
a bad idea and you know I'm I'm almost
the only Progressive Economist who
thinks that raising the corporate tax
would be a bad idea everyone else thinks
it's a great idea it's the typical
progressive tax uh it's a bad tax again
it causes corporations to move out of
the United States stes or to cut try to
cut special deals give me the tax break
and I will build a factory in your
community we ought to just get rid of
the tax level the playing field no
corporate
taxes instead uh if we wanted to we can
tax the owners so we impute all of the
re all all the profits to the owners of
the corporation and tax them as income
okay um the income tax is uh probably
not uh terrible tax I think there's
better taxes okay uh so I like taxing
bads so
pollution Alcohol
Tobacco uh maybe Financial transactions
which is another popular progressive tax
um those tax bad
behavior ideally they eliminate the bad
behavior
so you should the goal of a bad tax is
to get rid of the behavior so the ideal
is to have no Revenue at all so you tax
smoking out of existence then there's no
tobacco tax revenue at all okay
um the uh ideal tax to drive a currency
is a broad-based tax that cannot be
avoid it that's the
idea taxing income won't work when
you're trying to monetize an economy the
European colonizers found that out they
went down to Africa you impose an income
tax nobody has income they have no
incentive to get an income it doesn't
work so they said ah we need to tax
impos a tax they can't avoid so we have
a Hut tax you tax the Huts they got to
live somewhere okay it will drive a
currency It's very effective so we could
have a Hut tax or house tax and uh you
want to make it Progressive so you make
it square F feet you want to make it
environmentally friendly you make it
cubic feet because you got a heat and
cool cubic feet of airspace so I think
this is an excellent tax we should have
a cubic feet of um housing tax to drive
the currency you and finally uh you you
don't want to um allow accumulation of
family fortunes at least I don't uh
dynasties so you have
inheritance tax uh with a goal of
essentially wiping out the inheritance
so it should be very high um you you can
have a exempt amount a million dollars
or whatever but uh to get the high
wealth so those are the kinds of taxes
that I would advocate so you need to
drive it but then again you also want to
change of behavior and you want to be
Progressive okay last
um the rest of world so the you right
now in the global economy we have a
handful of international Reserve
currencies uh all the dollars Canadian
Australian and American dollars the UK
the uh Japanese Yen and increasingly
Chinese R&B so these are going to be the
global uh currencies for the foreseeable
future there is a huge International
demand for all of these uh even though
Australia is a tiny country you wouldn't
think that it was uh an international
Reserve currency International Global
Pension funds decided to diversify to
include Australia okay and so suddenly
there's a huge external demand for the
Australian dollar and that makes it
possible for all of these countries to
import beyond what they export okay and
China is a net exporter but it will
change change very soon uh it could be
within a year they will change so um
countries that face a huge external
demand can run a current account deficit
for how long as long as the rest of the
world once at all okay how long will
this go on
forever probably not eventually China is
going to want to stop net exporting to
the US they'll probably that net import
from the US uh luxury goods and so uh
and vacations in the United
States if we we could immediately get
that right all we have to do is make it
easier for Chinese to come to America
and we could have a start running a
trade uh Surplus uh with China it's just
a policy
decision um so it will gradually turn
around
the US will uh gradually move more
toward a current account um
balance
uh are do we face insolvency or the rest
of the world suddenly deciding to run
out of dollars no we don't face that the
the Chinese it looks like they're
gradually reducing their accumulation of
treasuries and maybe diversifying into
some other currencies the transition
will be slow first because the Chinese
realize what will happen to the value of
the dollar and to the value of their
treasuries if they suddenly try to dump
them so they're not going to do that
they want to
maintain a relatively strong dollar and
relatively weaker R&B and that requires
that they're very careful and how they
unload um the
treasuries the
uh
dollar will remain the main
International Reserve currency for
longer than anyone expects that's my
prediction the UK pound remained the
international currency long after the US
took over as the most important country
in the world and the largest economy in
the world um the the dollar will remain
the dominant currency longer than people
expect but there we will come to the
date eventually when the dollar will um
uh be in demand
globally is that a huge problem no most
Americans would think that's a good
thing okay the rest of the world is
going to want to buy stuff from the
United States that's a good thing
Americans might have to get jobs they
might have
to we might have to um you know start
working and producing stuff for domestic
consumption I don't see that as a bad
thing so I I don't think that we're
going to you know wake up one morning
and have a crisis I think it will be
very gradual our trade um deficit will
gradually decline our um uh trading
partners standard of living in China and
Southeast Asia maybe in India is going
to be rising uh so that the um our wages
won't be so high relative to theirs as
their stand Li goes up so I think it
will be a gradual thing the next
financial crisis there's going to be a
huge run into the dollar again and I
think that will be the pattern we're
going to see for a long time every time
there's a crisis the run will be into
the dollar not out of it so when we get
scared the dollar will be in higher
demand not lower demand so I'm not uh
worried
about a
crisis um
when the dollar is is replaced by some
other
currency people think people used to
think it would be the Euro which was
laughable because first if you
understood the problem with in the Euro
you knew that they were going to have a
severe crisis which they could not
handle but the the second reason is
because for a currency to become an
international Reserve currency the rest
of the world has to be able to get it
you can't get Euros because Euro land as
a whole basically runs back balanc
trading within Europe you have lots of
trading so Germany is a huge
Surplus and uh most of the Nations have
huge deficits against Germany but taken
as a whole EUR land runs small
surpluses the only other way to get them
is to borrow them but borrowing the
international Reserve currency is a lot
less
desirable than um earning it by selling
uh there was a time when uh London was
the international lender and so the the
pound really maintained its
International Reserve currency through
lending okay but now uh countries are
um uh much much prefer to export to get
the
currency with um globalization of trade
and bringing down trade barriers it's
much easier to get Curr that way so Euro
land is not a possibility China is not a
possibility right now China doesn't want
that role I know that some Chinese talk
about it and they're trying to get more
of their trade denominated R&D but if
you're the internation International the
primary International Reserve
currency you have to behave in a
completely different way when the crisis
hit the FED had to originate 2019
trillion in loans 29 trillion 40% of
that was to
Europe okay is China going to do that no
they're they are not prepared to be the
international lender of Last Resort so
Britain used to do that now it's the US
responsibility and so because of that
and because we have a Fed that has
demonstrated its willingness to do it in
spite of however much Congress might
hate this uh uh you know we proved we
will do it and so I think that also uh
really strengthens the um place of the
dollar as the international Reserve
currency if the FedEd said no then maybe
uh we could see a move to try to get out
of the doll but we didn't do that and
and the FED is is doing it
again it's continued to do it as your
Europe is needed dollars if F has said
yeah we we'll open that that window
again if we need
to well I already have more question but
let's do this so thank you everyone for
being here uh Professor Ray Rand thank
you for just taking the time to be with
us uh you know Professor Ray's coming to
us from New York with a newborn child
and he's taking his time out to be here
because he had promised a long time ago
so it was just very special so so thank
you again yeah and
let's


## Keywords:
