---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z60w6gzSe8Y
---

# Video
Leftist Infighting? Lessons From Eugene Debs
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z60w6gzSe8Y)

## Transcript:

just to set it up uh really quick you
know we have to think about what this
next year is going to mean for the
Socialist movement in this country um
and I think the biggest question that we
all need to be considering is how to
build a stronger movement going into
this next year and what's in front of us
it's going to be a fight as always for
labor and for democracy and against
Empire how can we embolden that fight is
the big question right you know everyone
say oh we got to return to labor oh we
got to return to doing Mass politics oh
we got to grow all this kind of stuff
like really thinking about what that
means I think is important and you can
do that by looking a little bit
backwards at what the bot Administration
has meant for the Socialist movement
right there have been significant
victories particularly on the local and
state level as more members of the DSA
have been elected on city and state
level offices that has massive Pro
promise for the future of this movement
the embedded the embeddedness in the
labor movement too I think has been one
of the most exciting and important
things remember like not only these big
wins for the UAW these big wins for the
teamsters um but I think a narrative
that has been missed is how much of a
role DSA members have played within that
I'm not trying to say to take credit or
anything like that but there are people
who are in in in positions of influence
power volunteer positions who have been
out there showing up participating in
these movements that's real that's the
kind of rootedness in the class struggle
that we need and of course you couldn't
ignore um the the movement
against the slaughter in Gaza right
these massive Street movements in the
public education that we SE right so
we've seen a lot of successes right but
uh this has also been a period of
fragmentation and disappointment the
Bernie movement is over in the sense of
you know being able to coales around a
grand presidential campaign at that
scale and promise add in the frustration
uh with many of the symbolic leaders of
this movement we're talking about the
squad we're talking about influential
media figures um the space between
support ERS of these movements and the
leaders itself has been shown and I
think that has created a lot of
frustration and that has led us into a
strategic and I think theoretical crisis
in our movement and the question is what
lessons should we learn from this period
and how to reorient and there's been
this fragmentation particularly around
this question right that has a full
spectrum all the way from everything
that has happened since 2015 has been a
big scam and people were trying to
bamboozle and derail and destroy the
movement that's one camp to another camp
that sort of says hey this is the slow
March of progress we should continue
doing what we were doing
without I think the truth of that sort
of lands somewhere more in the middle um
but we're seeing this fragmentation I
think really ex expand and I think going
into
2024 the task ahead of us has to be
finding a way to revive that Spirit of
mass politics doing politics at the
national scale building and growing and
articulating for a better future but
also while we're doing that not let the
the um the immediate goals of our
movement allow us to get sloppy about
articulating the heart of the heart of
our critique that all these fights that
we are engaged in will ultimately be
unsuccessful until we can weaken the
power of capitalist class power of the
working class this brought me to a piece
that we'll read a little bit from from
Eugene Debs the leader of the Socialist
Party um who is the most successful
socialist on a general presidential
ballot ever and he wrote this piece
around the time when he was running for
president um again uh from prison I'm
going to make this a little bit bigger
um but also just important to note that
this was written when Eugene Debs uh was
was imprisoned and running uh for the
president of the United States um so the
piece is called why are we not stronger
and he says one reason and in my opinion
a very real one why we have not better
succeeded in organizing the workers is
to be found in our intolerant attitude
and ill-tempered spirit towards those of
our own class and our own ultimate uh
aim who differ from us socialists
Communists anarchists syndicalists and
wobblies spend more time and energy
fighting each other than they do
fighting capitalism each faction assumes
that it is entirely right and that all
others are entirely wrong a very human
way of seeing things but far better
calculated to prevent than to promote
the effective the effectiveness of
organization of the
workers this next one here there are of
course and of necessary differences and
necessity of differences between these
various groups of organ ized workers and
these differences are wholesome result
in clear um in clear understanding
corresponding unity and solidarity
provided they are met in the right
spirit and are made the means of
promoting intelligent discussion and
acquiring more truth and greater
knowledge thereby building and adding up
new Strength uh to the organization and
he goes on to sort of articulate why is
it that we can't have debates um and and
uh conversations and political
differences within our own movement
without it you falling in uh to Bitter
INF fighting and he says up next
personally I have equal respect um for
all who stand for square for the working
class and for the overthrow of the
capitalist system whether they be
socialists Communists anarchists or the
wobblies I don't find it necessary to
hate and denounce them because their
method their method differs from mine
they may be right I don't think they are
but I have been mistaken a good many
times in the past and I'm just as apt to
be so now as anyone
else this last bit here I think really
gets um to what we're talking about here
I read this in a communist paper the
first thing we must do is smash the
Socialist Party the writer of that
sentiment will find ready allies in Wall
Street the Chamber of Commerce and the
manufacturers Association and I'm
inclined to think they would pay a round
price for the job more than likely this
comrade who now calls himself a
communist once belonged to the Socialist
Party now he wants to smash it his
former comrades are either Crooks or
fools and he must now devote his time to
smashing their
party he he then adds we know that the
Socialist Party is not all that it
should be but instead of deserting it we
are going to do our best to make it a
clean viral um uncompromising um
revolutionary party of the workers in
their worldwide struggle for industrial
Freedom I've been reading another
communist comrade who sneers with scorn
at persons from whom and the places from
where he got his first lessons in
socialism they seem to appear utterly
contemptible in his eyes since he has
scaled the peaks of Science and now sees
it all with clear eye and anoun standing
heart I con I confess I cannot
understand that feeling I have not only
a deep sense of gratitude but a sort of
reverence for those who gave me the
least help or encouragement in finding
my way into the Socialist movement and
there shall never be in my heart or upon
my lips a sneer for one of them however
far the movement may have left them
behind and he ends here by saying
something and I think this is maybe the
energy we should take into this next
year of struggle um I hope we have a
more decent tolerant and truly
revolutionary spirit in our at attitude
toward Those whom we defer um differ in
the movement and that we may devote our
whole time and energy in organizing the
workers into one industrial Union and
one political party for the gigantic
struggle which confronts them and which
they must win or remain in slavery the
most effective answer to those who snear
at political action is with silence when
argument fails let them alone and stick
to your work of education and
organization and you know I again I
highly suggest people read the whole
piece why we not Stronger by Eugene devs
remember he wrote this um when he was
imprisoned by the state for opposing the
uh for opposing World War I American
involvement World War I um Eugene Debs
was not somebody that you could call a
reformist um but he was seeing I think
very similar things to what we are
seeing today things that I think are
almost worse because at least then
people were members of organizations um
who might have been fighting with one
another um versus now where a lot of
times when people say oh I'm a communist
or an anarch IST or socialist or
whatever what that means is a kind of
personal spiritual social identification
rather than as a member of an actual
organized um and activated a block of of
working
people but I mean I think that we've
been seeing this for for years since
we've been on the Left Right Matt um you
know this kind of capacity to wage war
stronger with those close to you than
our enemies and and I I want to throw to
you to hear hear your thoughts on this
but I will say like none of this is a
call to not have those fights have those
debates those are really really
important um but it's actually having a
capacity and ability to work in a
comradely way with one another um so
that we can build a strong workingclass
movement and learn from one another when
yeah maybe you know a certain
perspective or Tendencies strategy is
wrong in a moment um or at least you can
articulate yours better with engaging in
that and I think that that's something
that's really Fallen to the Wayside
especially as I think as Eugene devs
puts really well there you all those
people in his time who are members of
the social party who left the Socialist
Party and joined other ones deciding
that oh you know all these things that
sort of cultivated me and you know I
grew with you know are now my number one
enemies I think you could see that a lot
with people who are very gung-ho for
Bernie Sanders 2016 2020 who are now
super based online Communists who have
no place for anyone else yeah well I
also like what one thing like this goes
with my favorite line of thought which
is like to not pathologize or since well
over catastrophy
things because this is things that if
people watched my um viewing of the
Prairie Trilogy documentary series of
the North Dakota socialists Henry
Martinson talked about this and how they
had to come to the defense of the
wobblies uh who were getting arrested
for um actually you know doing iners
civil disobedience in Min not North
Dakota and despite you know not agreeing
with the wobbly approach which he
thought was a little bit alienating um
in in certain respects like they felt
the need to show solidarity with them
because what they're doing was
fundamentally for the workers um and I
just think like these are I I don't
think people should get into the line of
like oh the left sucks and look at the
left doing this wrong these are things
these are Waters that we have to
navigate and have always had to be
navigated it's the difficulty of dealing
with you know different people um in
like a large scale um but I love debs's
approach because that's how I feel you
know I don't I'm a DSA member um but you
know when people call in and say I'm PSL
or I'm a different like I I I'm I take
the approach of like any of those like
honestly like people say like and people
make things so much about voting it's
like um so I don't want to vote it's
like well okay that's good are you a
member of like a Communist party or
something like that or is it just online
that you express yourself um you know I
I think like as long as people are doing
the work like this um I I I've I think
that you should be open to uh you know
and also extend charity and sympathy and
like a little bit of humility um towards

people


## Keywords:
