---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sT1KoXayDNU
---

# Video
Macroeconomics with Warren Mosler, Bill Mitchell and Martin J Watts, Birmingham  - 11th May 2019
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sT1KoXayDNU)

## Transcript:
good afternoon everybody firstly let me
take this opportunity on behalf of my
colleague Sarah and Claire to extend a
very warm welcome to you all some of you
will already know me
but for those that don't my name is pre
plumb rich and I am one of the five
founding members of the Gower initiative
for modern money studies it's really a
great pleasure to see old friends and
new faces in the audience and we're also
delighted to welcome our esteemed guests
bill met Mitchell Warren Mosler and
Martin Watts thank you all for coming
barely four years ago
Deborah Harrington one of the founding
members and I organized a panel event in
London at which bill was a keynote
speaker for those of you that don't
already know that small acorn
grew its first roots over the next
couple of years and in 2018 inspired a
small group of women to set up the Gower
initiative for modern money studies
which was launched last year in London
we are now as of 30th of April a fully
fledged not-for-profit organisation and
even though sometimes we still have to
pinch ourselves to check we're not
dreaming we are pleased to be playing a
role however small in changing the
economic narrative in the UK we are not
economists and neither do we have
academic backgrounds but we share a
common aim and that is to promote a
better understanding of how money works
and show that economics has higher
priorities than balancing books in that
aim we are truly grateful for the
support of our advisory board whose
appointment was announced in February at
the first European mmt conference in
Berlin and also
all those committed mmm tears working
tirelessly on social media platforms who
are also playing an important part in
disseminating knowledge about how money
really works from private chat rooms and
Google Groups mmt has now exploded into
the public domain initiating a much
needed conversation which admittedly has
raised the hackles of some but
ultimately is where all change will
start it is very encouraging so without
further ado I'd like to welcome our
first speaker Warren Basler Warren has
spent the last 25 years promoting the
MMT school of thought and is the author
of the seven deadly innocent frauds of
economic policy published in 2010 more
recently he co-authored maximizing price
ability stability in the market economy
with Professor Damiano silly Poe which
was published in the journal policy
modeling so Warren welcome and over to
you
thank you very much and wonderful to see
all of you Roger and I want to
congratulate all the organizers on doing
what they've done and I'd go on and on
about it but they've got I've got 30
minutes so yeah okay they didn't give me
time for that
I also saw on the title that it said
this was going to be about the MMT white
paper which it is but I didn't say that
specifically so there is an empty white
paper that had put out and I'll just
start with the beginning which is the
most important part
mmm tea alone recognizes that the US
government and its agents are the only
supplier of that which it demands for
payment of taxes okay so all the money
to pay taxes comes from the government
or else it's what's called counterfeit
government or its agents commercial
banks are agents of the government there
we go
and that means things like crowding out
private spending or private borrowing
driving up interest rates federal
funding requirements solvency issues are
not applicable for a government that
spends first and then collects its own
tickets later okay so this is before
wording backwards okay
so what we can't answer is the most this
important thing which is your starting
point which is what do you want what
does the country want the UK the United
States and I just have a list of things
that are generally assumed that the
nation wants okay but I was just talking
to a gentleman here who's looking at
Cuba and you can't make those
assumptions necessarily that that's what
the Cuban government wants it might but
you can so from what mmt is it's a
description of monetary operations and
it can also give you insight on how to
get the results that you want from your
policy your inputs okay
and at the bottom if the real resources
are already there
it can happen now I begin with this
little story of Pompey my wife and I
were visiting Pompeii about four more
years ago and we're on a guided tour and
we were somewhere around there and the
guide showed us these coins that they
found in the streets or what would have
been in somebody's pocket our merchants
place of business and he said it was a
very nice place to live they had very
nice public services what they did was
they hire people for public safety and
public sanitation and the aqueducts or
whatever and they would pay them excuse
me they would collect taxes from
everybody okay
these coins then they would hire people
to do all the public service and then
they would pay the people and even
though there are high taxes people like
to live there and I said to him being a
little bit of a troublemaker
I said look the way it worked was that
they would pay the people first and then
collect the tax okay this is a core mmt
principle right and he goes no no you
collect the tax and then you pay the
people so I said well where did the
coins come from he says well the
government made them
yeah so go on how did anybody get
according to pay the tax he says so you
pay them first and then collect and they
go yeah how else can it work and he goes
no no walks all right okay I'll
guarantee you everybody in Pompeii knew
that the government would spend first
and then collect the coins later oh it
kind of preview the next slide here
interesting this technology isn't over
running me okay so the fundamentals are
and these are outlined in the white
paper the funds to pay taxes and buy
bonds come only from the state I've
already said this four times okay so you
don't take anything else home they're
spending first okay well where's the
money going to come from for this
they're spending it first the question
is where the taxpayer is gonna get the
money to be able to meet their tax
liability not where's the government
couldn't get the money okay therefore
the state from a session spends our lens
first and then taxes can be paid to
repeat one more time
therefore state spending is not
constrained by revenues all right does
anybody think that the movie theater
collects the ticket first and then sells
it no okay you sell the ticket first and
then you collect it
the money story has to begin somewhere
and for purposes of understanding
today's currency we start with the state
that desires to provision itself you'll
hear other people start money stories
textbooks about people living on an
island bartering and then they start
coming up with a coin and maybe they did
I don't know I wasn't there but that is
not a lust rate avow things happen today
to start today's money story you start
with a state desiring to provision
yourself right and what the state needs
is soldiers for defense in these public
health in these public education and
needs a legal system how do you get
people out of the private sector out of
whatever they were doing into the public
sector
Pompey needed people to do all this work
how do you get people off the street to
do the public service okay so the first
step is to impose a tax liability
payable and it's in the currency in the
state's currency which becomes the tax
credit the currency is the thing needed
to pay taxes that's what a tax credit is
okay so you impose a tax liability in
dollars you oppose impose a tax
liability in pound sterling what have
you just done
okay you've changed things Pompey
imposed a tax liability in their coins
everybody's have to pay so many coins a
month or else they're going to lose
their house they're gonna go up for
public auction
they have suddenly created people
looking for work that's paid in that
coin before that tax liability nobody
cared about the coin then even though
there was one but after this tax
liability suddenly you're aware that
you've got an obligation and it doesn't
have to be everybody it only has to be a
few people but you've got this you know
absolute obligation to pay this thing in
it's coercive they're gonna sell your
house if you don't pay it right what
would that what we have created is
sellers of services goods and services
looking for paid work
that's called unemployment
so when the state imposes a tax
liability the purpose by design of that
thing is to create unemployment people
looking for paid work for the further
purpose of being able to hire them okay
so you have a tax liability results of
sellers of goods and services which is
unemployment okay seeking the state's
currency the state then can make its
purchases in its otherwise worthless
currency there's no value to these
things apart from them taxes are paid
now okay people come to work you pay
them now the economy has the money to
pay the tax and buy bonds if the states
sell it happens to be selling bonds now
in Pompeii they didn't sell bonds okay
what what happened was they found
something like twenty thousand coins in
the street how did they get there okay
what happens to state spending after the
state spends the private sector has only
two choices as a whole use the money to
pay taxes which case it's removed from
the economy or don't use the money to
pay taxes maybe buy something from
somebody else leave it in your pocket
okay in which case it remains in the
economy until someone uses it to pay
taxes so Pompey had all these people
show up for work for public service they
paid them all
turns out they paid them more than was
enough to pay their tax bill people were
willing to earn more coins huh none
overall then the tax bill like why would
they do that well they wanted coins in
your pockets the merchants wanted to be
able to transact to make change who
knows but they did and we know they did
because we found twenty thousand coins
in the street the only way they could
have gotten there is if the state the
city had spent more than it collected a
simple point of logic okay those coins
in the street are the public debt they
spent more than they collected that's
the public debt okay today the UK spends
a certain amount say a hundred maybe
ninety are paid in taxes and the other
ten remain in the street
it's a public debt okay they're
liabilities of the state the state owes
you the right to keep your house if you
pay those things in taxes right
that's why accountants call them
liabilities they they have an obligation
to you to accept these to release you
from your tax penalty whatever the
penalty for non-payment is so Pompey did
not then sell bonds to give these people
with 20 thousand coins a place to invest
and never occurred to them to do that
why would they okay
the UK does the US does Japan does we
don't have to ask why they to but it's
left over from that best you can say
it's left over from the gold standard
where but it's another story but today
it's not an applicable thing to do and
we'll get into that later
okay so what is the public debt the
public debt is the funds spent by the
state that have not yet been used to pay
taxes okay it constitutes what can be
best thought of as the net money supply
in the economy all those coins in the
street where the money supply and pompay
okay the 22 trillion of public debt in
the u.s. is the money in the street in
the US the u.s. spent 22 trillion more
than came back and that was paid in
taxes it's kept but what is the street
what do we mean by kept on the street
today what we mean is it's kept in bank
accounts some in cash but mostly in bank
accounts which bank accounts
specifically do we mean we mean bank
accounts at the central bank
what are those bank accounts called
they're called reserves and Treasury
securities gilts tret US Treasury bonds
those are just bank accounts into
central bank you give them money you get
it back with interest it's a central
bank the money is in a bank account okay
so we don't keep it out on the street we
keep it in bank accounts but it's the
same thing okay yeah okay so a growing
economy has a growing money supply does
that surprise anybody
move on to unemployment
another mmt fundamental insight although
others have talked about it but not
recently but taxation by design causes
unemployment we've already reviewed that
whose attacks that caused people then to
seek paid work to get that currency
unemployment therefore what is that
people looking for work who can't find a
job that's the evidence that the state
has not spent enough to cover the need
to pay taxes they create a tax liability
it creates a certain need to pay taxes
it also creates a desire to save once
you know this is a money the state wants
for taxes you want to save a few so the
tax creates two things a need to pay the
tax and a desire to save okay it hasn't
spent enough to cover the need to pay
taxes and the desire to save another way
to say the same thing if the state
doesn't spend enough to cover the need
to pay taxes in the desire to save the
evidence is unemployment as bill we'll
talk later
unemployment is caused by the state okay
it's deliberate policy whether they know
it or not they've done it it would be
there if not for what they've done it's
not something that happens in nature
that you were trying to reverse a
natural order of things this is
something that's created by a simple
monetary system so how do you reverse
the unemployment because it's a mistake
if the US government knew it only was
going to hire five million people why
would it impose a tax that creates ten
million unemployed that doesn't make any
sense
if Pompey had too many people coming to
work after they put the tax on they
didn't need all these people what would
they do okay there's only there's two
things you can do you can hire them they
could always do that you're not gonna
run out of money they had a big coin box
to pay these people the United States
just credits your account the UK just
credits your account so on these extra
an employee you created you could hire
them have second thoughts and say you
know what there is a lot more we'd like
the public sector to do we need more
public services well
you can lower the tax which case they'll
go away because the only reason are they
are is because the need to pay tax and a
desire to save okay
so the state has those two options but
there's one more problem once you've
created unemployment and you've hired
the ones you want and you haven't hired
the rest you've damaged those people
they can't just go back and get another
job studies have shown that employers
prefer strongly prefer to hire somebody
already working they don't like to hire
people who've been unemployed there's
too much risk you don't know if they're
gonna be on time every day or if they're
going to get in fights or they're on
drugs that you just don't know and so
you don't know they get along with other
people or their work ethics so you're
willing to train them if they're good
and you're willing to bring them on but
you don't want to take a chance having
somebody who's just out so you'd rather
hire somebody already working even if
you have to pay a little extra this has
been demonstrated over and over again
and so yes we can lower the tax to Tripp
and have fiscal expansion to try and get
business good and so hopefully these
employers will hire the unemployed but
they don't and especially in Europe you
get very high what they call hysteresis
where every cycle the amount of
unemployed they can't get jobs goes up
and up because they're damaged goods
and economically all right and so what
do we do about that how do I say it here
okay what we do is offer a job to
anybody willing and able to work okay
that has a certain jg wage which is a
reasonable wage and that by the way
becomes the minimum wage in the economy
so it establishes a because nobody could
pay less than that because people will
take this job so it doesn't
automatically you don't have to have
minimum wage legislation with
investigators and all that so we offer
job to anybody willing and able to work
and now they're employed now when we've
done this to promote the transition from
unemployment which is public sector the
government's taking you out of the
private sector with its taxation from
unemployment back to private sector
employment
okay so first of course the public
sector properly provisions itself it's
got all these unemployed hire whatever
you need to get the public services you
want but if there's anybody left over
you don't want to be doing nothing you
want to transition them back into the
private sector okay now there may be
some people even with a government job
don't want to go back to the private
sector fine no problem there and you
know some people will say well then it's
not a transition job what is there
available for work they're earning a
wage if the private sector can attract
them at a higher wage you know the
private sector is gonna have to try
harder because they like what they're
doing and they want to do it
I don't have any problem with that but
still the purpose of this program is to
provide for the transition into the
private sector okay and again it's after
properly provisioning the public sector
okay so what we have here is critical to
a lot of people who might not agree with
a lot of other things the job guarantee
provides a superior price anchor versus
unemployment the reason we have the
unemployed today is they're used to keep
inflation down you get a lot of
unemployment though you conduct policy
to make unemployment go up because
you're worried about inflation and you
think that'll bring inflation down
they're competing with other workers
they keep wages from going up and a
demand goes down because they're making
less money and so we use unemployment to
help keep prices from going up but how
effective are they in preventing wages
from going up too much whatever that
means
okay if the people can't be higher if
the government doesn't want to hire them
it's like having an build my talk later
about a buffer stock of wool which is
where he started and you've been buying
will because the price goes down then
when the price goes up you go to sell it
out in the market but it's all rotted
okay it's not gonna work as a and that's
what happens with unemployment but when
people are working now you've kept your
wall in tip-top condition you've kept
the butter fresh whatever your buffer
stock is you've kept your labor ready
for work
and how it's an effective price anchor
that's the paper I wrote that was
published in a leading mainstream
journal about how this employee buffer
stock is a superior price anchor that
unemployment and therefore the European
Central Bank should fund it to meet
their inflation targets okay so very
important to know these aspects of the
job guarantee these are the core
monetary aspects okay so what would our
proposals today are my proposals today
it's all proposals are always personal
of course number one I would increase
the annual deficit by five percent of
GDP as a starting point I think there's
at least 5% slack in the economy
probably 10 or 15 5% is a good starting
point once you see it's working then you
can go on from there and fill it up so
that would either be a tax cut some
people would have more money to spend if
you wanted more private-sector GDP maybe
you eliminate value-added tax or
something like that and then or you
could increase public services properly
fund national health rails whatever else
you wanted researched you name an
infrastructure those are political
choices you're going to have left and
right discussing those but coming up
with something that adds up to 5% of GDP
use fiscal policy then to sustain full
employment by full employment we're
going to have a job guarantee which is a
form of full employment it's not
necessarily everybody's definition of it
but what you've done is offered a job to
anybody looking for work but once that's
happened you can say that's a form of
full employment but then that size of
the j.g pool to get them to transition
you have to have an economy that wants
to hire them you then have to either
lower taxes or increased public spending
to make sure that number is kept to a
minimum and that minimum should be less
than a lot less than today's
unemployment because it's a better
buffer stock so if the minimum
unemployment not that there is one
because I can argue then that there is
no such thing but is 5% maybe this gets
you down to 2% or some frictional level
where people are going to be unemployed
as they're changing jobs and that type
of
okay sustain a permanent zero interest
rate policy you look at all the coins in
the street of Pompeii they didn't hurt
interest - as a zero interest rate
policy there was no inflation because of
that or anything else
Japan's had a zero interest rate policy
for 30 years with only a brief period of
maybe a quarter of a percent they're
still fighting deflation the European
Union sent European Central Bank's got
negative rates they're not causing any
inflation it doesn't work that way so
you don't do that and once you have a
zero rate policy then there's no
interest paid on government bonds so
which while it can be used as a policy
tool which I won't discuss now what
government interest payments I call
basic entry income for people who
already have money the government raises
rates they're paying out more interest
to people who already have money in the
form of government bonds that it pushes
up the whole interest rate Spectre which
is for people who already have money to
me that doesn't suit me politically as a
way to spend money into the economy by
just giving more money to people who
already have a lot of money it's but
that's just me okay adequately fund
public services investment research I'm
going to do a quick word on where the
price level comes from and where
inflation comes from and why with a zero
interest rate policy you still don't get
inflation in Japan what was the coin
worth in Pompeii well it depends on what
you have to do to get it from the issuer
it's a monopoly monopolist set price so
it's a government of pompei the state
said we're gonna pay one coin a day
what's that coin worth it's worth
whatever one day's labor is worth to
everybody I mean what's it worth what's
it worth in the marketplace would you
rather be a police officer for a day or
would you rather grow tomatoes and raise
chickens and sell them to police
officers you know there's some relative
value that goes on there so let's say a
coin was worth one day's labor and that
was worth ten tomatoes in the
marketplace
that ratio doesn't change unless the
government changes what it pains to the
police officers and the sanitation
workers as long as it's paying one those
things will be worth a day's labor
forever it's not gonna change nobody has
any saying that the monopolist sets the
price what if the government says all
we're gonna give everybody a raise we're
gonna pay two coins a day well fine now
coins only worth half a day's labor now
it's only worth five tomatoes all
they've done is cut the value of the
money in half they used to call that
crying down the currency okay that's all
they did was cut it in half the currency
is worth what you have to get it from
the issuer it's got nothing to do with
inflation expectations and rates and
demands and love it's what you have to
do to get it they've got it and you need
it are you gonna lose your house here's
what it's worth and then in a market
economy police in theory you only have
to set one price and the rest is written
and is reflected as relative value in
the marketplace what it's worth versus
other things and that'll change with
scarcity and all kinds of other things
and there's all kinds of institutional
structure out there that'll cause that
to change the laws and what you can do
but generally that's a good guideline is
what will be worth okay thank you
bingling process payments 0% rate
provide unlimited bank deposit insurance
should be limited eighty thousand pounds
it's not a single good reason I've ever
heard for that okay it just causes more
expense for the banks as they kind of go
out with all this effort to do things
but if you have unlit and you did the
next one provide unlimited bank
liquidity through the Bank of England
then the bet then you certainly don't
have to worry about any problems from
limited deposit insurance but then once
the banks have unlimited ability to fund
themselves
you've got to regulate and supervise the
asset side what they can do for lending
and I have a very narrow banking
proposal as what they can actually do
with the when they make loans okay so
once you've guaranteed the deposits
which is already the case now the banks
have public money and state funds
and if you don't regulate them properly
you get all kinds of moral hazard as
we've seen in the past and if you say
you can't you don't have enough
regulators then you can't let them do it
you have to just eliminate all lending
facilities until you're in a position to
adequately supervise them and regulate
them otherwise it's like giving the
military guns and bullets but you know
we have an established dock the officers
and the rules for the military you can't
do that you can't have these people
running around you know fully armed
without rules and the monetary policy
that would follow this is government
spending remains and member bank and BOE
accounts so there's no government
securities which is pretty much how the
US and Japan has done that almost
entirely it doesn't create any problems
it just makes things easier cuts down on
it expenses it's just more efficient and
the Bank of England should fund the job
guarantee and supervise it because it's
- it's an inflation anti-inflation tool
and they've got plenty of people working
there now who are going to have a lot
less to do this will give them something
a lot more important to do
oh is there anybody here from the bank
because if there was I'd have to dumb
this down a lot more yeah okay fiscal
policy simple you target output in
employment goals the deficits of
residual you don't even have to publish
the number nobody should care nobody
will care okay with a permanent zero
rate policy there's no interest payments
you don't need to know what the public
debt is it doesn't enter into any
calculation it's just a residual
calculation to make sure you didn't make
a mistake with your arithmetic trade
this will be the last part
okay exports are real cost things you
send out imports are the benefits the
things you'd get in an exit your think
of your real wealth as your pile of
stock the pile is this big from
everything you produced domestically it
gets this big when you import and it
goes down when you export okay so the
imports are the benefits the exports the
cost and that what's left over is your
real wealth so you want to optimize that
okay when when somebody's army conquers
another country the loser has to send
things to the winner okay the winner
doesn't say expert sale we want to be an
export power we're gonna conquer
somebody an export to them and so we're
the winners that doesn't make any sense
right okay and so I thought so
okay and so the other question that
comes up is they wonder like what if
nobody trades with us because if we do
this we have up export where if we
import too much we're never have enough
for surplus and that's total nonsense
okay
what is what is the UK produced nowadays
to use there's some product you are
chemical materials okay so you take so
you take a barge full of aggregates
right I've got one of those back home
okay and you send it over to you know to
Rome or something okay and then it
exchanges for so many Ferraris right and
there's a market a world market for that
so many we are so many euros for this so
many where else for that and you'll get
this barge will trade for 10 Ferraris or
whatever are they going to say well you
know because England's unemployment the
UK's unemployment is too low and because
they are the currency went down we're
not gonna do that
of course they they don't care they
don't care you if you even have a
currency
right those aggregates will exchange for
those Ferraris at some ratio in totally
independent of anything going on
domestically right so when we look at
your pile of stuff the exports go out
and the imports come in that's not going
to change now if they've been sending
you extra cars because they want to hold
your currency that part could change
it's not particularly large that could
change and that's what we talk about is
optimizing your real terms of trade you
want to be able to get the most for what
you send out but what happens is it
creates things that happen in the
currency create these massive
distributional problems if the currency
goes down or the currency goes up that
affects who has to dig the aggregates
and who gets to drive the Ferraris okay
back in England okay but it doesn't
affect the total for the country and
those distributional issues are best
dealt with with local policy monitor
fiscal policy and all your rules and
regulations and everything else and not
by making your pile of stuff smaller you
don't go into an austerity program to
bring down the real wealth so that you
can alter distribution or 'once or
something like that it doesn't it
doesn't make any sense to do that okay
so your real wealth is everything
produced domestically plus imports minus
exports full employment optimizes real
terms of trade and optimize as well so
it's critical to keep full employment
the gains you're going to have from full
employment will be much larger than any
small change that might happen in trade
but again you've got a mind that
distributional issues okay so just a
quick review pump government's public
infrastructure for a public purpose
these are the things we've gone through
the most important one right now has
lapped his last job guarantee for anyone
willing to work and I'll leave I believe
it's a Martin and bill to fill in any
holes I've left thank you
Thank You Orrin for your insight sir I'm
sure it'll prove food of the thought for
all of us and now moving on to our
second speaker and again a very warm
welcome to Professor bill Mitchell bill
is a leading proponent of modern
monetary theory and director of cofee
the Center for full employment and
equity promoting research aimed at
restoring full employment and achieving
an economy that delivers equitable
outcomes for all he has written
extensively in the fields of
macroeconomics and khurana metrics and
public policy his most recent book
jointly authored with professors Elle
Randall ray and Martin J Watts was
forged in London earlier this year and
followed the successful launch of
reclaiming the state in 2017 thank you
Bill and welcome
okay so so this gosh this this thing MMT
began in around the early nineties and
the sort of partnership when Warren and
I met up was about 94 I think and in
different ways we had been cooking up
stuff and then when we met with the
project really began when a done player
work on the monetary side and the
banking side I'd done prior work on
other aspects of it the the buffer stock
aspects the next gonna go crazy
and that's when the MMT project began
and we used to we used to laugh made up
that we could count the mmm tears on one
hand with spare fingers and this was 2 3
and Brian recruited some people and that
started from there and then spilled over
to two hands and we were really engaged
Warren was engaged in financial markets
and he'd have these annual events where
we sort of talk to financial market
people and obviously I and Randy were
engaged in the academic side and yeah we
were building what was what what I now
call a body of work the the the
principles and Warren's given a really
good introduction to those and then I
remember one day we had a meeting Randy
and Warren and I were there and I just
been to an IT seminar cuz I really like
i you know coding and that sort of stuff
and I've been to an IT seminar
announcing the concept of a blog
a web blog and I announced to the Randi
and more and can you remember that one I
said I'm gonna start a blog and I
remember Randy was quite impolite and
and and by the way I just I just love
England I was out running this morning
come on I was out running this morning
polite got me going and I was up near
sedan's and there's this sign on the
beach and it says no barbecues are open
flames on the grass area but it says
it's a polite notice you wouldn't find
that in Australia I can tell ya I just
love that polite notes anyway the move
into social media was a very important
move I think because that started the
communication with grassroots people
because if you've studied philosophy of
science you'll know that trying to get
paradigm change in the knowledge
communities is very difficult and trying
to deal with my peers in the academic
sphere is is is as I'll explain in a
moment it's just riddled with group what
I call groupthink and so really mmm teas
I think the first type of we're in the
middle of a paradigm shift folks and I
think that we've in in terms of the
history of economic thought this is the
first paradigm shift that's going to be
accomplished by a grassroots action and
that's a really significant event and
you're going to be all part of it and
when the historical line is drawn you're
going to be on the right side unless
there's some closets in the room
alright so that's sort of a bit of an
introduction have a check out some of
these headlines now this was in
Bloomberg this was in some other blah
Krugman Sommers Rogoff all of the sort
of heavy hitters in the mainstream
economics in the recent period have
really come out and of trying to kill us
off this particular quote here is not a
quote it's wording from a bill that's
before the US Senate where five
Republican senators have actually
proposed a bill which seeks to condemn
us because we're a danger to the economy
of the environment stage so ladies and
gentlemen we're making progress
I mean I love the one that we grotesque
I've always fancied I was okay
okay so what we're dealing with
basically is a resistance this is all
the resistance it's now coming and and
paradigm shifts go through stages and we
were ignored for about twenty years
while we were cooking up the the body of
work and now we're into the stage where
we're clearly a threat to the mainstream
no more people are starting to talk
about it it's infiltrated the the
political sphere now and there's
champions emerging for these ideas in
the political sphere and once that
happens then there's going to be votes
cast for politicians and so and so forth
and what we're seeing is a mainstream of
my profession which is a has a
disgraceful history and a history where
they've been compliant blithely unaware
of reality for years and that's what
happens in dominant paradigms and you
know I'm not going to go through all of
these things but these are elements of
this blindness you know in 2003 a Nobel
Prize winner Robert Lucas jr. announced
to all of us that the business cycle was
dead that's that that we were no longer
going to have any more cycles of
recession and and boom and that all that
government should do was then
concentrating on further deregulate the
micro economic aspects of life further
deregulation further movements towards
are lacking job protections you know
scrap some of those guys some of the
senators that have put that bill before
the US Congress want to scrap the EPA
they want to scrap the Inland Revenue
Service they want to scrap the
Department of Education and this is a
sort of thing that my profession has
been providing authority to these mad
crazy politicians and essentially they
they became my profession became locked
in this this bubble
Souths lever intial bottle bubble where
where the there is no longer and it
going to be any cycles where all the
mania could macroeconomic problems have
been solved and where you didn't even
have to worry about financial markets so
the dominant framework for
macroeconomics has taught in our
universities and which is dominating in
central banks and treasurer in finance
departments than just so-called New
Keynesian paradigm didn't even have a
banking or financial sector in its model
which is which is used for policy
analysis so wasn't it wasn't and that's
because they believed in efficient
market theory where where whatever the
financial markets would do would be
optimal and so there's no surprise I
didn't see the GFC coming because they
didn't even have a financial sector they
didn't think it was important and this
just just on on groupthink
but what's what we're now in the face of
is seeing what Emre like etosha was a
famous philosopher of science at LSE
called a degenerative paradigm and
that's a paradigm that's basically lost
the plot but it persists as the dominant
paradigm in the area of concern through
groupthink
deep thinks a way in which behavior of
groups is it becomes patterned and it
has features this was identified in the
social psychology literature in the
early 60s this sort of pattern behavior
and a sort of mob rule develops well you
were filters out dissent through various
wise graduate programs I was telling my
own yesterday that when I was doing my
my my masters work before PhD a senior
professor parish
won't Martin taught me in that program
by the way but a senior professor in at
the University said to me that he said I
advise you to become a sociologist
because you never gonna cut it as an
economist and that was that was a
filtering out pressure and they do it
from publications and through grant
distribution through appointments and
all the rest of it and so very few
people that I have known on mainstream
positions come through very few of us
and they just deny any thing that
creates dissonance for them and so these
are these quotes I had up there are them
trying to maintain their degenerative
paradigm that's lost its empirical
content that's the jargon that that
means is that it can't provide any
insights into what the real world is and
there's a whole lot of basic myths that
are taught to students and and
policymakers rehearse regularly
government's like a household cheating
money is inflationary and all these
articles that those headlines came from
rehearse these myths that deficits
Claire that in fiscal deficits crowd out
private initiatives that you define
what's fiscally sustainable by some
number of a fiscal deficit now the third
what the next part of this talk is is
really to provide a some more insight
into the Warrens based the basic
principles were initiated the mainstream
approach is to define fiscal
sustainability and fiscal space in terms
of some a set of financial ratios now
that's exemplified here for example in
the British Labour Party's fiscal
credibility rule just the terminology
cues gives it away and in the eurozone
three percent maximum fiscal deficit and
a sixty percent maximum public debt
ratio as if those have any meaning well
as was with with with our approach to
macro economists the MMT approach fiscal
sustainability can't be defined in those
terms
they have no context and no meaning and
so whenever we're thinking about fiscal
sustainability we have to be considering
well what's the role of fiscal policy
and that was Warren's first slide what
do you really want what what are the
aims of society now mmt can't give you
those aims because those aims reflect
the collective values of the society and
so a brutal dictatorship running a
monetary system will have different aims
to a very progressive left society but
you've got to start off with your Iams
and fiscal policy isn't there to produce
a surplus or a deficit it's there to
achieve - to use the capacity of the
currency issuer to
movses moves a society from out prudent
service provision
to those arms
and so if you've got a society where
you've got a private domestics that the
households and firms who wanted to save
overall for a rainy day and you've got a
society that's benefiting from having an
external deficit
I repeat that benefiting from running an
external deficit that follows on from
Warren's pile of stuff and what Warren
didn't say is that what the the macro of
an external deficit means some of the
income that's being produced in a period
is going to be leaking out of the
economy in return you're getting this
stuff through imports being higher than
exports and if you've got some of the
income that's being generated
domestically not being recycled back
into spending in the next period because
the households and firms are desiring to
save overall then you've got a basic
macro problem because if nothing else
happens you will end up with recession
because income is being produced by both
firms on the expectation that they'll be
able to sell the stuff and so if they
produce you income one period and
doesn't all come back next period in
spending they realize they've made a
mistake and they cut back and so the
only other only way you can get out of
that bond there's only one other sector
left and that's the government sector
and that's that establishes where
typically you'll be running continuous
deficits to maintain stable growth and
full employment
typically when a government runs fiscal
surpluses a recession soon follows now
there are some countries that can run
fiscal surpluses and satisfy the
domestic need to save overall and that's
countries like Norway that have got very
strong export revenue coming in but
they're in no minority extreme minority
so when you talk about fiscal
sustainability the first question you've
got to ask yourself is what do we want
to achieve with fiscal policy and we
want to maintain high levels of activity
so that nobody becomes unemployed and
that's just a different way of saying
what Warren said anyway another thing
that I that that we need to focus on is
this concept of deep politicization and
I'm not going to go into each of these
but the tendency over the last several
decades has been for those in charge of
fiscal policy that is the currency
issuing government to become obsessed
with running contractionary fiscal
positions and realizing that in our
democracies that's unpopular because it
causes unemployment it causes loss of
services tomorrow I'm giving a talk to
local government officials in London
about the disastrous situation in that
austerities caused local councils and
it's the perfect a perfect example here
that what depoliticization has done
under this austerity mindset is that the
decision-maker pushes the responsibility
and the the transportation of the costs
onto an external
entity so in Britain for example or
local government officials are getting
pilloried because libraries are closing
and govern essential programs being shut
down because of the loss of income but
the actual cause is central government
and you know Britain is the perfect
example of this as well because of if I
was old enough to remember mid 70s when
a Labour Chancellor Denis Healey told
Mars to the British people that the
government was just about to run out of
money and who would have to borrow from
the IMF that was that was deep
politicization and he did what he want
to do he'd become infested with
monetarism but he wanted to do was
impose austerity he knew it wouldn't be
the union's you know the wage agreement
at the time he knew that wasn't going to
be popular so he had to invent a story
that all we've got no choice
that was the beginning of Tina Margaret
Thatcher didn't invent teen of Denis
Healey and James Callaghan did
yeah I'm glad I didn't
what's that now another thing that we
need to get very clear also and this
this is both those quotes I showed I've
showed at the beginning of the critics
but also progressive people who are
trying to make sense of our work I often
hear well when we have progressives put
on Twitter and stuff well when we have
mmm two things are going to be great
Larry Summers says when we have MMT if
we have sticky and have mmt it's going
to be grotesque and the world or melt
it's as if mmt some sort of regime that
you shift to the ladies and gentlemen
mmm mmm t & Teller Joseph you're
paranoid
mmm teas burn around us
you know everyday life we walk the
streets and there it is so you've got to
be clear it's not a regime it's a lens
that I call a superior lens for
understanding the operations of the
monetary system superior to the way in
which the mainstream of our profession
attempts to construct an understanding
of the monetary system full of myths and
it also allows us to cut through and
identify what the actual capacities of
the currency issue in government are and
I think this is an incredibly empowering
lens because it cuts through what I call
the vial of ideology because if
everybody has an mm to understanding
that is that they aren't actually
understand the way our system out there
operates and what our governments can
and can't do and what the consequences
of different actions will be well they
know no longer tolerate a politician
getting up there and saying we've got to
tolerate ten percent unemployment
because we will run out of money or we
can't deal with climate change because
we haven't got enough money because if
we all understand that that's not not
true well then that smokes them out
doesn't it because then the partition
has to disclose where they want to have
ten percent unemployment and I think
that empowers our democracies and the
other thing with good then got to
understand is that - that mmm tea is
relatively agnostic well it's not
relative its agnostic about policy
and in what you know way you know it's
not the right-wing or left-wing to
operationalize the understanding that
mmt provides you you've got to overlay
that understanding with a set of values
with an ideology and so a real hardcore
right winger who understands mmm te
would come up with a different set of
policy interventions to a left-winger
like me with the same monetary
understanding so for it just happens
that the MMT founders and the the core
group are relatively progressive just
happens at but that doesn't mean that
mmm tea is left my values are left but
my understanding of the monetary system
isn't left it's knowledge that's a
really important thing to differentiate
in in when you're talking to people
because there's always you know the
resistance that we're getting now that I
those quotes and that isn't is is is not
about the core monetary theory that
we've provided because these characters
don't even get it it's about that they
think it's left-wing so they're really
having a debate about values and I
actually don't have understand the
distinction but you all do
what having your currency and this is
just reinforcing what Lauren said about
having your own currency means is that
the currencies you can buy whatever is
available for sale in that currency
including all idle labor once you
understand that then you immediately
know the next thing and that is any
honor any mass unemployment in the
economy is a choice a political choice
of government it's not something that's
come out of the ether it's not market
driven and none of all of that's true
it's not because people are lazy
it's because governments have chosen to
run net spending positions deficits that
are too low or surpluses that are too
big and so once you understand that then
the sort of questions you'll hassle your
local politicians with will be different
to the questions that you might ask if
they're if my profession gets up as they
do and say I will you know
what students are taught is that
unemployment is a voluntary optimizing
choice of people between leisure and
earning income that's what's taught the
students and the other important thing
is that the fact that the government can
buy whatever is available for sale
doesn't mean that it should it all
depends and if it does then what mmt
allows you to tease out is what the
consequences of different positions
using that capacity will be we've got
music
briefly having your own currency doesn't
mean that the nation will be richer in
material terms so I often receive on
Twitter if we go to mmt everybody will
be better off one not necessarily a poor
country that doesn't have a rather mmt
says is that the available real
resources that you have in the nation
plus those that you can induce from
others through trade can always be fully
used and made productive but but what
what level of output that and services
that emerge from that may not be very
deliver very high level standards of
material living okay job guarantee a new
bi Warren's already given an
introduction where we start from
is that a currency strong government has
two options in terms of establishing a
framework to maintain price stability
that is a steady inflation running it
can either use unemployment buffer
stocks which is the dominant approach
these days and a technical it's this
neighbor who don't worry about it or it
can take an mmt path and use an
employment buffer stock now warren
mention rule i haven't got time to go
into how i came up with this idea that
initially but it related to a rule price
stabilization scheme that the australian
government ran in where the government
would buy and sell wool to stabilize
prices so that farmers would have stable
incomes in in terms of fluctuations in
the real clip and that de time I was
studying agricultural economics and that
sounded like full employment of water
and it was at the time in the late 70s
when when unemployment was emerging in
Australia for the first time in live so
I wasn't interested in more so much
other than to keep in the wall in winter
but I was interested in in the
unemployment and so in the same
principle when the travitt markets weak
the government can buy the Labour and
when the private markets become stronger
again it'll borrow the labor back out
again that was that's an employment
buffer stocker goes up and down with the
cycle now the point is that unemployment
bar for stocks are in clip is an
incredibly costly way in which you can
maintain price stability yes they've
been maintained slow and steady
inflation rates typically because it
scares it disciplines workers from
getting pushing up wages typically and
it creates poor poor sales conditions
that firms can't push up margins that
sort of the story but it creates
incredible income losses it's it's the
income daily income losses are massive
because these people aren't working and
producing but it also has incredibly
costly social pathologies mental health
crime substance abuse family breakdowns
intergenerational disadvantage or you
know go through the market list stacks
and the benefits are for employment of
course are the opposite it's like a
mirror that you that individuals now
have income stability they can manage
their personal risk profiles they feel
better because if you're working you've
got social esteem and you got you feel
as are you included in society you
typically have pathways to higher skill
development we know that poverty can
relieve unemployment we've I've been
involved in a scheme in South Africa
Public Works scheme which which in the
first five years employed 1 million
people and
everybody in that program moved above
the poverty line it was just so so
obvious this was a this was a program
that the IMF didn't like obviously an
intergenerational stability is a really
important one if if the only thing that
happens from a job guarantee is the
children grow up seeing their parents go
to work each day and and don't inherit
the advantage of being in a jobless
household well then that's that would be
sufficient to justify a job guarantee
all right so I think morons don't know
that it's an unconditional offer you
just float that a job offer at a minimum
wage that's socially inclusive that
doesn't mean a that doesn't mean a
poverty wage it means that the person
who's receiving it is involved can
participate meaningfully in society go
to the theater go out to dinner
occasionally go to football matches
whatever it's not a pittance it's not a
just a mere consumption wage but that's
it's the minimum wage and of course how
do you know when you've reached what we
call loose full employment well it's
when nobody else walks through the door
asking for a job that's it where is it
loose full employment and one mentioned
a certif employment though its lowest
for employment because it doesn't take
care of what we call underemployment so
if I lost my job and we had a job
guarantee I'd be down the job guarantee
office to get a job but the the reason
that that it might mismatch my skills is
because it has to be inclusive to the
most disadvantaged people and we know
that the disproportionate burden of
unemployment falls on those who are
low-skilled and have difficulty anyway
engaging in in work
okay Warren's already mentioned that the
the important point here is that the
government a lot of progressives think
well when you've got when you've got
unemployment what the government should
do is stimulate the private sector now
what they mean you know you'll see
schemes to have major infrastructure
projects and things like that
well that's good but it runs the danger
because you're going to be competing for
resources as the level of activity Rises
at market prices with private you demand
us for those resources firms and that
you run the risk of triggering inflation
I call later generalize Keynesian
expansion but that runs the risk of
being inflationary a job guarantee
doesn't compete with any private sector
bidders because it buys off the bottom
the unemployed by definition have zero
bid in the private market because nobody
wants them so you can't be pushing up
prices by bidding bidding resources that
currently have no bid you're buying off
the bottom
these micro benefits are just a
reflection on what the benefits of full
employment are you reduce one's bones
already mentioned you reduced private
sector hiring costs because people
people are already in the workforce one
of the alot of research studies show
that when people become unemployed over
time their social network shrinks down
to one they start to the psychological
processes start to impact upon their
ability to manage time that if that
means that they sleep in and stuff like
that and why wouldn't you and a whole
lot of other things that make it
difficult to transition back into the
into the paid workforce that's all gone
it reinforces intergenerational
advantage one of the significant
findings in the social psychology and
sociology literature is that children
negraph in jobless households entrench
joblessness inherent the dissident that
disadvantaged and become unstuck and and
suffer right through their adult lives
training spacial advantages that means
that little villagers I've just been up
in San answer yesterday that little
village if there was unemployed people
there they'd get jobs it's not a Cosmo
thing a cosmopolitan thing it's not that
it can support it but it can be
essential part of environmental
sustainability because the sort of jobs
would be approved could would have to be
green and so on but don't get the idea
that the job guarantee is the bee's
knees
that it's the panacea for everything
it's just the first thing our currency
issuing government could should put in
place and there is a whole lot of other
things you know public health public
education green new deal infrastructure
transport all of that that's on top of
all of this but the this is just the
basic thing you you people say what's a
cost well what does any public program
cost not the numbers that are in the
budget statements they're meaningless in
in the the
stand-alone they don't mean anything
what letter policy program costs is the
real resources that are consumed by that
program so the extra food that the
unemployed might be able to to to buy
that's a real cost and so mmt has a
different concept of of cost and so when
I see politicians say oh well you know
it's going to cost thirteen billion
dollars so what what does that mean okay
there's only stuff about other jobs real
I mean the easiest way I think about
that is that how many of you have been
asked when you go to the supermarket to
pay if you have you got a real job I've
never been asked that I've never been
asked that so this idea of a real job is
just another ideological way of avoiding
government's taking responsibility and
you know my research center has done
very large-scale research in Australia
of local government agencies and we've
identified hundreds of thousand jobs
which is more than the unemployed that
will meet community need that will meet
environmental care needs that will never
be delivered by our market process that
is a private profit process which which
add to social ad social net social
benefits that's a real job
we're so conditioned to think of
productivity in terms of something that
adds to private effort
whereas productivity in the way I think
about it adds to social profit so you
know all this time I also see that it's
radical because at the moment our
societies aren't conditioned to be - to
accept a state where we're people who
should be or who could be productive
we'll take three income from the state
and not do anything we're just not ready
for that
and that's going to be my next slide but
let the job guarantee can do because
it's operating in the standard paid work
paradigm what it can do is start pushing
the boundaries on what we consider to be
productive work and so I've advocated
that musicians should be in the hood
should be offered job guarantee the the
the the the greatest Inc in Australia
the best income support for musicians is
the dole is that important then as a
musician on that that's worldwide I know
that so I would have either all my mates
in bands who haven't got work other than
playing a job now what would they have
to do in return other than go and play
gigs well they'd have to go to school
they don't have to go to schools and
teach and do rehearsals in school halls
and teach kids about how guitars have
work and how to compose music and how to
get on with each other in bands and
stuff that's the big one and you know
surfing
I'd hire the surface in the job
guarantee now what would they do rather
than surf well one of the big problems
in Australia is in summer people drown
in this in the beaches because they
don't understand water safety so there's
a huge role because I'll jump in the
most dangerous parts of the beach
because the rips take you out to the
break so that they're why is there just
examples that you know that I'm that I
associate with but we can I just walked
up from somewhere here and I've got just
sort of thousands of jobs that are
currently not being offered in
Birmingham that could be often that
would add to public value and you could
have many examples but it's pushing the
boundaries that's the point
okay basic Ingham why not the
progressives have become obsessed to a
basic income and I think I heard John
McDonald the other day talking about
basically income for God's sake
and I've got the awkward general rule
when the CEOs of companies who have them
up as some of the most pernicious labor
relations like Amazon start advocating
for something I get suspicious and why
I'm opposed to basic income is because
it surrenders to the neoliberal myth
that the government can't do anything
about unemployment it gets the it gets
the understanding of what causes
unemployment completely wrong and it
smurfed over the history of the
literature it's lately about robots but
it gets the you know what I told you at
the outset why unemployment occurs
because the deficits too low that's
there and I'm against the ubi because
it's an individualistic approach it's in
their liberal approach we used to be
involved in collectives we related to
each other in collective terms now we're
relating to individuals in
individualistic terms as looking after
themselves and we're constructing these
individuals who haven't got enough money
as mere consumption units well they
haven't got enough income where we
better give them some so they can
maintain a minimum amount of consumption
the CEOs want that so that people can
still keep buying stuff but that's not
what that's not how we should construct
individuals because if if we offer an
individual paid work we're not only
offering them an income we're offering
them inclusion in the mainstream society
we're offering them a chance to join
social networks and meet their future
partners and feel good about themselves
as part of the values of society that's
why I hate you Beyond and the other
thing is that if you want to make the
ubi sufficient to provide a good
material standard of living well then
you create inflation there's no anchor
whereas if you want to avoid the
inflationary pressures from it you've
got to make it so pitifully low that it
doesn't accomplish any poverty
alleviation anyone okay so last thing I
want to talk about in this room is EU
thank you and we've just come to we just
did we've been in inver and glasgow the
last two nights last whatever and you've
got to appreciate it's in the middle of
the night for me and you know the Scots
are in a real bind because they now want
their own currency but they don't want
to leave the EU and you know that the
the referendum results you know the
remain was very strong in Scotland but
that they don't get is that the our UK
as we call it now up there are UK love
it with the smaller the are UK is not
going to is already declared as you will
probably know that the continuing nation
is going to be our UK if Scotland
becomes independent then the legal ID
legal entity that's currently called the
UK is going to persist without Scotland
now why does that matter well that's
because the UK doesn't want to surrender
its position on the Security Council of
the UN because if a big if it agreed
that they were two new nations that's
what would have to happen now why does
that matter for Scotland I'll come back
to Brick's it instead where does that
matter for Scotland it means it's
because it's now a new nation and under
EU rules if it then seeks accession to
the EU it has to adopt the euro
so that's the Spiegel Scotland area now
we've moved the debate in Scotland from
sterlin ization have now basically got
over that nightmare but now they've got
to embrace the EU thing but you've got
to embrace it before that and here's a
perfect example of why of how we
differentiate between mmt as a body of
work and input values because in effect
mmtv as a book or body principles is
agnostic about membership of the EU so
on Twitter SEM MTS say millennium team
says we've got to be out of the EU who
says Bill Mitchell says well that's
conflating my values with my
understanding of the way the monetary
system works and as a progressive
individual I hope on the left the true
left not the left that shifted out Blair
right to the right where the center
seems to have come that way that's right
you
deu is the last thing the last
configuration that a progressive left
person would advocate joining or being
part of or staying in and the reason I
say that is because it's the the the
neoliberalism isn't just a pull of
political preference it's being embedded
into the core legal structure of the
arrangement in the treaties starting
with the single European Act and then
going through the Maastricht and on the
neoliberal amis liberalism is core to
the EU it's only a neoliberal project
and I understand these left people have
sort of you know the EU for them is some
sort of security blanket or some sort of
expression of cosmopolitanism you know
that grand tradition yet yet it's a
really weird form of cosmopolitanism
because cosmopolitanism in the
literature is and if in the
philosophical ideal is that you
everybody's in it well the year you lets
people die on beaches who try to get
into the little cozy arrangement that so
yeah it's not causing an expression of
cosmopolitanism at all it's a perverted
form of cosmopolitan
and how can you assert your democratic
independence when you're forced to
accept laws that are created by
technocrats in Brussels that are
adjudicated in disputes by not your
highest court but they're the the
European Court of Justice and which
first trade agreements on you which
allows corporations under investment
dispute mechanisms to then if they feel
as are their profits are being
threatened by legislation by any
particular jurisdiction in the interests
of the people of that jurisdiction they
can take you to court and win and
overrule that legislation where would
you want to be part of that that's the
end thank you Bill and now for our final
speaker last but certainly not least the
same will welcome to multi Professor
Martin Watts who as mentioned earlier
was the joint author of the recently
published macroeconomic textbook
Martin is emeritus professor of
economics at Newcastle University New
South Wales and research associate of
the center of full employment and equity
he has published over 60 peer-reviewed
articles in a broad range of leading
international and domestic of academic
journals and co-authored sixteen book
chapters Martin has gained extensive
teaching experience over his career
primarily in labor economics and
macroeconomics welcome mark
right well thank you very much some of
what I am about to say bill has covered
in to some degree so I'm actually we're
aware at the time so I'm not going to
talk too long I hope
hey so I was given some fairly rough and
ready guidelines as to what I should
talk about and I came up with this title
for the talk
a few days ago and as I say there's a
bit of duplication with Bill so first of
all by way of background as brother said
mainstream neoclassical thinking is
still dominant but the development of
mmt concepts started in the 90s with
Randy Bill and Warren and the role that
the post-keynesian thought email
discussion lists and I guess you can
point to two fairly significant
significant events in 1998 one was
Randy's book understanding modern money
and also the beginning of coffee and
Warren was highly very supportive of
that development at the University of
Newcastle and really in the years that
have followed you've really got two
centers of mmt the first being UMKC
where Randy was that has retired but
he's still involved and a series of
academic some of who are on the advisory
board and they have got a critical mass
and they've produced graduate students
who've gone on to teach MMT in a range
of American universities and then on a
somewhat smaller scale at the University
of Newcastle bill of course James
Junipero colleague and myself have
been teaching of empty principles and
using those principles in our research
and graduate supervision engagement we
thought of Orthodox economists at
conferences and seminars in Australia
became largely unproductive mmt ideas
were treated with some indifference if
not contempt I guess most of the time
people were fairly polite dialogue
ceased in the early 2000s I think it was
2002 bill when you asked the research
director of the Reserve Bank as to
whether a Reserve Bank cheque had ever
bounced and there was a pregnant pause
and somebody mentioned that we're better
way of putting it
and then suddenly talk started talking
about inflation in other words the
influence that the government was going
to spend lots and cause inflation there
was a seeing also an uneasy relationship
with post-keynesian economists who
despite a lot of shared views
particularly about these some aspects of
the monetary system had concerns about
the exchange rate if you introduce a
full employment policy and equally the
inflationary ramifications and they have
a particular hostility to the job
guarantee which seems to persist so
despite their rhetoric it's not clear
that they really believe that full
employment is sustainable and I guess
pre GFC there was some concern that an
ageing and diminishing group of Amenti
aficionados would spend their time
talking to each other and the the MMT
message would really not get out and of
course what did change
the dialogue somewhat was of course the
GFC and the realization that deregulated
markets politically financial markets
didn't work for the betterment of all
and also post year to see of course the
total reliance on monetary policy albeit
there was some token fiscal stimulus
measures about ten years ago
that created a lot of debate and
post-keynesian that have been part of
that debate in terms of saying that
austerity is not the way to go
in terms of the mainstream of course
they have made few concessions their new
monetary consensus does acknowledge that
there is a role for this core policy
under very specific circumstances what
is quite interesting is that mainstream
introductory and intermediate texts have
tried to maintain a monetarist
foundation that central banks are about
controlling the money supply but at the
same time they want to incorporate the
insights about the modern monetary
system and how the central bank actually
doesn't target the money stopped it
actually sets the interest rate and
myself and some colleagues did a very
detailed review of for leading macro
textbooks and one has to conclude that
they are totally incoherent and quite
how first-year teachers can actually
make sense of these textbooks is hard to
know of course
mainstream economists started talking
about mmt Krugman famously in the New
York Times op-ed piece in 2011
subsequent articles through to this year
mmm tea ideas represented by bills blog
mentioned that he started the blog
brandy didn't actually know what a blog
was I don't think and they that blog and
to a lesser extent new economic
perspectives has been very influential
and no doubt many of you present have
read Bill's blog bill made brief
reference to the sort of sequence of
what happens when new ideas are
introduced largely ignored and that was
the case prior to the GFC acknowledged
but really killed and here we have a
couple of academics
well pally in u.s. Ren Lewis in this
country who essentially say what's old
is correct and what's new is wrong in
other words MNT doesn't really add
anything and of course the somewhat
hysterical discussion that's now going
on particularly in America but recently
we there's been some quite sympathetic
material articles in Syria relatively
serious newspapers even the Australian
strangely enough which is a Murdoch
publication and of course the defining
moment really was a OC starting to talk
about mmt which led to the condemnation
which bill made reference to at the
beginning of his talk and of course the
Senate motion which essentially was
supported by laureth summers surprise
surprise Janet Yellen and a whole series
of members of right-wing think tanks but
equally support through mmm tea from
arrangement of individuals including
this financial character do you know
Maureen Monte a
yeah which is he his blog is very good
he's very supportive mmm tea and he
captures MNT in a very few words and
it's fairly catchy titles - okay so
that's my way background so I'm going to
briefly talk about the dominance of
mainstream economics I mean bill also
has already made some reference to that
raising the profile of mmt etc etc so in
an ideal world in the university system
that works in a discipline that is not
dysfunctional like economics you would
think that the Frank and fearless
exchange of ideas would lead to some
sort of progress in in the paradigm but
there are serious vested interests that
work in terms of tenure promotion
general progression in in the academic
scene and the prospect of other
lucrative opportunities resulting from
some profile I also reflect on the issue
of paradigm change contradictions
emerging in in the paradigm and how that
leads potentially at least according to
Kuhn to a crisis in the prevailing
paradigm and the resolution of a
nominally a new paradigm one may pose
the question well if you believe Kuhn
you would think that economic thought is
actually progressing and so us mere
mortals here are standing on the
shoulders of giants of the past and
everything is moving forward well
unfortunately it ain't as simple as that
and certainly when you look at the
responses to the GFC
policymakers had learned nothing from
the lessons of the Great Depression one
can talk about debates about philosophy
of science Milton Friedman just thought
that theories should be tested on the
basis of their predictions he didn't
realize that different theories could
lead to the same predictions which is
observational equivalence and more
fundamentally there has been this
separation this divorce if you like in
terms of academic debate the mainstream
stay over here and we stay over here
because it's quite pointless in trying
to engage with them so raising the
public profile of mmt well obviously
it's starting to happen it seems to me
it's quite interesting to think about
the dynamics of the introduction of new
ideas into the political domain
do interest groups in public opinion
drive the agenda and the politicians
follow or is it there is verse and an
example to me and I could be accused of
being wrong here is that we have the
same-sex marriage debate in Australia
where clearly activism grassroots
activism prevailed and obviously
politicians then get on board but the
activists drive drive the agenda and it
seems to me in terms of MNT the role of
politicians is that much more important
because the ideas are intangible and
counterintuitive and unless you have
politicians talking about them then to
really get some traction is very
difficult and the problem of course with
most politicians is that their careers
than they lack vision and now really I'm
willing to bite the bullet and
articulate counterintuitive ideas so the
government is not financially
constrained when they believe there's a
very high cost of doing that and this
sort of political cowardice you've we've
certainly observed in Australia new pad
dealings with the Greens haven't you
built with no positive impact in terms
of their view of that macro policy so
AOC Alexandre Ortiz Cortes has played a
very important role in the u.s.
political recognition of mmt at least in
the u.s. is a start and one would assume
that other politicians would now start
engaging with the debates and clearly
there is a role for activism not only
engaging with politicians but getting if
you like the critical mass of the
population to start embracing mmm tea
ideas and I won't presume to provide
advice as to how that should be done as
such
what is important is the nature of the
MMT message which is disseminated and we
came across this sort of issue at the
last mmt conference in New York as I say
some of the mainstream media at least
giving are giving mmt a run at present
my perception is the UK debate like in
the u.s. is very superficial between
academic economists there's pally in the
u.s. news frankly dreadful very
superficial and what tends to happen is
they don't really address the body of a
mint tea work they select a few papers
or books or whatever and they don't
reflect on the fact that people are
writing about mmm tea even in nineteen
2019 the UK criticism seems to be well
it's obviously about blogs to some
degree
portes mainly macro which is some
reverses blog and there's been as I
understand it significant Twitter
activity but I don't subscribe to
Twitter because my life is too short
I'm also if we're going to have a
serious academic debate a serious
discussion then Twitter is really
totally inappropriate and what I found
interesting in respective Sam Ren Lewis
is that he has not written the mainly
macro blog about MNT this year so it's
more subterranean in terms of using
Twitter macro is difficult there's no
doubt like most disciplines it is driven
by concepts and principles the fallacy
of composition is very challenging
theoretical models are very important
but developing a theoretical model
specifically into algebraic terms does
not give it credibility at per se
because it is the nature of the
assumptions something that Friedman
wished to ignore so the really important
thing in terms of the dissemination of
mmt is to reflect on the fact that it is
the current state of understanding is
the result of many years of thought and
interaction amongst mmt economists and
that for anybody who is pushing out the
message it's very important to
understand the principles and not start
uttering glib to liners about government
can provide for your every need so in
very general terms mmt incorporates
chart ilysm and functional finance but
it's grounded in institutional practice
in other words what central bank's
actually do as well as what banks
actually do and how fiscal policy is
constructed so warren is touched on this
this is a rather more sort of firm or
way of talking about the fiat currency
it's issued by the state it's unit of
account it's got value because the state
imposes taxes in that currency and fiat
money is money that the state has
declared to be legal tender now that
doesn't require legal tender laws
because if people are paying their taxes
in the currency then other transactions
between households and firms and so so
on will will also take place using that
currency
then we have functional finance which
goes back to learner and the notion that
fiscal policies should be used to
counteract economic fluctuations to
secure full employment and price
stability and you can completely ignore
the impact on deficits and accumulated
debt institutional practice as I say
refers to how these key institutions
work how they operate and given that
institutional practice is precisely what
central banks and others say they do it
is really not Theory at all and you can
read you can go to the Bank of England
website you can go to the RBA website in
Australia and they'll tell you what they
actually do how they make sure that the
rate they announce every month is the
rate that banks lend to each other how
they engage in open market operations
and so on the idea of institutional
practice though is somewhat nuanced
because there is a distinction between
what MNT says about the capacity of the
monetary system to operate and indeed
policy and the fact that in that
countries impose involved sorry
voluntary constraints on the operation
of certain aspects of policy so for
example major purchases of government
debt on the primary market in other
words when that that is issued the Bank
of England doesn't go and buy a whole a
whole load of that debt that is either
outlawed or simply in practice doesn't
occur in many countries not all
countries because Canada's a bit
different so it's very important to
distinguish between talking in very
fairly abstract terms about MMT
the capacity of these institutions and
had to operate in a particular way and
the way that Institute in these
institutions in a particular country
operate and other countries are
different and in writing the textbook
that has been a challenge that
institution arrangements do differ
across countries so it's very important
that mmm tears are very clear about what
they're talking about not are they
talking about
in abstract terms or they talking about
the operation that the US economy or the
UK economy or whatever and let me move
on to the next ok back so if we're
talking in fairly abstract terms then
it's important to realize that there
that currency sovereignty is highly
important in terms of the capacity of
well the way for the way the conduct of
policy can be conducted
now currency sovereignty is very
important because it refers to an
economy with its own currency
so not a eurozone country operating with
a freely floating exchange rate and also
and this really doesn't apply to modern
developed economies not over exposed to
current to debt denominated in the
foreign currency there's no reason for a
country with its own will a modern
developed economy with its own currency
there's no reason for it to acquire or
sorry to sell foreign currency
denominated debt and if you have a a
country which satisfies those conditions
including the one about debt exposure
and Australia fits
the bill very well and the UK would as
well then of course military and
physical policies can be focused purely
on the domestic economy so the external
economy then therefore trade and
exchange rates will be will be handled
by the fact there is a flexible exchange
rate so in terms of engagement of them
empty ideas with those who don't agree
these basic principles are of central
importance that they really are the key
building blocks and in terms of when I
read articles that are often critical of
mmt and I'm wary of the time so be quick
if the article doesn't talk about these
principles then as far as I'm concerned
it's totally deficient if you're talking
about the operation of the macro economy
in a particular country you've got to
understand what the institutional
arrangements are ok and a warning about
this I say clip statements you know
government can spend and buy anything
that it wants owned you just set up your
wish list you know get rid of student
loans more money in the national health
blah blah blah there is a real resource
limit on obviously what can be spent
okay the textbook well I'll be very
brief about this of course the textbook
joined a very illustrious stable of
textbooks including 90 recruitment guilt
by association I suppose hope hopefully
not it does represent the consolidation
of the work that's been done over 20
years
it is pretty rigorous in terms of how
its developed
and let me just I'm going to jump a few
because I'm worried at the time I'll
just go to the content the conceptual
basis and theoretical basis of mmt is
it's very carefully outlined the this
rigorous stop flow consistent modeling
and it is adopted and illustrated by the
use of balance sheets there is a breadth
and depth of analysis of competing
perspectives so it's not as if all votes
in mmt book we ignore the alternative
views but we don't pretend to be plural
because we understand how modern
monetary systems work lots of reference
to empirical evidence including three
major currency crises history of thought
gets a lot of attention and contemporary
policy issues in the last few chapters
which are obviously highly relevant
teaching MMT I won't go through all this
other than to say that you need good
students and committed students and the
work that many when I was teaching it at
Newcastle the good ones that one comes
across they become very excited with the
ideas and some of them obviously go on
to postgraduate work which is very
rewarding but the majority probably want
to do marketing or some other may you
know major in their degree and economics
is simply too hard for them okay final
comments we are making some progress in
terms of getting traction it is
important that the ideas are represented
appropriately in in public discussion
and discussion with friends in the pub
and so on I hope that the textbook is
useful in assisting the transmission
that the MMT framework to
students and interested public you have
to deal with initial disbelief I don't
know what percentage of you is still in
the state of initial disbelief and maybe
very few so well you can assist in this
process of the emergence and
consolidation of MMT in the public
sphere by reading the book and also
recommending the book I mean this is not
supposed to be a sales plug for the book
its face to be getting the ideas of them
empty out so thank you very much my name
is John Mayer I'd like to address this
to either bill or Warren in World War
two
the US government funded the war effort
presumably from a currency creation of a
perspective from an mmt perspective and
then raised war bonds under the guise of
funding the war but I have read and I
don't know if this is the case and I'd
like to know what your thoughts are as
to whether that was an anti inflationary
measure
to issue war bonds when they win it
isn't a requirement
the weapons were issued really as a
solidarity measure there were all these
posters you know that uncle Uncle Sam
and stuff and they wanted people to feel
as though they are part of the war
effort that's what the historians tell
us the main prize contract price
initiatives were rationing that's a day
that that was the rations were the fear
of inflation rather than the war bonds
just a quick interesting story to that
of one of our associates is Jamie call
birth and his father was John Kenneth
Galbraith and he he was in charge of
that and so I talked to him about it a
little bit I'm not a student of it and
um pretty much like you know as bill
said but uh because it was interesting
because I come along and I said look you
don't have right the the price level is
a function of prices paid by government
into the monopolies supplier and he
talked about yeah you know his dad had
said about that during World War two you
know they recognized they recognized
prices paid by government was critical
you know and in this thing but when they
came to the 70s all the Keynesian at the
time went in and with price and wage
controls in the economy and now I think
that's what discredited the Keynesian
movement from everything else you know
cuz no matter how bad things got people
didn't want the government telling them
how much they could charge at a grocery
store something like that and the irony
is that these you know I said didn't
didn't know that it was government
prices being said and not private sector
they didn't need to do that he said and
he said you know this was before his
father died he said yeah a few years ago
we went back and we're gonna write
something about that but I guess I never
got around to it
kind of an interesting irony that I
certainly should have known that and it
certainly should have given them
different proposals for the seventies
but it didn't get carried over not to do
the US experience but those war bonds
are issued the beginning of World War
two in this country and it was very much
seen in terms of solidarity and all that
and the war bonds were highly
undersubscribed
and the sort of propaganda issues of the
german germans crowing that the brits
couldn't even raise the money from their
own population was such that they
actually the central but well the Bank
of England fudged it and said that
indeed yes the allocation had been sold
and it hadn't been and Keynes got to
know about this and said masterful at
the beginning of the Iraq war the US had
a proposal out to have war bonds and I
think somebody from the Treasury told
politicians like
okay okay but I any of you can answer
this if you if you want so you can do it
you did then I'm Ian Ian Charles and I
asked this question to ordinary people
because from time to time our Royal Mint
issues another set of coins and at the
moment we have a pound coin lovely
little thing with twelve sides and it
reminds me of something that we had when
there were 240 pennies to the pound
there great big things with pennies for
centimetres across what we had a
threatening bit or a three pence coin
and there were 80 of them to the pound
now the spending power to a little boy
was that that knee bit would get me from
my house in lys to the centre of Leeds
it would also if I chose if I had
another one I would spend it on a comic
book so might be you know our Dundee or
something like that that I could read on
the bus solaced and the other time and
the other thing that it would do small
boys economics was thus it would buy me
an ice lolly a forty ice lolly with okay
now spending power of the new pound coin
doesn't do that you would need two
pounds now in order to purchase what a
threatening bit eighty to the ground
would be and I've asked people isn't
never said it's inflation well I know I
know it's inflation well I know I'm
growing down the currency oh I don't
know do such a thing where the 159
threaten abyss have gone and perhaps why
couldn't we just spend as much as much
as we need on the NHS or write off the
student there why couldn't we do that
what would happen if we did so it's all
tied up with why inflation
that cuts a currency into lots of little
bits well it's gone who's got it and why
can't we do a bit of it okay thanks
if you had have been an adult then
instead of buying your lollies if you
had been an adult at that point instead
of buying your lollies your income would
have been significantly lower than it is
now so used you you're only focusing on
one aspect of the relative price rather
than the all the other uuugh capacities
much greater now so sure you can call
that inflation if you want but it's
pretty meaningless why it's thinking
about it look what matters is it what
one pound bison sweat all opposed fine
so what is all the pounds by last year
what was your real GDP that was somehow
distributed I so fairly equally in the
UK right now like the US okay so but how
is that whole how is your pile of stuff
is your pile of real stuff large you're
smart how what put it all the pounds by
no matter what the number is and that's
gone up by one to three percent a year
depending on your productivity and
growth rate and everything else and
that's the important thing for your real
standard of living and of course the
distributional issues are serious but
it's a different issue
it my name is Christopher Brewster my
question is at like s Union what
monetary theory is an accurate analysis
of the current economic system and the
way capitalism works ideal particularly
the fact that growth of any sort has
seems to have deleterious effects an
environment and a lot of recent research
I refer you to jason nichols recent
paper shows that is very very difficult
to take couple economic growth impacts
on the environment so I'd like to just
expand on those sorts perhaps an
alternative economic system that goes
beyond the current system as we have it
our economic impact
I mean one of the I've had a long
history of let's be kind just discussion
discussions with the grains and
the point is that these discussions are
typically between Cosmopolitan's and and
others where the things that they're
they're talking about are affecting
rural communities so in terms of
forestry so they say from Sydney they
say we've got to ban all forestry
yet they never consider in war Hope
which is a rural area in New South Wales
which relies on foresty for jobs in
their material standard and what's going
to be the effect on them and so one of
the tensions I think in all of this
green New Deal stuff is that tension
that that how do you ensure that you
don't kill off the material prosperity
of communities that are relying on
polluted activity that's the first point
the second point is they say you know
we've got to have a zero growth and then
I say well are you going to give up your
mobile phone you're going to stop
driving your car and of course the
problem is if you're having and moreover
are you going to start start compulsory
sterilization of people and the point is
that if you had population growth you
have to have economic growth to maintain
material standards of living now then
you have a big distributional argument
because I'm happy to give up material my
metier some of my material not my phone
but but that's not going to be enough
and so the green you deal the way I can
conceive of it is that first of all it's
gotta have a recognition of all of us
that there's got to be just transitions
that means that we have to make sure
that those people in the communities
that are going to lose I don't lose too
much in material terms we can't really
address the sort of spiritual when I was
doing my PhD in Manchester it was at the
height of the mining stroke it shows how
old I am and you know those mining
communities they it was more than an
income to them it was their identity so
we can't really fix that up so that's
the first point the second point is that
we have to understand that the market
will not deliver satisfactory outcomes
and that leads to the next point is that
we've got to ensure that it doesn't the
green you deal doesn't become
financialized and what I mean by that is
vehicles for whole new sets of products
and derivative products they're
basically the wall street and they're
the hook City here benefit from and what
that then leads you to think is that
then this is a real disagreement I have
with the Greens
is that they're advocating carbon
trading systems that's a market system
that's a financialization of the the
environmental problem and I get I get
death threats at home in in the mail
because I advocate closing or I live in
a cold district Newcastle is the largest
coal export port in the world and I
advocate no market system just the
government announced in 20 years time no
more coal exports because if you want
you in grace trading systems you
financialized the problem and you'll get
these these obscene situations where
where the big polluters go into small
communities in less developed countries
like northern India and out ruin the
community so that they can claim carbon
credits that can then content
polluting in their other country so
there they're the things that I think
about and the other thing is that the
green you deal total support for it but
it's a major transformation of society
and there's huge vested interests that
are at stake and you've just got to be
patient it's going to take time
I had to two things I wanted to
reinforce if I could remember both of
them so first of all comes back to
unemployment I think the major cause of
environmental environmental degradation
is unemployment people looking for money
okay so if you had for employment people
like good jobs they wouldn't want the
trees cut down they wouldn't want
anything dumped and their rivers but
when it comes to needing the money they
have a different opinion so number one
so many things start with real solid
full employment policy where there's
jobs opportunity and everything else so
I think that's part of the problem and I
don't think the Greens have gone and
recognized that it's fundamental the
other thing is rationing by price such
as the carbon schemes are regressive and
when you're rationing by price it's
regressive and some things you want to
do that there should be rewards for
having excelled and done better and fine
but not something like that okay that
doesn't fit at all so too many of these
market doctor all of them but I'll say
too many they just it's all regressive
ways to do it where the people who can
least afford it are the ones that pay
the most in real terms and so I just
want to add those two things if I work
those okay more questions
financing freedom here question and
inflation but just privatize or the
corns and two things that bill just said
maybe Nations let me buy the green new
deal on the problem of population and
one you mentioned well if you get some
employment actually there's an amazing
video on Ted by hands later hands
wrestling showing very elegantly there
may be other arguments how to deal with
a population explosion problem which is
making the poorest more
that birth rate goes down dramatically
and it's a very elegant way if you look
what has was invented on that back to
inflation um sort of vaguely socially
active one of the things I'm gonna zone
poor so me and the sky on best of my
doubt is here I think this in the states
were active on that so usual questions
about that I've got your excellent
textbook there's not enough there for me
to answer some of the inflation
questions so on so inflation general
answer in a very similar analysis show
the dangers of those policies leading to
inflation potentially hyperinflation but
it also makes me think about for example
looking at Venezuela these large foreign
currency tournaments also the factors to
the oil account in the US you know I'm
looking for like decent analysis because
look at it now it should be obvious you
could have made an argument an MNC
analysis of Venezuela a few years ago
there's these things of hindsight you
know we look at these Austrians who keep
making these complaints about inflation
and they can keep them being wrong which
is great we show why they're wrong and
they're wrong but on the other side
there are scenarios where inflation
occurs is anyone doing the analysis to
make policy recommendations don't do
this because they'll be inflation for
example with Venezuela whether it's
foreign currency debt and a supply-side
crash when the oil price dropped
I mean the Venice file is the latest one
but for 20 years or so Zimbabwe's been
the the poster child for hyperinflation
and if I ask this audience what do you
know about what happened in Zimbabwe how
many people have a detailed knowledge of
what happened some people not many and
had nothing to do with deficits
particularly fiscal deficits what
happened in Zimbabwe and it's a similar
story to the via our Republic
what happened in Zimbabwe was Robert
Mugabe decided he wanted to reward his
freedom fighters who took them out of
the colonial yoke of Britain and the way
he did it so the sentiment I think I as
I left progressive I think it was a
great idea but the way he did it was
ridiculous because in Bob we had the
most efficient agricultural sector in
Africa was the food bowl of Africa and
so what he did he said okay that I'll
reward and and he and he was also
addressing another issue and the
colonial land tenure outcomes were
incredibly unequal white versus black
the whites had the land the blacks
didn't so he wanted to redress that and
so he gave the farm even for you you
know the story they took the farms over
these were good machine-gun nests
hopeless farmers and within a very short
time 60 percent of agricultural output
collapsed and that led to a whole lot of
other things happening with using the
what foreign exchange they had to fund
food imports rather than to provide
money for manufacturers to import
capital and all this sort of stuff but
under those circumstances any spending
whether it's private or public would be
inflationary
it told you nothing about the conduct of
fiscal policy and I'm not saying the
conduct of fiscal policy was good I'm
just saying that you can't use the
hyperinflation to give you any
information about the conduct of fiscal
policy doesn't tell you anything about
what would happen if the British
government funded a job guarantee scheme
nothing at all if you have a society
where the service office supply side
crashes you're going to probably get a
hyperinflation so you know all the talk
on inflation comes down to what happens
if you have overspending too much demand
and yes you can cause inflation doing
that I'm sure bill and I if you put us a
charge set a 100 percent inflation we we
wouldn't be like the European Central
Bank we could get that done quick but I
could do in Japan 20 minutes they call
the inflation they want on the physical
side you know luminate the consumption
tax don't add to it like to show you how
to get some spending going but hey close
the deficit would go up right so we know
how to do this they don't right they're
going the other way but the thing is
I've been around since 1973 45 years I
have never seen inflation caused by
excess demand I've just never seen it I
know it so all the inflation's are
caused by something else
so let's go to Turkey today with 25
percent inflation the unemployment
headline is 10 percent their debt to GDP
is only 35 percent
they've got 25% a year inflation it's
not coming from excess demand one place
is coming from a zero overnight rates
the policy rates 24 percent and I've
been making the case that the interest
rate for all practical purposes will be
the inflation rate but you know we're
just a quick answer here so the other
thing out there as well the other place
that inflation comes from is Google
Venezuela corruption
and you'll see mr. Selix all was
arrested in Miami after having somehow
borrowed 2.4 billion dollars from the
banking system sold the currency got US
dollars it was money laundering in Miami
all right that's just one guy 2 points
work day we're borrowing money through
the banking system I won't say a weekly
but you know like that insiders getting
loans that they're not gonna pay there
is no such thing they're not real assets
and then you sell the currency
immediately they don't care what the
exchange rate is cuz they're gonna get
their dollars and abscond with it right
and you do that over and over again your
currency collapses and it doesn't matter
if it's just drop 50 percent they'll do
it again if it's dropped 25 percent
they'll do it again and what happens is
I was just reading about that as well
today they're still using bolivars they
might need a million of them to your
point instead of one but there's still
well I need it to buy food I needed to
do this they're still there yeah and so
you've got the banking system which can
be an open channel of corruption and
state-owned enterprises do the same
thing if you've got corruption in the
state-owned enterprises where they're
getting funded by the government allowed
to borrow public credit and then people
insiders are selling foreign exchange
the currency exchange rate goes down you
will see inflation coming in through the
foreign exchange window so I go on and
on this
just just a fish we discuss it later yes
why are we not making this analysis
before these events occur while the
white side it's very easy to make sure
this analysis well I think you know the
analysis that corruption has been
problem is like America's places like
Turkey state-owned enterprises all over
the world
they get politicized problem with
private ownership has serious problems
with no question how could we see it all
the time but the politicization of
public you know it's just as well
publicized it's all dangerous stuff it's
gotta be regulated supervised somehow
monitor business and if I'd have been
writing my blog when Robert Mugabe just
announced he was gonna take all the
farms over he would have had a bit of a
blog about it
hi thanks yeah my name's Tony I'm the
totally with virtually everything that
said today the one source lightest you
have is the exports equals bad imports
equals good elements of mmt because the
way I see it for most economies which is
the UK we bring in imports definitely
very good we give them out pounds in
return but obviously in the long run
that means that the people who hold the
pounds have a call on UK assets or UK
goods and services so the way I see it
ultimately it would net to zero the one
exception to that where I do agree with
you is America as with the exorbitant
privilege of the dollar then the people
who get dollars are happy to use the
dollars for buying oil buying gold
buying copper they don't have to spend
it in America so I totally agree you
agree with you in terms of the dollar
but the III I don't agree with the
export is is bad imports good for
everything other than the dollar can you
talk about that
so what's happening is you're taking in
real goods and services if somebody else
is piling up a sterling account at your
bank right so and it's not a
governmental deficit the government
hasn't done anything it's just somebody
in the private sectors doing this and
whoever's holding those accounts is
taking a pretty enormous risk because of
values undefined we just saw what's
happened to each one okay and if at some
point it suits public purpose to not
allow your exports you can do that you
can put export controls on you can have
export taxes you can do all kinds of
things to make sure that guy who you
know from Korea who sold you all those
Hyundai's can't buy anything with that
money he got them and you know what they
don't care because the reason they're
doing it is because the exporters are in
charge in those countries and they're
doing it to keep their wages low to
suppress their real costs right so that
they can sell to you so that he can make
his profit march or whatever it is and
he doesn't really care about what's
happening the standard of living of his
country population or whether in ten or
twenty years they can ever buy anything
with the dollars the government has
piled up as foreign exchanges reserves
to support his immediate sales so if
you're on the right side of the trade
let's put it that way
you've got all that you hold all the
cards at that point they have a number
in a bank account and you have control
of all your product that you can export
or not on any terms you want you haven't
guaranteed prices in the future if you
guarantee prices in the future that
falls under external debt that's a whole
different thing
Australia's been running external
deficits of about 4% of GDP since since
the 1770s and that that means that the
rest of the world are accumulating these
financial assets in Australian dollars
and we are getting iPhones now who's got
all who's got the real risk I don't have
the real risk I've got the iPhone and
the car and the BMWs and all the rest of
it I don't ever think of you motorcycle
and so imagine these people that are
holding all these Australian dollars and
I'm using Australian dollars
specifically to avoid this u.s. stuff
now were they going to do with it well
if they try to sell it you know that
then the a lot of progressives say well
I'll just dump the Australian dollar
will they'd be stupid to do that because
I'll make immediate losses so the first
thing is that they're going to be risk
averse
in liquidating the stocks of Australian
dollars they hold okay so then what can
they do with them okay they can transfer
them into real goods and services for
available for sale in Australian dollars
well that's why Australia's got a
Foreign Investment Review Board to stop
stop them having unregulated capacity to
buy whatever they can that's for sale so
we don't allow foreigners to buy real
estate unless they could they they they
produce new new real estate houses
now the foreign investor investment
guidelines in my view are far too lakhs
because we're seeing in our city's
apartment Bach blooms big booms because
I can actually build new constructions
and there's one famous case in Melbourne
where I grew up where they've done
studies of the water usage and though
these towers are 80 percent unoccupied
they're just speculative vehicles so
that's the first point the risk risk is
on the export or not the importer this
but the second point and I agree with
you this is an agreement is that it's a
progressive left person I don't want
foreign capital being able to use that
money that is those Australian dollar
holdings in ways that give corporate
sector leverage and so you know I think
you know I think this is a problem
everywhere that you've got to make sure
that that money can't be used to
manipulate the political process through
lobbying you've got to have very tight
restrictions like Lawrence said on what
they can buy and what they can't buy
with it in Australian dollars but it's
not just the this idea that because the
u.s. is the recycled reserve currency
that mmt only applies to the US is a is
a falsehood
it applies to any monetary system
I'll tell you have the likes of the
JPMorgan World Index they give every
currency of waiting
dad's up to 100 percent if you're a
prudent investor you want your diversity
of currency holdings to be fit that so
if you're in India you just sold your
construction companies for rupiah or
whatever and you want to retire you now
go to your investment management person
he says okay well you need to diversify
across countries and four percent is
going to be in Australian dollars and 22
percent will be US Dollars and so when
they do that they've assured these
countries in the index that they will be
net they can be net importers forever as
they want to have those funds go into
retirement accounts pension funds
they're all diversifying globally this
way all the people working check off the
box yes I want global diversification
because over the last twenty eight years
it's been point five percent better than
not doing it or some study somebody did
and is it that those funds never get
spent they just pile up forever yeah
it's equally worth noting that the
occasionally fears are expressed about
the Chinese dumping us denominated
assets when it never happens for the
same reason of capital loss do it from
us the trillion a few years ago nobody
even noticed my name's Christopher use
and I'm like the Christopher front is
actually gone now my question was George
Monbiot article in The Guardian a couple
of weeks ago on capitalism in the middle
of the article there was one five word
paragraph which said green growth is an
illusion and that's that was my question
and I don't provoke billing to using
anglo-saxon in public but I suppose my
subsequent question would be I spoke of
in an exchange with Patricia Pino last
week she she tweeted then they ridicule
you and I asked when do you think we
will relate to the phase of we will win
and I just wondered what what the panel
thought of up the in most of the
advanced countries the the unmet need is
going to be in terms of personal care
services and environmental care services
and those types of occupations and jobs
and services deliver massive social
benefits but they're hard to get profit
from
and so if you transfer of people out of
coal mining in the personal care
services GDP continue to grow so we say
there's still economic growth going on
but that's green growth because very low
carbon intensive in reading a person a
book and massaging their feet and doing
their garden and growing more trees for
them because then they can be maintained
under a job guarantee so I just don't
buy this argument that you can't have
green growth we've got to have growth
with with more people and until we come
and I take I think Martin's points very
important that the the more educated
we've become and the more secure we're
in employment we become we have less
children because we don't have to have
our own social security scheme with you
know more children but that's an
evolutionary thing but we can have green
growth and what that implies I didn't
mention it under green you deal is a
society is going to have to have an
engaged debate where it reflects that
the proportion of growth that's taken by
the public sector will have to be larger
in the future now that's not socialism
I'm advocating although I do advocate
socialism but that's a reality that it's
shifting to activities that provide net
social benefits rather than provide net
private benefits
question four bro how many how many
research assistants do you think the
average University professor would hire
if you had to budget for it hello that
let's talk about UB I I realized that
obviously didn't have a lot of time to
go into a lot of detail but I had a
totally different idea about it give an
example you might have a couple where
one partner is working so that the other
one can perhaps either go to university
or study or develop a new business or
some sort of business idea so that it's
okay with with a couple so one could
earn the money but if there's a person
on their loan they can't do that so that
was my idea for UPI and also things like
you mentioned earlier carers love to
look after you know disabled or sick
people in their family so they tell us
or to proper income and the only other
question I had was a you ever spoken to
John worked on water would you like to
do so
on the last I had a meeting with him
last October very unsatisfactory outcome
he publicly acknowledged he is Labour
Party is being poisoned by their
advisers on the ubi there's the last
example you just described a job care a
caring job is not not a not a not a
government paying for doing nothing
your provide you're talking about a job
in the set first instance you're talking
about making opportunities available for
people to be educated
that's a publicly funded education
scheme not ubi let's go back to Pompeii
for a moment they put it and they put a
tax on everybody's house and then they
said you know what we're gonna give
everybody UPI so we'll give you enough
money to pay the tax so nobody has to
worry about it okay they've just
defeated the whole purpose right now
nobody shows up for work to be the
police officers or anything else because
if the need for the money has been taken
away so that's the risk if they only
give them part of what they need to pay
the tax then you're still going to get
people showing up for work the whole
point is the state needs to provision
itself it needs people working for the
state whether it's US soldiers or public
health workers or whatever and ubi at a
certain point undermines the whole thing
in the form it takes is hyperinflation
the money doesn't buy anything anymore
so it's okay small mouths but if you get
to a little dipping point which isn't
all that high yeah the whole thing the
whole you've threatened the whole
civilization ceases to operate
yeah but if you get yeah if you get it
I'm just saying if you get it wrong
there's a huge penalty it's not like
this is yeah it's not it's not a small
penalty if it's a job where people have
to work to get the money that's
different and Pompey when they show up
to work and they were paid to sell their
time then you're going to get people
looking to work but if you don't have to
do any remember it's only worth why you
have to do to get it at the margin and
if you don't have to do anything to get
it it's worth nothing and so I'm just
not totally against it okay I just think
I'd be very careful you you do have to
have a sensible social security system
in terms of people who've you know got
disabilities or what I mean just one
more point on that the other thing is
that if you only had a ubi and you want
to discipline the inflation process what
do you have to do you have to create
unemployment whereas we have a job
guarantee you create more employment by
disciplining the inflation process it's
a very fundamental difference
can you speak to applying mmt to
developing nations particularly reducing
import dependence
sorry can you speak to applying mmt to
developing nations sorry okay can you
speak to applying mmt to developing
nations please
particularly import dependence one of my
slides was about that having your own
currency doesn't make our nation
materially rich necessarily it means
that that nation can or that state can
always bring whatever productive
resources are available into full
productive use but the level of output
might be Suffolk might not be sufficient
and other nations that I've worked in
have problems with food dependency and
other nations have problems with energy
of dependencies and
this is a good example of how we're
we're differentiating between core mmt
principles and values because what I've
advocated in the book that I wrote with
thomas farsi before this one in 2017 was
that a solid solid heuristic world at
the moment at the moment we've got
multilateral institutions like the IMF
in the World Bank that word is not
created by the way in a different era to
do different things so the IMF was
created to provide funds to nations that
were struggling to maintain the fixed
exchange rate system and the World Bank
was created really to reconstruct Europe
and then and then when we floated
exchange rates in the early 70s those
institutions really lost their meaning
and we sort of morphed into their
neoliberal form and so what I advocate
as a progressive left person not as an
mm tear is eliminating those
institutions and creating a new set of
new multilateral capacity that would
it's quite clear that if a country can't
export but it needs it has to import
food and nobody will buy its exports and
account grow its own food then then it's
got a problem and it's to me as a
progressive left person this is where I
think about globalism not the EU but as
a true global cosmopolitanism and
solidarity that we've got to create a
new form of IMF that allows the advanced
countries to distribute foreign currency
to the poorer countries so they can eat
but that's not an that's that's not an
mmt thing
at the beginning of professor bill
Mitchell's presentation you mentioned
robotics and my question to you the
panel not just a professor Bill Mitchell
would be is there a way to go supplant
the labor in the labor market given
professor Michael Osborne at Oxford
University's research that suggests that
70% of white-collar jobs will disappear
by 50/50 is your view that there's a way
to supplant the labor and also I'd be
interested to get your point of view on
Bill car bill gates his public comments
with regards to robots should be taxed
as a way to actually read new the supply
of taxation in them the labor market
with regards to the loss of labor in the
labor market itself I'd be interested to
get your point of view on that okay so
what that whole discussion does is it
confuses this is obviously just assuming
that you obviously have views with
regards to the validity of the argument
about robotics and it could be also that
you you consider the whole argument just
to be a total misnomer otherwise okay so
what that argument does is I'll say can
confuses conflates a productivity story
with an unemployment story which is an
unspent income story
unemployment's always an unspent income
story it's from somebody not spending
their income and no other agent willing
to spend more than his income and so you
get unemployment it's a monetary
phenomenon productivity is an entirely
different thing we've already had the
robot story happen okay not two hundred
years ago we couldn't have this because
we all have to be out growing food he
needed 99 percent of the people in
agriculture or we weren't going to be
able to eat and today less than one
percent the US produces enough eight
thousand calories a day a person or
something in exports food manufacturing
now is down to seven percent of the
people in the US if you got it up to
eight percent this room would be filled
with junk that we couldn't have
okay and so we've already got
productivity has already taken away
over 90% of 99% of the agricultural jobs
which shows everybody and then when it
was men in fact they've already lost and
unemployment is still at kind of the
same numbers it's always been alright
and that's because it's not it's got
nothing to do with unemployment
productivity are two entirely different
matters that's what we're trying to
separate here and and so you want as
much productivity as possible
okay that frees people up to do other
things there is no there's always them
there's always a lot more to do than
there are people to do it there are
always more jobs than you could possibly
do the University Professors can't
possibly get all the research assistants
they want all right that's not possible
and so we wake up every day with a labor
shortage but we wind up for the labor
surplus because we don't understand
understand the unspent income story
yes that's that that's the first point
and the most the most point but you know
this this other thing the other point I
think about is that it's as if it's as
if this is sort of like a tsunami
now tsunamis we can't really control
they just they're beyond our policy
control but you know it's sort of like
saying if we stopped if we just
eliminate all the traffic lights there'd
be chaos of course there would be and so
if this was really a tsunami then we'd
be we'd have problems but the government
can always provide conditions through
which private sector activity is
mediated and so if robotics really were
the problem then we just say you can't
do it that's it but the real problem is
that we have created a mindset that our
currency issuing governments can run out
of money and we haven't understood that
unemployment is because they're not
spending enough net currency into the
economy and this is so that's what it's
about the robot issues a separate issue
and so on and it reflects a dramatic
lack of imagination on what socially
productive activities that deserve to be
paid can be out there
it's massive number I got running every
morning I see hundreds of jobs or
thousands every day every day I go
running new jobs you might hear to be
saying the government could do this the
government can do that got a lot of
government in this thing which is true
but it's because the currency itself is
a coercive monopoly public monopoly and
once you've introduced a monopoly the
idea of things being settled by the free
market outs you know it doesn't exist
anymore to economics professors teach
you know versus monopoly oligopoly and
then free market he don't have you know
monopoly means there aren't free markets
and that's true and so in any market
will then operate under the
institutional structure set up by the
government there's no way around it once
you've got this coercive taxation if you
don't have course of taxation you don't
have a public sector that can have a
military and defend itself that can have
a legal system that could go on any of
these things you've given up this whole
idea of any kind of free market you've
now it's required that you know
everything's gonna be within this
monopoly that's been set up okay it's
the antithesis of competitive markets
you could set them up to exist within it
but you can't you know step back and let
leave anything to the you've taken it
away with your taxation which is a
necessity for you know human
civilization I feel great weight on my
shoulders
this has got to be a good question but
my name is Stephen Wilkinson I buy it
III really appreciated what you what you
think explained to me today because it
doesn't make a lot more sense to me now
I just want to ask one thing you've
talked about interest rates being zero
but on a sort of institutional practice
side I just wanted to know what you
think about what the taxation rate
should be and who should pay the taxes
and whether they should be a progressive
income tax or whether they should be
sales taxes what kind of taxes should
there be on who should they be levied
and at what rate and that's those kind
of practical questions and things that
come up in mom
when you're talking well I mean
certainly the tax system should be more
progressive than it currently is that's
undoubtedly the case sales tax is
typically highly regressive so in the
indirect taxes I mean depending on what
the taxes are enclosed on that fact
would be regressive so I mean you can
start from there and decide you know how
high you can go in terms of
progressivity I mean once upon a time
the top UK rate was 90% something in
that order
yeah so I don't have to spank any area
you'll ever get back to that there's
yeah I mean there's clearly a massive
problem of inequality we know that in
many many countries and having a more
progressive tax system is one way of
addressing that some degree and the
other ways to do something about you
know executive service which is
another issue together
the first point is that that modern
monetary theory is about macro and on
and the sort of issues about tax
structure it's not the conventional
realm of macroeconomics that's the first
point it's not saying it's not important
but it's also like asking a question
well what should industry regulation be
they're separate areas of study that's
the first point no I'm not saying it's
unimportant what you're saying the
second point is that there's this sort
of progressive narrative that says we've
we've got to tax the rich to fund public
services and that's very dominant in
heat over here
your Shadow Chancellor talks like that
that's his principle narrative and what
what an understanding of modern monetary
theory tells you is that's an absurd
statement because as long as there's
real resources available for sale to
provision these services though you want
the public sector to provide for the
well-being of the population then the
government can do that and and and
there's sort of a philosophical view
here because once you start talking has
anyone read Atlas Shrugged Ayn Rand's
book yeah this is a book about the
importance of the of the big man the big
in the big industrialist and all of us
are just parasites on their endeavor and
productivity what's the same sort of
argument you're saying we've gotta tax
the rich to fund these basic public
services for the poor therefore you're
saying that the rich are somehow
important and without them we can't have
equity policies at the bottom end well
it's just an absurd thing for a
progressive left person to say now
that's not this so that's not to say we
shouldn't be having discussions about
vertical equity in the tax system in
other words making the more progressive
'ti and having
income people pay more tax but got
nothing to do increasing the capacity of
government to fund services for the
lower-income groups from my point of
view we don't we want the top end of
town it's an Australian expression I
don't know if it's here we want the top
end of town to have less and not more
because they use that to pollute the
political process they use that to fund
think tanks that are on the right they
use that to lobby governments so I don't
want them to do that as much as they are
doing and I'd rather them not do that
and so they're the sort of things that I
think about but don't ever get fall into
this Labour Party narrative that we've
got a tax the rich to provide basic
services in your health system your
education that's just ignorant
no I'm okay get way back row on you so
let's look at real term so we don't what
we care more about is apart from the
influence which we do care about his
consumption what's the distribution of
consumption rather than the distribution
of income so if you've got some buddy in
a one-bedroom apartment with 30 cats
it's got five billion dollars in the
bank they're not so you don't need to
take their money away for any purposes
not doing anything he said feeding a
bunch of cats right now if you got
somebody else with no money that's a big
wheel or dealer that's got a big yacht
where they cut down half the rainforest
floor in there and you know he somehow
bought it on credit well he's the
problem
I'm taxing him is it's not gonna happen
you know it's wrong so we've got to look
at our consumption of resources so what
I look at our transactions taxes like
the income tax what's the real cost of
the transaction come tax and when I
talked to a friend at University of
Chicago economics and I said I thought
it was about 15% of GDP
he said you might be low right these are
all the costs of everybody's
record-keeping okay all the government
expense collecting it all the
enforcement all the legal expense all
the people going to school to learn
about it all the people with tax havens
all over the world doing things at every
level you know it's an enormous industry
that's just a legal talent alone that
could be out curing cancer doing
something useful is staggering it's
absolutely staggering so let's say it's
15 percent of GDP so if you get rid of
the income tax entirely and I'll replace
it with a property tax ten percent of
the value of your property just flat all
right it's not progressive or really but
just for this example and there's a job
guarantee so nobody's gonna lose a job
and get thrown out of their house like
they do in Europe they have high
unemployment then they put a property
tax on and then all the unemployed gets
thrown out of their houses you know in
the condon so italy tries to do so but
not not that so so now we've increased
real those 15 50 % of real GDP those
people are now doing something else
we've got full employment policy
where is the consumption of that 15%
going it's going to go to the lower
consumption groups the lower income
groups it's not going to go to the
people on top because they're not going
to go from three meals a day to five
meals a day because they've got more
money or something like that there are
if they're flying once a month in their
private jet they're not gonna fly every
two weeks because they have more money
okay it doesn't affect the consumption
of the highest income people at all and
probably the top 50% very little so now
the lower 50% probably aren't getting
15% of the consumption anyway so you've
pretty much doubled the real standard of
living of the lower 50% of the
population by eliminating the income tax
by getting rid of all the compliance to
cost built in now if you look at the
compliance cost of all the other
transaction tax like VI T and everything
else the staggering we because 1% grows
the food 7% doesn't manufacturing the
rest is all its services there's a whole
lot of gains by making this thing more
efficient right now we've got a whole
lot of people digging holes and then a
whole lot of others filling them in at
all levels the bureaucracy has got you
know has done that and we could afford
it because we're so productive but those
I think enormous gains an enormous way
to raise the standard of living
you know without you know then what
happens is these people who want to do
it by taxing the rich and they're
talking about in the state's raising the
marginal taxes seventy percent they're
going to turn it's gonna be an enormous
amount of political capital it'll take
them four or five years they'll get it
done let's give them a benefit done I'm
not against it but it's not gonna change
anything so the person making fifteen
million dollars you know takes home a
million dollars a year less I mean so
what if you accomplished all that and
here the opportunity is there to make a
serious you know change that doubles the
standard of living of more than half of
the population at no expense to anybody
else whatsoever
so I'm our chairs gone so I think that's
about it
I take in closing this meeting
I'd really like to extend my thanks and
thanks for Sara and Claire to you all
for coming and of course Bill Warren and
Martin for such a stimulating
informative and enjoyable afternoon I'm
sure you'll all agree with me that you
will be going home with something you
didn't know before and obviously give
you some food for thought and I'm sure
you all know we've got it up on the
screen that Gibbs has a presence on
social media and we've got a website and
you'll find if you hadn't been to our
website before we've got comprehensive
resources from facts to fact sheets and
links to further information videos and
books and it also includes a growing mmt
database of published academic papers
accessible through Zotero which was
launched in Berlin earlier this year as
a nonprofit organization we give our
time freely as unpaid permitted
volunteers and our costs are for holding
such events are met by crowdfunding and
I have to say give my thanks to all of
you who have been so generous in your
support for which we thank you we
couldn't actually do this without you if
you'd like to sign up for our newsletter
you can go to our website and sign up
and that will keep you up to date with
future events that we are organizing and
so that's it really
to conclude thank you all again for
coming and a safe journey to you all
hope
you


## Keywords:
