---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G5v6U1SJdtU
---

# Video
Marxist Philosophy - Bryan Magee & Charles Taylor (1977)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G5v6U1SJdtU)

## Transcript:

foreign

practical terms Marxism must be Far and
Away the most influential New Philosophy
to have appeared in the last 150 years
or so and I suppose most of us have a
rough idea anyway of what its basic
tenets are one could put them I think
like this
everything that really matters about a
society is determined by how it
maintains itself in existence because
it's what people have to do to keep
alive that really decides their
relationship to Nature and to each other
and therefore ultimately to everything
that grows up on those bases so the
decisive thing in any society at any
given time is what the means of
production are when they change people's
ways of life have to change and the way
individuals relate to each other has to
change and thus the organization of
classes changes
so long as the means of production are
in the hands of a section of society
rather than the whole of it a
deep-seated conflict of class interests
is inevitable
for this reason the whole of History up
to now is really a history of class
struggles this is bound to continue
until the means of production are taken
over by society as a whole thereby
abolishing classes in Marx's sense
altogether and held in common ownership
and run in the common interest the
establishment of this new kind of
society I.E communism will inaugurate a
whole new era of human history which
will be different in kind from the past
however since no ruling class can be
expected voluntarily to give up its
ownership of the means of production
with not only the wealth but also the
power privilege and Prestige which that
confers the forceful overthrow of the
existing system is likely to be the only
way in which Communism can be
established and it's therefore if only
for that reason Justified
well something like that sketch map of
Marxist theory is probably as much as
most of us possess and indeed as far as
it goes it's accurate but there's so
much more to it than that Marxism is a
rich and Powerful explanatory system
whose intellectual history is colorful
and interesting in its own right as well
as having an obvious practical influence
on the world we live in but in this
program we're going to consider Marxism
as a philosophy to do so we have someone
with us who has a lifelong interest in
the subject the Canadian Charles Taylor
more than 20 years ago as Chuck Taylor a
young fellow of all cells College Oxford
he was one of the founders of the new
Left movement in Britain since then he's
been professor of philosophy and
political science at McGill University
in Canada has run as a candidate several
times for the Canadian Federal
Parliament and has published a major
book on Marx's philosophical progenitor
Hegel now after all these years he's
back at all cells as professor of social
and political theory in the University
of Oxford well Professor Taylor I've
started this program by giving a very
rough but perhaps overbuild outline of
Marx's political and economic theory and
what we want to do now is to go into the
philosophy that throws these things up
to the surface as it were now where
would you like to begin in discussing
that well I'd like to begin pick up a
point you made about how it's what you
said was right but it's much richer I
mean you gave a thumbnail sketch very
good thumbnail sketch of Marx's an
explanatory Theory but there's also
another dimension a theory of Liberation
which I think accounts for the immense
importance and excitement that this
theory has has generated for the last
century you can start really from the
same point it's that human beings are
what they are because of the way they
make their lives the way they produce
the means to live and they produce the
means that live as a society as a as a
group not individually so in a way we
could look at them just as another
gregarious animal like ants or bees
but what differentiates them from answer
bees Marx holds is that human beings
have this capacity to reflect on and
change the way that they work on nature
to produce the means to life in other
words labor in the human sense in Marx's
view incorporates this idea of
reflection and that means that they can
change the way that they interact with
nature over time and that is the
dimension it's property human that means
that over time they can get greater and
greater control
greater greater capacity to take from
nature what they need and to produce the
means to human life now this just
doesn't just mean that they aren't
monotonously stocked like a certain
animal species in the same way of doing
things all the time
but over history they actually get
better they actually realize this
capacity to control nature to a greater
and greater degree in that sense already
we can see they become Freer that is
with the increase of Technology with
their understanding of nature with their
capacity to reorganize their their lives
human beings become more and more
capable of controlling the way in which
they interact with nature and is part of
the point here that a man in his most
primitive State when he's literally
emerging from the animal state is
virtually enslaved by Nature he's
subject to all the natural forces the
realm of Realm of Necessities the way
that Marx uses for this very much and
that the historical process can be seen
as the process of of self-liberation
from this enslavement to nature which is
conversely if you like the process of
the conquest of nature that we are more
and more mastering our material
environment is that that is the now what
makes Marxism a very interesting and
Rich theory is that there's another as
they were Wing to this that as we as man
progresses in history and nature
something else happens between human
beings because Marx believe that the
necessity it was absolute necessity in
order to progress that human beings
break up the original highly unified
Human Society there had to be a division
of labor
there to be the generation of a surplus
which required very rigid discipline and
all this meant necessarily inevitably
that some men would dominate others in
other words they would be class division
and the tragedy of this if you like is
that this great capacity to control our
our labor and our interaction with
nature and our way of being in the world
is something that we never can fully
exercise because it's something we only
could exercise as a whole Human Society
together
whereas the the the necessary
requirement for progress in the
beginning is that we break into class
division
and the result is that instead of we're
controlling freely
our way of of interacting with nature
and getting the means to life from
nature we find that it escapes human
control that it follows a set of
impersonal laws which no one no
individual person no individual group
can dictate and of course the the Apex
of this at the highest point of human
development in history before we recover
control is is capitalism and that Marx
devoted his major work to Capital and we
see in capital important one way of
putting a pencil sketch of capital is
that it's an it's a picture of a society
of an organization of society which is
governed by inexorable laws out of human
control in control of no individual in
which the laws of capital accumulation
drive on and on and on to the
destruction immense suffering of human
beings which no one can can control so
the Paradox is is what Marx use the word
alienation for
that this immense potential human beings
develop
to write their own ticket as it were as
as animals in nature which no other
animal has is it we're arrenched from
their hands by their own internal
divisions now comes the final
combination in which by a revolution
Human Society
can recover control something that can
only happen at the Apex of history when
the Surplus has been generated and the
means have been as they were gathered
why does I mean why is this so to speak
almost magical Act of Revolution going
to make everything right that's been
wrong throughout history what how does
the theory explain the theory really is
that there is a bent in human nature if
you'd like to put it this way towards
ultimately free and therefore Collective
control
together over their Destiny and this
this bent you can see is being
frustrated by the fact that in previous
history it just wasn't possible to take
the first steps without paying the
terrible cost of class divided Society I
mean in very poor Indigent societies
under primitive communism it was
necessary to break into dominators and
dominated Masters and servants in order
to make the next step I see and that's
when it no longer is necessary the
Marxist theory is that a class will
arise which is willing to take that step
towards a revolution which will for the
first time not simply produce another
dominant class but do away with
domination altogether yeah if I remember
rightly and absolutely in a way the key
to this whole process though in Marx's
view is the division of labor isn't it
because I believe he says that that uh
in order for human societies to develop
beyond the very primitive stage you have
to have specialization but once you have
specialization the individual is no
longer producing everything that is
responsible for his own maintenance and
he becomes dependent on others he he
gets hived off into particular groupings
with others but he also becomes so to
speak an instrument of production he is
somebody who is now being used for the
purposes of others as well as himself to
produce the means of livelihood for
society as a whole and this starts the
process that you just mentioned of
alienation he becomes someone who is as
it were cut off or partially cut off
from the means that sustain him yes we
are all at that point fragments of the
social process and none of us can really
understand or control it totally and it
follows from that of course that when we
have a revolution in which we recuperate
this control that once again the
division of labor has overcome it's very
important theme in Marx that the
division at least between workers by
hand and workers by brain will be
overcome but now I think the really
exciting element in this which has not
always been brought out very clearly but
I think it's always there but I call The
Liberation theory is really this that
what human beings are about in history
comes to be something very surprising it
the motivation for all these earlier
stages of History moving from one system
to another is of course just acquiring
the means to life I mean the very dire
necessity of keeping alive but Marx had
the view that it was part like a human
fulfillment to exercise this capacity to
control their lives for its own sake
is it where that there was a expressive
Dimension not simply an instrumental
Dimension to this it becomes a form of
self-realization of realizations yes and
it's this dimension of self-realization
which is utterly frustrated by class
Society
in other words what marks you see Marx
constantly
saying his works both early and late is
that in class Society capitalism for
instance we have a society which at best
simply produces in order to keep men
alive it's just the bear means
production simply a means to keep alive
whereas man is a laboring animal ought
to be capable of expressing himself in
his labor as a human being is almost the
vision of man as a collective man social
man is kind of artist
expressing himself which is where what
awaits human beings once they can
overcome this alienation and I suppose
the vision of the society to be achieved
communism is a vision of a society
without internal divisions without
classes without master and man and
without alienation exactly it's an
overcoming of alienation and which means
that all the capacity that human beings
have to control their lives are put to
the service of their expressive uh drive
and aspirations
that's I think in a nutshell what
overcoming alienation means no uh it's
very clear that this philosophy has had
an enormous influence on the modern
world and on all of this and it's also
pretty clear to me anyway that it
contains very important elements of
Truth what would you say uh uh so to
speak the the good things about the
philosophy or the things that we all
have learned from or at least ought to
have learned from even if we haven't
well I would say of the two sides that
we've looked at the expansion Theory and
then the Richer Liberation Theory the
expanded theory in a way we're all in
some degree Marxist now in the sense
that it gave us a reading of history in
terms of of the precisely the way in
which human beings make the means to
life and it gave us insights into
history which no one can go back on
however much there may be arguments
about how far to take it
when you get to the Liberation Theory
it's a much more checkered and
controversial question it is it's
undoubtedly given as I think one of the
one of the Richer and more interesting
insights into the development of modern
man the the immense importance that
freedom has for people in modern
civilization the way that uh people Pine
after it and struggle for it and so on
at the same time it's been the source of
one of the biggest problems within
Marxism itself because these two sides
of the theory explanatory Theory and The
Liberation Theory don't always fit too
well together I mean can can you show
how they I think we can see that
together by example I mean if you want
to look at Marxism simply as you know
almost newtonians and scientific theory
explaining human history doing for
development history what Newton did for
the planets then you get a view of
inexorable law which governs human
beings at any period of time isn't this
Newton's Laws of the planets govern the
planet's motions in a period of time
then what disappears is something in The
Liberation theory of Marxism which is
something of this kind
that as we make the revolution from
capitalism to Communism we recover
control over certain facets of Our Lives
which previously under capitalism or as
it were under the control of inexorable
law the idea that some at one point in
history some things are controlled by
laws which then are recuperated if you
like for for freedom this is an idea
that doesn't fit neatly into a model of
Newtonian science in other words I mean
what Mark what Marx is suggesting is is
that up to a certain point in history
namely the Communist Revolution all
historical events are covered by laws
which have the character of scientific
laws and suddenly there's going to be
some kind of break so that man will
after that become free and therefore not
government except the Liberation Theory
it wouldn't be that that uh crude I mean
it would be of this kind really that as
the different societies succeed each
other in history I mean feudalism
capitalism and so on you get very
different kinds of laws governing people
and things that are under control and
control at one period cease to be at
other periods and vice versa and it's
only with the arrival of Communism that
we get um
another such change but at this point of
change which has an unprecedented degree
incorporates an impressive unprecedented
degree of control but the idea would be
that there would be
quite a great qualitative differences
between the kind of laws applying under
ancient Society feudal society and
communist Society against this however
you have the kind of the way that
Marxism came to be considered quite
understandably in late Victorian period
the period of Darwin
the period of you might say scientism is
a kind of ideology when it's seen as an
inexorable set of of of laws now within
Marxism itself these two sides have gone
on struggling you know as a political
movement it can't abandon either one
because it's I think it's political
punch precisely
depends on holding on to both of them I
mean it has to hold on to the Liberation
Theory because that is the if you like
the whole Messianic future that it can
open to man and it has to hold on to the
claim to
being a science because that stamps it
is something quintessentially modern
just overcome Superstition and which can
have a really solid foundation but any
that's level of politics any Marxist
theoretician has been in one way or
another deeply embarrassed with this and
they've taken difference
different roads there is a very popular
school today which has decided to
jettison The Liberation Theory almost
all together I think many people
listening to this discussion between us
will be surprised at your emphasis on
half of Marxism being a theory of
Liberation because in many people's
minds I think Marxism is bound to be
associated with a form of
totalitarianism there are very very few
people left anywhere in the world now I
think who actually regards say the
Soviet Union as in any serious sense a
free country the communist countries are
dictatorships of one sort or another and
how them people will be asking
themselves how can a theory of
Liberation be the ideology of this kind
of society yes I think it's a very cruel
Paradox but I think it's one that
explains a great deal of it explains
just why the Soviet Union is such a
totalitarian country it is if it were
content merely to be
an autocracy as its predecessor regime
its Artisan was it wouldn't need to
interfere with control shape people's
lives as much as it is it tries to do
but it's because it's a regime which is
based on ideology of Liberation it has
to be the case that everybody not only
obeys but likes it but believes in it
and any evidence serious evidence that
people don't they find it spiritually
empty has to be crushed I mean people
have to be at the limit even put in
insane asiders partly because one has to
believe that such people must be insane
to see a system of this kind as
spiritually empty because it has these
tremendous claims again you mentioning
earlier that The Liberation Theory and
Marxism in a way looks on man as an
artist and therefore four Marxist
movements again what artists say hold
believe Express becomes supremely
important according to the theory they
ought to be in that Society
expressing and celebrating what that
Society is about and when they turn out
not to be it's something absolutely
intolerable and therefore they have to
be suppressed this brings us to a
consideration I think of what the main
shortcomings in the theory are I don't I
don't want to get hived off into a
discussion of the Soviet Union which
would be very fascinating I wanted to
try and keep to talking about Marxist
philosophy but it does seem to me that
one of the mistakes in the theory is
that the theory posits with the
achievement of communism a society
within which there are no conflicts now
it seems to me that this is even
theoretically unattainable
um for example wherever you get two
people together you are bound to have
conflicting interests and conflicting
opinions and so on and almost the
central problem of politics could be
described as being how do you solve such
conflicts if not by Brute Force if not
by the law of the Jungle I mean in one
sense this is what politics is primarily
about and I think we now realize more
than people did in the 19th century that
the the physical resources of the world
the material resources of the world are
cruelly finite and they're always going
to be disputes about how they should be
used in any kind of society
so in any kind of society you're going
to get conflicts and Marxism doesn't
give us any way of resolving these
because it denies that in its form of
society there are going to be any
conflicts at all yes and I think can I
just add a point here Chuck I don't want
to go on talking too long at this point
but I want just to add the point that I
think that this is connected with the
reason why Marxism is so to speak bad
about freedom because it doesn't
acknowledge the possibility of conflict
in its kind of society it has no way of
coping with a situation when the
individual is at odds with Society or
when minorities are at odds with
majorities because it says that can't
happen
would you agree that there is yes I
think that you're being a bit unfair in
the sense that a Marxist would reply
here that there is do foresee certain
kinds of conflict but basically the
basic point that they foresee that the
really deep conflicts that which make
people take up
cudgels against each other are grounded
in economic exploitation and will
disappear and I agree with you but I do
agree with your basic point that emerges
in that that
their powerless to cope with they have
no resources that were intellectually
otherwise to cope with with conflict and
no model of how to operate a society in
which conflict could arise and there's a
very deep feeling that if you begin to
allow for that you're going beyond the
bounds of Marxism I think that's
certainly true what do you think are
other important shortcomings of the
theory as a theory well in a way
something we should have raised in
connection with the Soviet Union is the
opposite of of the Crimson the Soviet
Union it's that it all happened in a
country like the Soviet Union and not in
a western Advanced country because the
theory of Marx was definitely
to the effect that communism would come
about in the most advanced industrial
societies I mean in a way just as you
can say what's happening in the Soviet
Union there's no test of Marxism so on
the other hand you have to say that the
biggest intellectual question put to
Marxism is why hasn't it happened in
Britain in Germany
and I think that this is both a major
one of the major shortcomings of the
theory and one of the major sources one
of the major areas of continuing
discussion by Marxist would you would
you agree with me also that Marxism is
very limited in the following sense that
that with said speak the great
philosophies of the world or the major
ideologies or major religions they they
provide explanations of uh of the world
on one can put it very crudely by by
saying it this way they provide
explanations on three different levels
the individual level the human
individual with his unique life and
death and Consciousness and knowledge
and soul if he has one and moral sense
and so on and a whole cluster of
important philosophical problems the
mind-body problem the problem of the
self and sound relating to the
individual then there is uh the social
level
of political social problems historical
problems and so on and then there's the
level of problems concerning the natural
world the cosmos the material world with
fundamental questions arising about the
nature of time and space and the whole
material structure within which human
life finds itself now it seems to me
that that uh
the great theories the great
philosophies are richly explanatory on
all three of these levels
whereas Marxism isn't Marxism almost
totally ignores two of them it ignores
the level of the natural world and has
nothing to say about the cosmos and
really has almost nothing to say about
the individual it's a it's a theory that
functions entirely on that intermediate
level of social existence I much I agree
with you on that having nothing to say
about the cosmos I'm afraid that in some
cases they have too much to say about
the cosmos they're a development out of
angles which you now have in the Soviet
Union of the dialectics of nature which
I think is in a lot of nonsense
philosophically
really it would be better if Marxism had
nothing to say about the natural Cosmos
what modern ideology or or religion does
I think that a much more powerful
criticism of yours would be that it had
nothing to say about the personal level
and I wonder how if that's entirely true
it's it's true up to now the historical
record that not much has been said by
marxists
I don't know how much that is some kind
of historical accident that Marxism has
been taken out very powerfully by
important political movements which have
had other things to think about then
indeed I wanted to suppress certain
questions about the individual when you
see the rich resources of Marxism as a
theory of Liberation you see the kind of
theory of art that could emerge from
that
it's possible to conceive of a another
development of our culture you can
imagine it happening in which that side
of Marxism could really be explored
could be given the kind of exploration
and development that Marxist economics
has been given our Marx's theory of
development has been given
we have just a few signs of it really in
Marxist aestheticians Marx's theorist of
of Art
and I there could be an ultimate
question arising there whether
the individual as we've understood it in
the past the lonely individual who very
often faces the most dramatic and
important aspects of his life alone
whether Marxism could ever properly
capture this may indeed be a question
but it's a question we don't know the
answer to a priori because this is a
very underdeveloped side of Marxism it
would be would be interesting and very
exciting if there were such a turn in
our cultural life
that our Marxist thinkers instead of
being
very exclusively focused on
theories of why the revolution didn't
take place or why it will take place
tomorrow or theories of the state and so
on in which
sometimes diminishing returns seem to be
coming in and there could be a focus on
greater development of Marx's theory of
Art
theory of human aesthetic experience
moral experience
it could be something there have been
certain Beginnings which have never been
really taken up which could be something
quite interesting do you regard the
acceptance or indeed advocacy of
violence as being a strike against the
philosophy or the theory
well you can't say that an advocacy of
violence is such because there's very
few theories except outright pacifist
ones I mean a great theoration like lock
of the of liberalism Advocates
revolution in certain circumstances but
I do think I think there is a point in
what you're saying there that
the very belief that one can achieve a
kind of conflictless society
beyond the revolution
gives you a kind of license
to destroy and undercut what exists now
and to do so even violently as long as
you think that what's going to come out
of it is going to be a conflictless
realm of of Harmony and it's not about
it that the certainty with which
marxists uh political figures and people
believe in this
the um very often the facilities which
they accept the idea that one should
destroy system violence or violently
upset it
I think is a is a feature of you might
say they're Messianic hope because and
also in individuals and in groups it
only too easily becomes an assumption
that it's all right for them to use
violence in pursuit of whatever their
aims are doesn't it but that does of
course fall off the theory because if
the theory is right they are on the
right side there's also yes it's
perpetual Marxism is a Perpetual theory
of the just War applied to politics in
in his slide to history or yes yes any
theory is just War says that we're right
and they're wrong I mean that's but
that's not peculiar too but now what
exactly is the status of this Theory I
mean it claims to be scientific and it
marks his own writings this is
reiterated over and over again that he
is putting forward a scientific View and
I suppose what he really meant was that
whereas other socialists have been uh
either seeing lovely visions of an ideal
Society or issuing uh moral demands he
wasn't doing that what he was doing or
trying to do was to look at the actual
sociological processes at work in
society and seeing where they would lead
him
uh he was claiming all the time that he
was taking a scientific approach but one
is struck in fact by by the amount of
profits
prophecies Theory isn't one by all the
claims and discussions about the future
which actually don't look very
scientific when you examine them closely
well actually he marks us quite careful
about claims in the future in any detail
he hedged a lot about the future nature
of commune society and what would happen
I mean the big claim is the breakdown of
capitalism the big claim of the future
which is yet to be Redeemed by by the
facts yeah but I the word the word in
German meaning science as you know
distance shaft has a much broader sense
and people talk very happily in German
about historical science and as well as
about the science of physics
activities but I think it's undoubtedly
true that anyways Marx developed he came
to see the firmness and rigorousness of
his science of capitals being absolutely
on all fours with that of of physics and
do you think that just can't be
sustainable but I don't think it can be
sustained in principle for any Theory
which purports deal with human beings
their motivation their history their
society how they develop that kind of
rigor that kind of exactitude that kind
of verification just can't be of course
I think why not to add In fairness to
Marx that the notion of of what
constitutes science has changed
radically in the hundred years since he
wrote that that all well-informed men in
the middle of the 19th century thought
that scientific knowledge was especially
secure and certain and infallible they
were an encourageable kind of knowledge
whereas now that view has been virtually
universally abandoned and we've realized
that science is valuable science is
currently and uh and therefore I mean we
Marx himself would take a different view
now if he were writing it because he
would have different models yes yes yes
yes and that's too wouldn't fit very
well with as you say the Messianic side
it really was a 19th century belief you
know Darwinism cleaned up this area and
he had all that all clear and and
physics had cleaned up this area and now
Marx was we're cleaning up finally the
area of Human Social history
one parallel that's been drawn by a lot
of other people is the is is between
Marxism and the religion and I'd like to
invite your comments on this uh what the
people who make the parallel point out
is that it has uh says sacred books and
it has its profits and its sects and its
schisms and its persecutions and its
Heretics and and the whole kind of setup
the the whole way in which Marxism and
communism has developed is strikingly
like a religion even the spread is like
a religion I mean I do think that uh an
absolutely astounding fact about Marx is
that uh 100 years ago he was an almost
unknown uh Refugee intellectual living
in this country on the charity of
friends and living in lodgings and
working all day in the British museum
reading room studying and writing and so
on and within less than 70 years of his
death the death of this intellectual
Scribbler uh within less than 70 years
of his death a third of the human race
is living under governments under region
teams that actually call themselves by
his name that call themselves marxists I
mean the whole of China the whole of
Russia in its 19th century Empire the
whole of Eastern Europe This is an
astounding thing and the only similarity
to it it seems to be in the whole of
history is the spread of Islam and the
spread of Christianity now what how
would you comment on those parallels
with a religion well I think undoubtedly
Orthodox established Marxism in Soviet
Union or China resembles in the respects
you've mentioned religious movements in
the past imposed Orthodoxy and indeed
the the the worst dimension of an
imposed Orthodoxy when you go back to
Marx himself Marx is writing himself
what is the religious element there I
think this something there which is the
kernel to all that along with the
scientific Outlook and that is that
Marxism is so obviously related to the
Messianic tradition of the milanist
tradition of European uh movements
movements in the Middle Ages
for seeing the coming of the the New
Order of the new world that broke out in
the time of the Reformation indeed were
there in a way in the extreme sex of the
French Revolution who had the same idea
of a new beginning they started you know
in 1791 I think it was a new calendar
law
and this is a very important feature via
Hegel via the works of Hegel which fed
into Marxism
particularly the idea that there will be
a period of Maximum Strife maximum
suffering a great final struggle just
preceding the introduction of a new age
of Harmony peace fulfillment now this is
not necessarily incompatible with
science I mean if you
did try out to be the case that Marx's
view of human history was right then it
would turn out that
Messianic movements had been unculinity
prescient just as certain myths as were
our forerunners of atomic theories and
so on but it's there's no doubt that
right or wrong this is part has been
part of the very powerful appeal of of
the theory this however is still very
far
from what you were pointing out the
established developments of established
religion with heresy trials and the holy
office and all the paraphernalia which
is grown up where marxists societies
have established themselves officially
but I mean you would do agree that that
parallel exists oh yes
unquestionably yes yes
now this really takes me naturally to
the next question I wanted to put to
which is this in view of all the things
that we've agreed are either wrong with
Marx's Theory or if that's too crude a
way of putting it in view of the
limitations and shortcomings of the
theory how does one explain the spell
binding appeal that this theory has had
to so many such enormous numbers of
people I mean you you've begun so to
speak halfway to answer this now in in
what you've been saying but I'd like you
to to unpack that a little more yes I
think that if we go back to these two
sides of it and see that it combines
them some of the most important and the
most appealing theories in history have
been a theory that combine two things
that people want to combine and they
can't easily combine in life and the
claim to be a science
to be something firmly established to be
something very much of modern times
which is cast off the Superstition of
the old days and yet at the same time
answering that deep hunger for a new age
a new era a freedom of fulfillment that
these two can be held together I think
it's been very powerful playing very
powerful appeal and it's gone right
through tremendous gamut I mean all the
way from
intellectuals semi-disabused
intellectuals in Western societies
through Marxism is very much a private
orientation to their their studying
whatever they're studying because they
haven't maybe a popular movement but but
are as we're attracted by the same
combination from their point of view all
the way to third world countries third
world populations where because there's
been a rapid breakdown of a established
set of traditions
something new has to take its place some
new Global picture of of life
particularly one that offers a future
and that can claim to be modern and the
same mixture
seen from a different angle
we're a new Heaven and a new Earth but
established by science by what is
quintessentially modern
has its appeal and so we have this
tremendous gamut of different publics
and different kinds of people which this
combination can can appeal to it may be
that
Marxism may be eclipsed in this I mean
in this in the second function
by as it already in a way has been
partly by nationalism
or we may find and this is perhaps
unlike religion a whole lot of hybrids
growing up which have taken in in
different Societies in the world today
official ideologies which have taken
some things from Marxism and mixed them
up with other elements which are
terribly important in that Society
particularly National elements so that
we will have African Socialism or a Arab
socialism all of which oh something to
Marxism but may try to make it part of a
broader mix but in all these cases you
can see an attempt to do the same kind
of thing to have a global view of things
perhaps also which saves the tradition
from which people come and yet which can
claim somehow to be radical new A New
Beginning quintessentially modern and
founded on the most solid establishment
of modern civilization namely science
and now we come to what for many people
is I think the 64 question that is the
relationship of all this to actual uh
communist societies and the relationship
and the problems exhibited by the
relationship are one of the central
themes of modern Marxist writers
uh let me put it to you this way there
seem to be two basic schools of thought
about this relationship one says that
the that societies like the Soviet Union
are a perversion of the system of of the
theory that they are the theory gone
wrong and and one such school of thought
blames Stalin and stalinism for what
went wrong and so on but there's another
school of thought that says no uh this
outcome was always implicit in the
theory
and one interesting fact about that is
that from the beginning it contained
many revolutionary left-wing people for
example the early some of the early
anarchists
always prophesied that if Marx's
theories were put into effect they would
issue in a despotism a a dictatorship
and later on you get Rosa Luxembourg the
revolutionary leader of the German
socialists at the time of the first
world war saying that if Lenin's views
were put into effect they would be bound
to issue in a pre-state now which of
those two uh views roughly speaking do
you sympathize with well Rosa Luxembourg
I mean she was saying Lenin's views not
Marx's views and I think that
that is the right uh Theory I mean of
course if you go back to any theorist
who never had his theory put into effect
in his lifetime which is theorizing you
can find a great many things that's uh
with this attitude and that attitude can
lead to almost any result think of the
academic gain people play with so is he
totalitarian is he liberal and so on
there's no doubt however that in Marx's
view what
ought to follow from a revolution would
be what he indeed he discussed the
French commune of 1871 in these terms
would be even more radical basic
democracy than we have in any Western
society today with recall of delegates
and so on the um the type of command
Society we see developing the Soviet
Union very much emerges however
honorableism out of Lenin's view of the
party as a a command structure and out
of the situation which Lennon found
himself so I think that there's a little
bit of
over wisdom after the fact in reading
all that back into Marxism the only
thing you can say is that
the very idea the very belief that one
is going to bring about a conflictless
society
ill equips one
as you said earlier ill equips one to
develop a model for how to work in
conflict that Mark would have had great
deal of trouble if his theories had
actually worked out in his lifetime but
from that to say that he had something
like the germs of a totalitarian system
in his mode of operating which I think
Lenin unquestionably had I think it's a
great great jump and it's not at all
Justified yeah
have given that the uh that all of the
known uh Marxist movements would have
actually come to power have Institute
have resulted in fact in bureaucratic
dictatorships how do you think they're
going to get out of this do you think
they will have to aband that the
societies will have to abandon the
theory of Marxism if they are to evolve
into non-dictatorial Societies or do you
think they can do that on the basis of
some reconstruction yes Marxist I mean
it's very unlike at the Soviet Union
will do this in the base of a
reconstructed Marxism but it is possible
ever since this shock occurs a Marxism
taking over and making such a horrifying
regime there has been attempts by what
are called revisionists other marxists
many in the west but elsewhere even some
in Yugoslavia to work out to ReDiscover
their Marxism an extremely interesting
and fruitful ideas have been developed
along these these lines I think you
began to see in 68 in Czechoslovakia the
beginnings of a society summer food
sources some of whose intellectual
sources would have been revised Marxism
of a free society which was nipped in
the bud
and a substantial amount of thought has
gone on as I mentioned in Yugoslavia
where again it's not really very
possible to put it into practice indeed
those who think these thoughts have some
of them have lost their their jobs but
nevertheless there is
there is a possible living development
of Marxism which could be the basis for
this kind of society whether you have
the political conditions in which this
kind of thing could happen in Eastern
Europe is another question I think it's
very very different so far in this
discussion we've confined ourselves and
I think we've been right to do this to
the Marxism of Marx but now that we've
said to speak brought the discussion up
to date and you've been talking about
the ferment of ideas going on among
contemporary some contemporary Marxist
thinkers I'd like to just finish the
discussion if I may by asking you if
you'd pick out one or two of the more
recent Marxist thinkers and tell us
something about the particular
developments of Marxism for which
they're responsible yes well I think
that there's two really quite different
just to give an example in quite
different areas one is the Praxis group
in Yugoslavia that I would be referring
to earlier which a set of markers who've
tried to return to the basis of marxist
humanism and to work out the theory of a
Libertarian Society based on on Marxism
this is one of the most interesting
developments and they're the they're
perhaps the center many other people
have contributed to it uh they've drawn
on a number of other other thinkers
they've been perhaps the in some ways
the more spectacular because the the
bravest of of this group
another area completely Marxism has been
very fruitful in developing
um economic theory of the world economy
I mean that's the strength of Marxism is
to see an economic system as a whole
which is the word determines the roles
of its parts
and the development of a theory of
underdevelopment of the way in which the
structure of the world economy
to some extent forces under development
actually brings about underdevelopment
certain societies and prevents them from
from developing attribute certain roles
in which societies are are stuck I think
that's been one of the most fruitful
developments of marxist economics and
these two ways if you like in an attempt
to come to terms with capitalism as it
is today 100 years after Marx wrote
Capital and very different
and secondly in an attempt to ReDiscover
libertarian sources in Marxism I think
we have perhaps the two most interesting
developments of non-official Marxism one
outstanding feature of the history of
communist countries is has been that the
great political leaders like Lenin and
Stalin and Mao tsitung have also had
pretensions to be philosophers do you
actually credit any of them with any
outstanding philosophical capacity no
philosophical no I mean Lenin uh great
political a political strategist and a
very clear thinker about that start on
the less said the better Mao
no no I mean it would be too much to
expect that such men should also be
philosophers
so in other words you think that for the
new Marxist ideas we need to look not at
uh not to the political leaders but to
the philosophers to the writers of other
kind Scholars and the economists and so
on yes and especially not to those
political leaders but precisely to a
number of very important things that
have that have come in the Marxist
tradition and have added to our
understanding of it that is the that's
going to be the groundwork for any new
germination
thank you very much thank you Professor
Taylor



## Keywords:
