---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h1BFUT_8e48
---

# Video
Mass Protest Without Revolution | Vincent Bevins | TMR
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h1BFUT_8e48)

## Transcript:
we are back and we are joined Now by
Vincent bevans a longtime journalist
author of If we burn the mass protest
decade and the missing Revolution uh
Vincent thank you so much for coming on
today really appreciate it yeah thanks
for thanks for having me so your book
really looks at this central question um
and it's it's expansive uh and ambitious
in in a way that I really appreciate the
the and it's an analysis of a decade of
mass protest right starting really with
the Arab Spring and and ending with Co
um before we get into more of the
specifics here I'm just wondering if you
could give people a sense of the time
frame of that you that you wanted to
analyze um and really that that central
question as I say of with all these
protests why has there been such little
structural change Andor Revolution or
indeed the change we saw was often the
the wrong kind or right certainly not
what was asked for by the streets is as
much as we could understand what the
streets were asking for so yeah
absolutely thank you so much um it is
indeed ambitious it seeks to be a
history it seeks really to try to tell
the story of the last decade 2010 to
2020 so I go from January 1st 2010 to
January 1st 2020 and it is global in
scope um so that is that perhaps at
first at first glance like wildly
ambitious far too ambitious but it is
delimited by a central concern right
like any work of history um it chooses
to
build the the the story around a a a set
of things that are considered important
for for the reader now and and that main
question is how is it possible that so
many mass protests led to the opposite
of what they asked for now not every
episode that I analyze in the book ends
this way but far more in this way than
anybody would have expected back in
2010 um and it is really kind of a
conundrum that overturns a lot of the
assumptions that we had about uh
um Revolution and indeed political
resistance of any kind um 101 15 years
ago and so I think that it is possible I
hope that it is possible to do so to
tell the story of that decade as if the
thing that really powered history in
that in those 10 years is mass protests
of a certain type that got far larger
than they were expected to to to by the
original organizers or participants and
that really changed the course of um
history in many countries and I think
indeed the global system so it it it
attempts to put all of that at the
center of a history of the last decade
um that hopefully readers can come to um
not only to understand what happened
like what happened in you know the
so-called Arab Spring what happened
between you know Brazil in uh uh uh Hong
Kong and Ukraine from 23rd to 2013 to
2014 but to speak to concerns um that
really matter to people that will be
trying to change the world in the future
well let's start with Brazil because
that's how you start your book right I
mean and and talking about your
experiences there um in 2013 how you
were both attacked by military police
and then you know how that protest
movement on the ground just began to
morph into something that wasn't really
representative of the of the the goals
that um were delineated in the outset um
talk a bit about your experience and and
and how uh you know how how everything
began to shift yeah absolutely um Brazil
is kind of the central Narrative of this
book um even though it's just one of
many episodes analyzed because I lived
through it so I put myself in that story
to the extent that I am in it just um
because I was so close to what happened
as you as you as you mention at the
beginning of a particular set of
protests in June 2013 a small set of
leftists and anarchists were agitating
for a reduction in the price of the bus
Fair now the first set of protests
succeeded in making noise succeeding in
shutting down parts of the city but like
the dominant forces in Brazilian Society
the media eventually came to the
conclusion that we need to crack down on
these kids this needs to be uh this
needs to be taken care of basically
asking for the military police now the
the police in Brazil are military police
as a legacy of the us back dictatorship
basically asking for the military police
to crack down now on June 13th and this
is the moment that I'm hit though the
fact that other journalists are hit even
more severely really changes the the
story moving forwards uh the military
police do crack down they crack down so
forcefully that it shocks mainstream
media the major voices in the country
into entirely changing the way that they
view the protest they go from saying
these are punks and anarchists that we
need to sweep off the streets
immediately to no indeed this is a
Uprising a patriotic demonstration of
the right uh of Brazilians to express
themselves in the streets and as
millions of people pour into the streets
this new interpretation delivered by the
Brazilian media leads people to believe
that the protests are about something
other than what the original protesters
would have thought it was about um these
two groups you know very broadly
speaking the original leftists uh punks
and anarchists come often into like
violent conflict with the new arrivals
and then a week later after this initial
C on that I outlined in June 13th I
witness what we would now consider the
beginning of the far right movement in
Brazil but it didn't exist no one even
imagined that could have ever happened
in 2013 people like that uh people
acting in the ways that we would now
recognize that badis does act in dress
that supporters of farri right president
J
bolsonaro actually expelling the
original leftists uh and punks from the
streets actually getting throwing them
out and saying no that's not it's not
about your little leftwing party using
your cute little Social Democratic or or
Anarchist dreams it's about what we say
it's about um and the original
organizers had planned on this getting
much they hoped for it to explode but it
exploded in a way that they had never
expected and the explosion would did not
work out well for them it was this was
they were horrified Often by the
direction that it took and long story
store a lot of elements are born in this
sort of pressure cooker of June 2013
that find ways to take advantage of
political opportunities in that moment
and later uh in the in the next years in
Brazil um ultimately removing a
democratically elected president
ultimately supporting a corrupt
anti-corruption uh campaign that places
Lula in jail uh and ultimately all of
these elements come together to lead to
probably the most extreme right-wing
elected president on planet Earth uh
taking office in 2019 or indeed the
exact opposite of what it appeared that
the streets were asking for back in in
in the days of June 13 when I went out
uh before getting tear gassed by by the
military
police is that a failure of militancy on
a part on the part of um
protesters is that a uh lack of
political education on the differences
between um like
anti-government uh sentiment and uh and
and uh populism and breaking things
versus uh that like breaking but with
the uh understanding that it's to to
build up some sort of leftist um
government in its wake is that you know
part of the central issue that we often
see which is um the this the splintering
of certain kind of uh organized efforts
to upend the system um in ways that are
bit A bit chaotic because it's not
centered around traditional Le or as you
talk you talk a bit in the book about
the old left right I mean like what what
uh principles as opposed to um just a
general kind of
animus yeah intentional organizational
forms with long-term strategy in real
structure was something that would have
been entirely natural um to people that
were trying to change the world in the
first half of the 20th century the uh
black civil rights organizations that
were so heroic in the 50s and 60s and
indeed inspired um so much of the new
Left would have taken for granted that
you needed structure organization
discipline um and long-term strategy now
that sort of Falls away I think for
ideological and material reasons in the
second half of the 20th century not only
do people believe by the end of the 20th
century that there's something sort of
inherently problematic about that not
everybody believes that these
assumptions uh exist in wide enough um
spheres that that this sort of
ideological uh uh uh uh precondition
exists for really the way that I think a
lot of these Mass process explosions are
covered by people like me in the
english- speaking media and then also
you sort of get the the the actual
concrete material decimation of a lot of
the organizations that were put together
you know aot you know by the end of the
20th century the 21st century people are
atomized they individualized people are
sort of to the extent that they have a
connection to the the the movement that
they end up joining on the streets it's
that they all saw the same thing on the
internet and then they sort of find out
on the streets who the other people are
um that are part of this movement it
comes together um in a very uh in a way
which is not really built by or
conducive to proper Collective action
and I think that a an assumption was
shared um again especially in the
english- speaking media but across a lot
of a lot of um the world in especially
the liberal North Atlantic world in the
90s and the 2000s that if you know you
sort of overthrew a bad thing that
something better was going to come along
sort of deep deep this deep deep belief
and sort of the ideology of progress the
deep deep belief that the world was
going towards something you know this
was the explicit thesis kind of of
fukiyama end of history book certainly a
lot of um people in the US government
believed that the internet and internet
Le um uh internet L uprisings would lead
to things that were good for them like
this was a major uh tenant of thinking
about their Democratic uh and Republican
parties now especially liberals they
tend to think the exact opposite that
like if the internet caused people to
run into the streets that's really
problematic that's actually maybe some
foreign power that's ruining America
rather than the the universalization of
the American dream um and I think that
this tendency to view the
explosion um as something that was
necessarily going to lead to something
better taking its place was
understandable in some to some extent I
mean the particular ideological and
organizational form of this
one um this one group in Brazil they
were explicitly horizontalist so that
meant that they had they didn't believe
in leadership they had no leaders they
they rotated their members um constantly
they rotated tasks um everything should
be decided by consensus um all of you
understand it's very understandable
where all that comes from it's very
understandable why they believed that
this would lead to the type of explosion
that would be good for them it just
turned out not to be true quite
tragically and this particular
organization form that works quite well
for them for eight years in as a Titanic
group planning for their protests um
left them both sort of ideologically and
organizationally incapable of rising to
the opportunity that was perhaps
presented to them when the people rushed
into the streets in June 2013 and this
is kind of something we see across the
decade even though the cases are very
very different this is another problem
is you see the sort of copying and
pasting of tactics from one country to a
very different country um where
conditions are very different or indeed
after it's become clear that in the
original country that the tactic didn't
even work out that well um but what
often what happened in Brazil what
happens uh in many places is that when
this explosion happens this opportunity
is because the protest itself especially
the protest of this particular form an
apparently spontaneous leaderless
horizontally organized digitally
coordinated format for protest because
this particular type of protest cannot
take advantage of the opportunity
someone else does and that and that's
often a very cynical or powerful actor
existing Elites um powerful economic
forces in society a foreign power that
may use this as an excuse to launch the
intervention that they've always been
wanting to launch in this part of the
world but now there's a power vacuum so
they do it um and so I think yeah I
think you're right to point to both sort
of some ideological assumptions but also
like the particular type of society that
ended
up discovering a clear desire to change
the the global system but without the
the organizational structures required
to take advantage of what comes from
this these explosions I'm struck by a
lot of things that you say here one is
like you know the the the fact that
we'll talk obviously about the the
neoliberal word in a second and and and
what that means for for these kinds of
protests but it's also the the
exportation from the United States and
then importation of General um I I would
say attitudes towards that kind of regim
change which we have engaged in um over
the past Century and seeing how those
kinds of um that kind of thinking can uh
be be embedded in certain movements
without necessarily their being the the
the larger structural change uh element
that's that's the ballast for for these
movements but also you how the
limitations as well of anti-corruption
politics ICS I guess as it relates to
Brazil uh and other countries is
fascinating to me where it's more when
you talk about how some of these
movements were just about getting the
bad guy out and and not really
necessarily having something in its
place to to build it back up um you know
when you're dealing in anti-corruption
politics inherent in
in that uh that thesis is that it's
really just this
uh cabinet this leader that is uh it
corrupting the system uh and we just got
to get that guy out and put our guy in
and that is a very ideologically
flimsy um kind of way to go
about Revolution because there is not
the I guess necessary um ideological
underp pinnings to make it more robust
um I said a good amount there but I'm
curious what you think no I think
there's two really interesting points
that you raised especially in the
Brazilian context
one the guys that ended up running the
anti-corruption campaign in Brazil did
have an ideological project it was not
clear uh to everyone at first but
eventually it turns out these are
far-right guys these guys end up joining
the bolsonaro administration so uh
that's related to the other point that
that you bring up that so when as
happens very unexpected the in June
2013 everybody literally everybody is
invited to the streets for whatever
whatever reason any individual wants to
come to the streets for whatever like
literally
everyone is offered an invitation to
come to the streets and protest whatever
it is that you want to protest you end
up sort of reproducing just the common
sense that already exists in a given
Society um and often you know I forget
who says this sort of some somewhat
dismissively might be a bad guy but
don't don't get mad at me the the the
the quote is still interesting that the
the protests become uh against
everything that's bad and for everything
that's good so anti-corruption is
something that is
like so OB being against corruption is
so obvious as to be meaningless right
because you have to you have to start
answering the questions that you started
outline like well how what particular
type of anti-corruption practices are
you going to employ because everyone's
against corruption by definition it's
like being anti-me in like ironically
ironically Sero the one of the main
judges the main judge in the the now
discredited um Lavato uh campaign he
ended up trying to P like he ended up uh
Penning a anti-me law when he came up uh
in in like the bonaro government like
like all all laws are anti-me everyone's
anti-corruption right so when you when
you make a movement about
anti-corruption that's something that
everyone can kind of get behind but that
it does it does not answer the the
question of how this uh problem is going
to be attacked in practice and the lava
shot t for task force we now know um
learning a lot from the United States
before they started operating in contact
with the United States the entire time
that they are um on this on this crusade
to ultimately put Lula in jail what
they're doing is they're breaking the
law and they're looking at one
particular party more closely than
they're looking at everybody else and
this becomes clear later but at the
moment this is one of the various
ideological strands it becomes quite
powerful out of this sort of invitation
to invite everybody onto the streets for
whatever reason because everyone's
anti-corruption but what specifically
that does that
mean right right exactly um I mean and
and I also quick quick pivot here but uh
you mentioned uh some of the
technological elements earlier that
influence obviously um the these
protests it's been I think a a a general
thesis about say the Arab Spring that
the rise of social media and Technology
was a big part of that um but what how
do you from your Vantage Point assess uh
the role of the United States's
technology um and technology in general
but with us influence on some of these
protest movements yeah I think it is
right to point out that the like we
didn't get the internet in the abstract
what we got shaping the built
environment of social media the
experience of being online for the vast
majority of the world's people is
us-based capitalist firms operating for
profit and that I think that was not the
only way that the internet could have
taken shape uh the fact that it took
shape in that way rather than all of the
ways that it could have taken shape um
has a lot to do with the disappointment
and the indeed like the ways that we all
have lost our minds I think to some
extent um from being being on the
internet all day long um when it comes
to the beginning of this this what I
call the mass protest decade starting in
Tunisia in 2010 and then going to Egypt
uh in the beginning of 2011 and in the
creation of the so-called a spring there
was a lot of debate back then as to the
role well especially us English-speaking
media um were quite excited about the
idea that social media had been a part
of it and that was seen as a necessarily
good thing um now where I come down 10
years later is that for the type of
particular Mass protest explosion that I
analyze which is one that becomes so big
that it either dislodges or
fundamentally destabilizes a a
government you can never have that part
particular kind of explosion without
multiple causes you need to have many
many things coming together you need to
have material conditions for the people
you need to have the right combination
of of different elements of society
coming together you need many many
things uh but I think one of the things
that gets you over the line one of the
things that makes them larger than
expected in a way that ends up mattering
is social media now that doesn't mean
that it's about social media and that
also doesn't mean that that the
influence of social media is a good
thing because uh the the
like while it allows for the
instantaneous transfer of sort of
solidarity across borders and while it
allows for everybody um to learn things
immediately uh social media ultimately
especially as the decade goes on is used
in ways that were were not imagined and
like powerful forces can influence
social media which was sort of Forgotten
or not understood uh at the beginning of
the decade these four profit capitalist
firms driven by advertising Revenue
decide what we see based on what will be
more likely to allow them to sell
products to us right like they choose to
show us what will keep us glued to our
phones so that other companies can
advertise to us um and so yes I think
that social media is one of the things
that gets the initial so-called a
spraying over the line but that doesn't
mean that it's about social media uh if
you asked people I mean most people were
not online most people were more likely
to be looking at television um than
Facebook and in places like Tunisia and
Egypt most more people were likely to be
talking about economic Justice than the
things that often the global media
imposed like what the the things that
the international media saw in the
squares because that's what they wanted
to see in the squares um so yeah I think
social media is a part not the primary
mover and and to the extent that it's a
part not necessarily a good for in ways
that have positive consequences well and
so how can you ensure then as maybe a
lesson going forward uh that your
protest movement isn't a a replication
of like say capitalist interest from the
perspectives of the of the mediator uh
or or the me uh not the mediator the
medium right on social media um
versus something organic because it it
leaves a lot of vulnerabilities I would
imagine when methods of communication
are um so heavily influenced in the way
that you accurately describe yeah and I
think so I this book is primarily work
of history and the work of history is
built on 250 interviews that I did in 12
countries over four years and these
people you know agreed to tell me their
stories often very difficult stories so
I could build this history but the
reason they did so the reason they were
willing to spend their time with me the
reason they were willing to go through
often traumatic moments is because they
belied that there was something to be
learned from this that the idea was to
look forward and to take this very
obvious desire to improve the global
system um and sort of match it with
better tactics so that the Next
Generation could learn from some from
things that did work because again some
things did work um and the things that
did not work in the
2010s and some of the things that come
become common across different National
and political environments apart from
the very very obvious lesson you need to
pay pay attention first and foremost to
the ways that your condition is
different than the other thing that
you've seen pay very very close
attention to the ways that your system
is constituted and act upon it in ways
that will improve it without necessarily
you know
you it's amazing to be inspired by
something that happens elsewhere but as
as I said there was a sort of copying
and pasting of tactics that might have
worked better there or may maybe would
work here but not exactly right now um
so apart from the lesson to pay very the
obvious lesson to pay very very very
close uh attention to your particular
configurations of power um um another
something that came up across many many
countries well there's a lot of things
but probably the easiest one to
summarize is that people came to me and
said we wish we were more organized
before the explosion um as a general
rule for seeing who does the best in the
wake of these unexpected Mass protest
events it is the groups that are most
organized
before history comes knocking that are
most organized before the the the the
Revolutionary moment in the street
streets uh because trying to throw
together an organization or coh coherent
movement or you know as organizers no
organizers very is is very hard it takes
you know a lot of hard work um and the
people that did that hard work sort of
in the off season uh so to speak uh
beforehand tended to do the best and the
types of organizations that people found
to really work are the ones that allow
for real Collective action uh so a
democratic a truly Democratic
organization they can also act
collectively um and respond quickly to
changing conditions with changing
tactics and indeed stay solid in the
long term and so this is something that
is very common across movements that
come together very quickly because of
sort of a viral post or or an inspiring
thing uh on the internet often the
structure does not remain after the
initial animus
dissipates that makes total sense um So
based on your
analysis uh I think there was only one
my recollection that you would say was
successful um or we you would Define as
having some success I I don't want to
put words in your mouth but if that if
you don't mind telling a bit about that
example um and what others can learn
from it yeah so there's two so the the
the the book ends with what Chile and
Hong Kong and Chile is is is a
successful Hong Kong of course uh ands
uh in disaster for a lot of the original
organizers uh but also South Korea
earlier in the decade as a success the
the candalite revolution does succeed in
um in removing a a president um very
very credibly accused of corruption um
so in these two cases uh some
commonalities are that in both South
Korea and Chile you have you have Labor
action you have Union power that is able
to put a put real pressure on Elites in
a given Society at moments in which they
can't really ignore because depending on
where you are and what you're doing
often Elites can ignore people on the
street I mean if they don't like the
people you know if they if they are not
inclined to to sympathize with people in
the streets they can wait it out often
but usually Elites in the capitalist
Society do not put up
with the reduction of profits the with a
with a real hit to the economy so both
in both South Korea and chil the
importance of unions
matter and as I kind of try to sketch
out earlier when these explosions occur
unexpectedly if they're on if they are
incapable of speaking for themselves
with one voice if they're incapable of
presenting um a set of Demands or a
revolutionary project or indeed taking
power and forming a new State uh because
of the particular nature of like an
individualized protest usually someone
ends up speaking for them so you know
there's the famous quote from the 18th
bu like those who cannot represent
themselves will be represented um I kind
of reformulated
again here in this book to say those
that cannot speak for themselves will be
spoken for so luckily in the case of
Chile in 2019 for
example Gabriel boric and other uh
people in the political establishment
understand well enough what's going on
the streets to impose a solution upon
this this um quite complex and and
cacophonous explosion which is close
enough to what a lot of people are out
there for that it ends up uh uh
dissipating the crowds and then you get
the long-term project to to to replace
the Pino Constitution with a new one now
that hasn't been successful yet that's
another history of the book it takes a
long time to build a better future uh uh
you know it's okay if the the if
everything is not resolved in the short
term but this generation that really
came out of the 2011 protest in Chile
now became the government so Bor became
the President of Chile camil for one of
the more recognizable figures from the
2011 protests um is a major figure in
the government and it was because the
representation that the this social
explosion in Chile ended up getting from
the people that were already in the
establishment was close enough uh to
what even though a lot of people
rejected this this this solution at the
time a lot of the people that were in
the streets rejected the solution at the
time but in the long term many of them
came to the conclusion but this was
close enough to what was being asked for
that it did set us on some kind of
long-term path for transformation of of
Chilean Society even if Bor you know the
borch government stumbles even if the
Constitution is not replaced in the
first or second or third tribe at least
that generation took power yeah um which
is very different what happened than
what happened in places like Egypt we
have a worst dictatorship than before
Brazil the decimation uh uh of
progressive forces until finally the PT
puts things back together and um is able
to to to win power democratically uh
last year so yeah that's I think that's
the some of the elements that that that
that emerge when looking at the
victories some real like some real
elements of working-class power that
Force Elites to really pay attention and
then the representation that is
ultimately provided is legitimate as
close to legitimate as possible given
the very strange and sort of
elgible very difficult to understand
nature of these
um uh apparently spontaneous Mass
explosions well um your book is very
detailed and for some of the other
stories I would really encourage people
to check it out uh Vincent bevans uh
journalist author of you know you're
also the author of The Jakarta method
which I would recommend to anybody um
and this book is called if we burn the
mass protest decade in the missing
Revolution really appreciate your time
today thanks so much yeah thank you so
much and I appreciate anyone that that
that takes the time to read it I
hopefully as you say there's a lot in
there and hopefully uh if people come to
it with their own experiences hopefully
that different people will find
different things I think there is a lot
in this history and we're just starting
to understand what we can learn from it
so yeah I thank you for for for your
attention yeah we we'll be uh we'll put
a link to it in the description of
wherever you're listening to or watching
this and at majority. FM thanks so much
Vincent


## Keywords:
