---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2QLeyXV8W9o
---

# Video
Matt Christman: “The Internet Creates An Illusion Of Agency”
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2QLeyXV8W9o)

## Transcript:

welcome to the postgame everybody
welcome to all of you patrons best
people on earth and of course thanks to
everybody on the team we appreciate all
of you hope every staying strong and
staying safe continuing on with us is
our friends that crisp and of course
check them out first and foremost
chaplain Trap House but they're also met
keen I'm sorry Brad I'm all I'm kind of
off my usual a TV anchor game here you
have a twitch a lot of stuff on our I
should have done this up top but we'll
clip this for later but I talk about all
the ways that people can get into the
mat Chrisman experience haha well yeah
the podcast obviously I was for a while
during the first like couple months of
covent I probably did the daily stream
but I disagree and then later on twitch
I cook I took almost a week off but I'd
had one today and I'm gonna be doing
them on a if not nightly semi nightly
basis around six o'clock awesome what I
mean we talked about dialectics which is
definitely something that you and I
resonate on what else has just been sort
of what else has been on your mind in
your process I've been trying to
formulate just a way of talking or
thinking about politics that that that
breaks the spell I guess that has
pervaded over people whereby because
there's no such thing as a social you
know but being in this country people
have completely adhered to the sort of
the wire mother of online to form their
political identities and to provide the
totality of their political worldview
and I know I'm part of that I'm
literally embedded in it because I
that's where people find my my stuff but
I've been try to just express and
synthesize a way to to tell people to
stop being on the internet while
watching me on the internet which is
inherently a conflict but one that I
feel like it's really my only hope
because I've lost any kind of faith that
that if any good can come from politics
as it's currently practiced by people
who for the most for for most people who
have even the best of intentions yeah
it's it's funny looking back on uh like
if you read like a great classic
critique of television by a Neil postman
right I think I call them amusing
ourselves to death yes yeah it's amazing
and yeah the first wave of theories of
the internet we're like this is the
opposite it's an active not passive
medium so that's gonna mean that it's
gonna be this technology that people are
gonna participate in they're gonna build
new communities in and and it's like
well number one that actually has
happened not in mostly the positive ways
that these people idealized it and
secondly it's actually hurt it's it's
like be even more consuming amusing
ourselves to death medium because it can
amuse you in the exact microsecond way
you want it any second of the day yeah
in wheat atomization yeah was that
inevitable because of the kind of
origins of the internet or has this been
the path when we just turned it all over
to the big four companies like what do
you think directory I I think I think
the the trajectory of all of these mass
media from television to the Internet
really shows that the determining factor
of the productive you know mechanism if
you have a capitalist society the
introduction of a new piece of
technology will to stabilize to an
extent but over time will largely reify
and
and celebrate every every tendency
within that mode of production and
that's what that's what happened with
television and that's what's happening
with with the internet and it's easy in
the moment to lose that especially with
the internet because of how deeply
immersive it is and how unlike
television it gives the illusion of
agency and I think that's the most
insidious and element of it the illusion
talk more about the illusion of agency
because you choose where you're going on
the internet and you can choose to
express yourself on the Internet
and then people can interact with you it
can make that act feel more
consequential than it is it can make the
idea of a post thinking because because
if you have political beliefs and you
find yourself stymied in any way to act
them out your day to day life which is
true of most people then you will try to
see try to find a place where you can
and because the Internet is a relatively
frictionless plane for personal
expression you find do it there and so
what ends up happening is is that you
put all of your all of the psychic
energy associated with your politics all
of that that willed to power that drives
the political belief you can dump you
can get all of that validated virtually
and over time you become so invested at
that level that that becomes the only
politics that matter to you because
they're the only ones that are real and
it's where you're getting your meaning
and where it's easiest to get your
meaning and it leads you to like I said
that that paralysis of analysis because
since there's no action behind it since
you're not doing anything you're not
seeing your theories tested in any
meaningful way they're not being
challenged and changed by contact with
reality
you will never get anywhere you you will
you will find yourself on a hamster
wheel but you will never even notice it
because you will still have conflict you
will still have enemies you will still
have fights that will feeble to you in
every respect like actual politics being
exerted but you have not done anything
you have not changed anything and more
importantly most importantly you have
not built anything with anyone else
which is literally what politics is
great and then yeah but and then it
leads to gossip witch hunts trivia
nonsense some you know the
elevation of it basically just all sorts
of toxic petty nonsense yeah you'll draw
ma instead of like actual effort I mean
I think of this is like very team yes
meta and I probably shouldn't even do
this because of blow my voice out but
just I was joking with it was a friend
of mine about like the idea of some like
incredible leader like Lula you know
obviously I'm a big lost fan and
everything you know but like like taking
his speeches on Brazil and on labour and
on the Internet
national affairs or whatever and then
sort of like turning them into like and
you know this person also liked a post
by someone who was affiliated with you
know another podcast or what you know
like just in the sense of the type of
kind of like reams of nonsense that come
out of online discourse that substitute
for for like actual politics like this
person like that thing this person said
this I heard that blah blah blah blah
blah and and and then actually at the
end of the day all you're doing is
getting incentivized to do all of this
by the mediums themselves who just want
you posting amount of oneness your only
incentive structure but that's I mean
that's where the the the motor
production kicks in because all these
formats exist to be addictive to to make
you post more and it was very
rare that posting more or or expressing
yourself more leads to better
understanding it usually does the
opposite because the more you are doing
that unless you are receptive to
anything else and I'd say one of the
most insidious elements of it is that it
also encourages this subconscious almost
but also conscious competitive framework
where everyone is trying to stand out
from a crowd of people who all have
similar politics and that means that the
only way that you can maintain that
position is by outfitting people in
extremity extremity of belief and that
means detaching even further your
politics from anything plausibly related
to the real world at this point you're
not actually engaging with the world
you're engaging with a hypothetical
group of people with a group of totally
hypothetical beliefs don't intersect it
anyway with reality and at that point
standing out means giving even further
from reality right because that's the
way you get the attention that's when
you get the eyeballs and that's like
mass movement piled politics and social
media micro careers are not exactly
synergized
insurance yeah it reminded me of I mean
the funniest manifestation of this and
this feels you know let's let's let's
indulge in a little nostalgia and trash
Warren people for a second although if
you're on the streets now you know if
you voted for a Lizabeth I don't really
hold almost anything against anybody
forever so you know c'est la vie but
anyways that being said I thought it was
the the best post and and people beacon
I think people be confused by this I
didn't really there are people I knew
was supported Warner it's like yeah of
course you're literally a torts
attorney like obviously you're gonna
support Elizabeth Warren you know sure
whatever look great you know I will see
you later
but but the most annoying and incredible
and insipid was the you know my class
position and comfort is gonna make me go
for this
like center-left technocracy that has no
you know is no actual teeth to it so
I'll do like well I'm sporting Warren
because of some identity stuff and
because I think she's more and more you
know she has more plans or whatever the
and you know before you criticize
me I'm a ho chi minus-- to the left of
Bernie no you're not
no one was because what if Curtis you've
done none of us have done anything
you're not to the left of anyone because
you don't have politics you just have
opinions right being online solidifies
those opinions in your mind in your
heart and thanks to other people telling
you yes these are your you have these
politics you walk around thinking you
basically decide I'm Ho Chi Minh over
here cuz you think some things to the
left of Bernie Sanders who complained
about him because none of them Adamic I
was fighting through a goddamned attack
right health care yeah I'm a polyamorous
Csonka right Yeah right that
post-capitalist priests space-age
exploration socialism so don't tell me
that I'm not to the left like I remember
actually the first time I lost patience
with some idiot who was trying to run
that rap on me in real life I was like
you know you know I said something like
oh I mean you know did of course I mean
don't get me wrong I mean you know as I
like water my drink at this like
like outdoor bar in Brooklyn I mean like
you know we're all Mallesons here
obviously so yeah please yeah it goes
without saying I mean yes we're all
obviously organising a countryside
peasant revolution in 1920s and 30s
China I mean to give it I mean just just
even that kind of like fantasy universe
even on terms of like
the other way that the the Internet can
just completely mash historical
trajectories so like you can have like
that new show on Netflix Hollywood and
it's in addition to just being unfunny
it's like no they didn't call people of
color people of color then and you
should not write that they did because
actually it's insidious as hell
you you clay I mean if you're if you're
if you want people to reckon with the
historical the historical reality of
like racial apartheid of this country
and its continuing effects on people
how is that helped by rewriting history
to make it less racist than it really
was so that you can get points for being
inclusive now it's like at the expense
of any kind of historical understanding
of where we where we how we got here
let's do a Nelson Mandela bio bio where
the apartheid authorities are like yes
Queen yeah he's just like thank you but
we are going to need to have a very hard
conversation about your privilege and
that's what happened that was how is
help this might make you uncomfortable
laughter of you talk you just watched a
Michael Brooks show video subscribe to
get them all why wouldn't you don't be
foolish
click subscribe below and become a
patron as well patreon.com slash t MBS
thanks everybody


## Keywords:
