---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PemCOaBo9cs
---

# Video
Michael Brooks Warns the Left Against Descending Into Escapism and Fantasy
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PemCOaBo9cs)

## Transcript:

I want to talk a little bit about
escapism denial fantasy and Gramsci and
I'll try to put this together here and
I'm actually gonna keep this really
short but I think guys we just suffered
really bad loss it really is a bad thing
for the country that Bernie Sanders is
not going to be the Democratic nominee
it's a horrible thing for the country
that Bernie Sanders is not going to be
President
we need to pivot on to other
opportunities right now there's probably
unprecedented opportunities in general
strikes and in late labor organizing but
it's also very important to be real with
where the left is right now and what we
might figure out how to do to move
forward and I want to talk about two
tendencies that I see right now that I
think are both unhelpful so one is this
notion of denial and I think you see
this in a lot of folks who look I think
justifiably Anna and I are not gonna
like posture I live in New York so I
will you know enjoy either not checking
the bark on the presidential ballot or
you know voting for a socialist
candidate or whatever I think if you
live in a competitive state you have to
think much more seriously about that but
I also think that a lot of folks are
coming forward and basically still
essentially telling the story of
progress and leftward motion in the
Democratic Party which is true in the
margins might be true in certain case
studies and yes of course there are
policies that Democratic Party leaders
some will sort of tip their hats to that
they would not have done ten years ago
or even five years ago and yes we've
seen some sort of rhetorical shifts but
actually the reality is is that in the
big structural picture and the big
structural Baili of the Democratic Party
they have not moved to the left at all
or in any significant structural
strategic way right now let's look at
the leadership Joe Biden is the nominee
one of the most right-wing Democrats the
architect of every imaginable bad policy
direction for decades on both foreign
and domestic policy and someone who
spent most of the campaign including
during the outbreak of the pandemic
railing against the idea of national
healthcare the Democratic leadership in
Congress just helped usher through what
I would call a grand theft bailout an
enormous redistribution of resources to
the top and completely unaccountable
slush fund essentially for Steve
minuchin and the Trump administration
Andrew Cuomo who I do think will
probably replace Joe Biden if I'm being
honest it's cutting Medicaid right now
in the middle of a pandemic out-breaking
in New York which he has completely
failed to handle in spite of his ability
to do some decent press conferences and
yes we can find some examples gavin
newsom is a bit more left than he was in
the formation of his career and has done
a better job in california but for those
who are looking at california some type
of bastion of progressive resistance
remember that this is also the home of
Silicon Valley monopolies still has
enormous ly environmentally problematic
AG policies and a homelessness crisis
and a crunch on working and middle-class
people and of course the poor across the
state so we need to be real about that
in order to respond to it as a final
thing
a Bloomberg firm called hawkfish a data
vendor and consultancy which was they
basically designed and created to serve
the Bloomberg campaign is not going away
and hanging its head in shame as some
people think would happen after
Bloomberg got humiliated no it is
actually selling its services to the or
attempting to pitch its services to the
Biden campaign as well as other
Democratic and so-called progressive
organizations according to a new report
in the intercept then guys we also have
fantasy and I want to be a little bit
more gentle than I can be sometimes I
think the impulse for revolutionary
change is correct we actually need
revolutionary change in this country and
globally as Anna said this is literally
a matter of planetary survival but at
the same time
this push towards the rhetoric of
revolution or the escapist fantasy of
revolution that we could and and it
comes in two ways one is some people go
to examples like 1917 Russia or 1950s in
Cuba and they think of completely
different historical times completely
different historical conditions and
project that it would be fun to do
something like that here now by the way
I want to make clear I am not at all
opposed to I want people to be reading
about Cuba Russia Thomas Sankara
anywhere just as maybe I want you to
actually be reading books about business
strategy okay like I think taking from
historical examples and finding
inspiration is incredibly generative and
incredibly positive but historically
these are complete non alignments just
let's take to really click quick
examples to illustrate that cuz my
friend Daniel best nur pointed out
Stalin let's be really provocative
during the Russian Revolution was in a
position where as people some people
know that they were the the
revolutionaries carried out petty crimes
or I guess significant crimes like bank
robberies and stuff like this in Tsarist
Russia they could go and get gel bids
and either escape from jail or get let
out of jail as an example if somebody in
a revolutionary undertaking in 2020 went
and tried to rob a bank
they would be killed or spend the rest
of their life in maximum-security prison
with no broader cultural or political
dissent from the general population
Julian Assange has been completely
railroaded internationally and he
essentially is a news publisher he's in
a prison in the UK that also stores
al-qaeda operatives so we need to be
real about the unprecedented power of
the national security state but also the
cultural buy-in that still exists in the
broader population even as America and
capitals elite internationally
devastates the world and I just wanted
people to think of and I'm gonna quote
now from a website called war of
position and Daniel bessner is also
somebody who
talks a lot about Gramsci so and funnily
enough I'm gonna include a quote here
from Peabody Judges dad or Pia Buddha
judges better the better Buddha judge
this is quoting now about the difference
between war of maneuver which is about
taking on state power physically and war
of position which has to do with dealing
with civil society dealing with cultural
buy-in that was Gramsci's insight that
is a lot more relevant
there wasn't much cultural buy-in to
Batista in Cuba they knew he was a
gangster who treated the island as a
plaything for the Mafia and for the CIA
and didn't give a about the general
population right there so there was a
war of maneuver but there wasn't a whole
lot of normal day-to-day Cubans who
still had some underlying belief in the
idea of the Batista State whereas there
still are obviously an enormous amount
of Americans that have a belief in the
dominant ideas of our culture and that's
not necessarily a bad thing at all it's
not necessarily good things just so and
Gramsci's big insight was that in
particularly liberal democracies there
was a lot more buy-in on civil society
so I'm just gonna quote right now in
modern democracies direct confrontation
armed uprisings general strike etc I
disagree on general strike I'll put that
in my because I think conditions are
changing what gorona but I'll just a
continued quote will not threaten
dominant groups so long as their
credibility and authority is firmly
rooted in civil society Budaj edge notes
civil society in other words as far from
being a threat to political society and
liberal democracy it reinforces it this
is the fundamental meaning of hegemony
and this is actually where if we do our
work right we can help a little bit on
the cultural terrain of changing
politics but it also means that the Left
needs to get back into the center of
American life understand the language of
ambition of small business of even as an
example when we talk about really really
important rights issues
so understanding where the broader swath
of the country would be not in terms of
in any way compromising on substantive
rights but also recognizing that there
will be disagreement on particular
controversies disagreement on how we
talk about things and disagreement
between what people think about in the
private spheres of their life versus the
public spheres of other life so I would
say guys we have opportunity we're in a
really serious moment and we can't deny
how bad it is until a bedtime story
about progress some has been made but a
lot hasn't and we also cannot go into
escapism and fantasy yeah I love that I
have so much to say I'm gonna start off
with the fantasy portion of your
commentary because Ben Burgess wrote an
excellent essay that I highly recommend
everyone read he has a patreon page it's
$5 a month and you get to read his
incredible essays and he talked about
you know some of the revolution rhetoric
that we hear and the portion of the left
that thinks we need an armed revolution
now this is a I would argue a small
portion of the left but Ben does a good
job in kind of dismantling that argument
because we still have a system in place
where we can really garner enough power
to change things structurally right so
we need to think strategically moving
forward on how we can mobilize and
organize and make that happen but we
need to be as you often say precise in
our rhetoric precise in our vocabulary
and we need to think about how our
vocabulary could either be inclusive and
appealing to a broader group of voters
or the opposite so I didn't want to buy
into this I didn't want to believe this
but I think at this point it's
irrefutable II true Americans do get
turned off by the word revolution
because they automatically do think of
an armed revolution they automatically
do think of increased instability and so
I didn't want to accept that but it's
just the truth if you talk to voters on
the left
who find the policies of Bernie Sanders
incredibly appealing they will tell you
I know but I don't know I just don't
have the stomach for a revolution right
now I just want normalcy and so we need
to think about our rhetoric and how that
has an impact in either helping the
candidates we support or hurting the
candidates we support going back to what
you had to say you know just about sure
it's dire about how we haven't
fundamentally moved to the left I
actually wanted to buttress that point
by giving a few other examples you know
just yesterday Joe Biden extended what's
being referred to as an olive branch to
Bernie Sanders supporters and it was it
was a joke it really was because his
proposal was to lower the Medicare age
from 65 to 60 I mean that's the kind of
incremental change that you would expect
from Biden without having to appeal to
pretty supporters and then the second
portion of it was I'm gonna go ahead and
cancel student loan debt but it's gonna
be means tested and it will not apply to
people who went to for-profit colleges
to trade schools to grad schools I mean
it just doesn't include so many people
who desperately need student loan debt
forgiveness and so the reason why Biden
did that he was empowered to do that is
because he doesn't really see the Bernie
camp as powerful and we need to question
why you see what I'm saying a hundred
percent
I think this is like really really
really and and and it's another area
that's tricky because I totally accept
that there are people who have like I
when I was like a teenager and like in
the beginning of college I was like
definitely part of a lot of like protest
movements and like church basement
left-wing whatever okay so I have some
understanding some experience in you
know certainly like being on the streets
and protesting and different types of
organizing but I have not done that for
my life right so there's people who
absolutely have a much more experience
with how and know how to build a
campaign
and how to set up a you know database
and do outreach and organizing all of
these things and there's a huge amount
of really important skill sets in that I
mean that's one of the reasons that I've
had my good friend Joshua Kahn rustles
so much on tmes from wildfire project
like it's really important that we
bridge these worlds and at the same time
the I still think there's a lot of there
is a tendency with some folks to sort of
say like hey like you know worth of
organizers or were the Democratic Party
operatives or were the activists or were
this this and this and it's like okay
well guys yes it's been super
unfavorable terrain for the left for
decades but also like just this isn't
working so I can't at the same time just
like automatically valorize your
experience because we have to look at
why we are where we are and where we are
where we are is that there yet there is
not a real sector for power there is not
a real and and part of that is I think
yes totally there could have been
tactical differences with Bernie Sanders
I think that and I've said this before I
think the time horizon is already
shrinking on this but I think that if
maybe there was like a meeting of people
basically saying like all right we're
gonna do a petition we're gonna get
several million people to sign that they
will and by the way you would also have
to say you would frankly vote for Joe
Biden if these conditions are met just
to like keep it real but if you said and
not just like vague promises but like
okay Mina Turner's vice president if she
wants it or you know we want Sarah
Nelson that labor we want like these are
like not just by the way like vague
policy commitments but like staffing
which is probably the most important
thing Democratic platform we're over
that we did that 2016 it had had some
merit then it's irrelevant now so I
think yeah and I think that this just
goes back to the idea of like sitting
with where do we actually are is
important because then that's gonna
allow us to get to someplace better and
then once we're real I think
can say opinion has it's changed a lot
Bernie's accomplished a hell of a lot
there are millions of new people that
are activated and engaged and like
strikes are happening and organizing is
happening we can actually start to index
all these really important things but
only if we start from like the
groundwork you know it's like if you go
to the doctor and it's like hey like you
that's awesome you made some strides
like you're cutting down smoking a
little bit that's awesome at the same
time the vitals are still pretty bad we
got to do we got a lot of work to do ya
know that's an excellent
that's an excellent analogy I mean look
consider the fact that tens of millions
of Americans just lost their jobs
they've been laid off and in most of
those cases they've also lost their
health insurance in the middle of a
pandemic where treatment for a lethal
virus is still not covered it's still
not free Congress totally dropped the
ball on that and the left has still
really struggled to basically pressure
the Joe Biden's of the world to support
a single-payer health care system how
insane is that and and I loved what
Richard Wolffe had to say in one of your
recent episodes he was talking about how
we have the largest labor strike I mean
it's not it's not labeled a labor strike
because people were forced out of their
jobs due to this pandemic but what has
happened is the people with power have
realized that everything really does
rely on labor right and there's a lot of
power in that and the question is how do
we use that to our advantage
absolutely that's the that is the
question and I think that is where
there's real opportunity and I think
that's like the the paradox of the
moment
you


## Keywords:
