---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e8NZ8ivY7K0
---

# Video
Michael Brooks on Tactics for Changing Minds
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e8NZ8ivY7K0)

## Transcript:
yeah there's a quote from I always
forget the author I apologize I'm the
master of decent halfway quotes and not
remembering who did it tribute them to
but it's good it's from a writer from
Mozambique I know that and he said that
when the people are terrified they elect
monsters to protect them and this that
was a quoted by him it's a writer Mia I
forget his name regardless I think that
you have to be you know I'm sorry here
call to me and katsu there thank you
there it is and so I think that that
explains obviously the rise of these
monsters across the globe Trump and
volson are oh and all of these various
leaders but I think it also in a way
that I want to have a compassion and
attentiveness for theirs look there's a
bunch of people like Hillary Clinton I
have no doubt she's more angry of Bernie
Sanders and Donald Trump she doesn't
care about the results of this election
there is a power elite inside the
Democratic Party which links to your
second question that I have no doubt is
more threatened by Bernie Sanders than
Donald Trump that's clear yeah well the
people that as an example you mentioned
Phillip I think that people are
rightfully petrified that some gameshow
 is putting children in
concentration camps and they want to do
anything they can to remove him and so
how we enlarge the conversation at this
point we're in a really interesting
moment because I think actually
legitimately Bernie is the safe bet he's
a smartest tactical choice right go up
against um but depending on who you're
talking to you need to disaggregate
there are cynical people who have bad
faith motives the same people that yes
the DNC being controlled by these
interests is a disaster for poor people
for working people and for democracy and
they have bad faith and they need that
that's the Machiavelli part I keep
talking about they need to just be gone
after hard and strategically for normal
human beings whoever they may be that
are appalled and maybe they weren't as
conscious you know I think there's some
people on the left that have a little
bit of like early adopter if that's like
oh really you're shocked by that I knew
that this was terrible
like you need to bring them in and you
need to have a real empathy not for the
cynical stuff you see in media but for
the genuine natural human sentiment of
people who or maybe just tuning into
that and go oh my god what is happening
here and so I don't know the right
tactics I just know that you need to be
very clear about who you're talking to
because you're gonna get that sentiment
from the most cynical people imaginable
and also from some of the most
open-hearted sincere and genuinely
morally motivated people imaginable and
you need to respond obviously in
diametrically different ways


## Keywords:
