---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hq6Hh_t5XzQ
---

# Video
Mission Inflation with Warren Mosler | Taxes & Inflation Explained Through MMT
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hq6Hh_t5XzQ)

## Transcript:
president Trump 177% tariff on Lumber
because Canada wasn't charging us enough
kind of idiot policy is that so what
does Biden do he doubles down on it so
it's now 34% because they're still not
charging us enough who are these guys
and so if you need to send somebody out
shopping for you don't send either one
of
them end
when you get inflation you get a money
supply shortage so if you think about
this let's say all prices were to do and
you used to go shopping with $300 in
your pocket now you have to have $600 in
your pocket to go

shopping I refer often to Martin Luther
King in the context of the Civil Rights
Movement he said I have no time for the
tranquilizing drug of gradualism and

incrementalism taking money from our
children and borrowing from China people
are
dying is the program so critical it's
worth borrowing money from China to pay
for it and if not I'll get rid of it
stop

lying
I want the
TR now let's see if we can avoid the
apocalypse all together here's another
episode of macro and cheese with your
host Steve grumbine hey this is Steve
with macro and cheese from time to time
I'm invited to talk about mmt on other
shows this week we're bringing you an
interview I did with Warren Mosler for
status C I think you'll find this topic
as relevant as ever all right and this
is Steve today's guest is going to be
Warren Mosler and he is the father of
modern monetary Theory what once was
called Mosler economics I was lucky
enough happy to have waren Mosler be
able to join me not only to talk to you
about what mmt is but to talk about this
damn inflation thing it has me insane
watching television listening to other
alternative media personalities
describing the stuff and In fairness
they always get it wrong so let me bring
on my guest Warren MOS or Warren thank
you so much for joining me today h good
to be here absolutely you have always
been in my mind anyway the father of mmt
and I know that when we first met this
was called Mosler economics and your
website the center of the universe has
some great resources for anybody that's
interested in reading up on mmt but
could you please tell the audience what
mmt is modern monetary theory is and why
it
matters okay I'd say the most important
thing to understand is
that what I came up with years ago is
understanding that the dollars that can
be used to pay taxes come from the
government now this is in direct
contrast to every member of Congress
every Economist everyone else out there
who was saying that members of Congress
would say we have to get money by taxing
to be able to spend it and if we want to
spend more than we tax we have to go out
and borrow money to be able and spend
that money and so any money that we want
to spend in Congress here we have to get
it first by either getting it by taxing
or get it by borrowing and sure enough
you saw President Obama with secretary
Clinton going to China in I think 2009
to make sure we could borrow money from
our creditors China who they were
creditors to be able to fund the
stimulus package and what modern
monetary Theory points out and it's
something that the operations people in
the Federal Reserve have always known
since the beginning and every other
Central Bank has always know and that is
that these dollars the government is
spending come from the government they
don't come from the private sector they
originate in the government and if the
private sector tries to originate
dollars to pay taxes that's called
counterfeit and you go to jail for that
strict laws against that so it makes an
enormous difference in how you view
things so Congressman think they have to
go out and look for dollars to be able
to spend the real struggle in the world
is that us the taxpayers we are
dependent on the government's spending
to get the dollars that we need to pay
the taxes now this does not mean that
the government does not have to tax it
does mean that it spins first and then
we get the money and then we pay our
taxes but what the government has to do
first is tax and specifically it has to
impose tax liabilities tax obligations
so just to keep the conversation simple
let's imagine the only obligation it
does is it puts a tax on everybody's
house so step one would be the
government would put a property tax on
everybody's house this creates a
population that now needs dollars to pay
taxes before the tax there was no
particular need for dollars because this
economy was looking at from day one once
there's a tax in everybody's house
there's this massive need for dollars
and it might be three trillion or four
trillion dollars tax on everybody's
house okay so now people need the
dollars so they'll go to work to earn
dollars they'll sell things to get
dollars and they're trying to get
dollars and now the government can hire
them you can say I put a tax on your
houses you all need dollars and so now
if you want dollars come wor for me if
you're a soldier I'll pay you $50,000 a
year you're a Supreme Court Justice I'll
pay you $200,000 and so on down the line
if you're a public school teacher I'll
pay you whatever and so the government
can then pay people to do all the work
that it wants done and then after that
people can pay their taxes so what we
point out is the sequence the sequence
is first a tax liability by a government
that wants to provision itself the
government wants people in public
service wants School teachers it wants
soldiers it wants public health
workers how does it get them number one
it puts the tax in your house number two
this causes you to now be unemployed and
go out looking for pain work work that
pays in dollars number three it hires
you number four you get paid and then
number five you pay the tax so the
purpose of the taxation was not for the
government to get your money it came
from the government they spent first
purpose of the taxation is to get you to
need their money so that you will go
work for the government so then they can
pay you and then you can pay the tax and
that's the end of the line is when you
pay the tax once they understand that
sequence you realize that the whole idea
of government solvency just doesn't make
any sense it's not applicable it's not
like where is the money going to come
from the money comes from government
they just credit your account with
online banking you can just look at your
account you might have $1,000 in your
account which is a one z00 Z and then
here comes my social security check and
all of a sudden my account says 40000 Z
I just got $3,000 put into my account by
the government okay what did they do did
they take a gold coin and Hammer it in
no all they did was change the one into
a four the keyboard and they changed the
number up in my account that's called
crediting an account okay okay that's
all they do they're the scorekeeper for
this dollar it doesn't come from
anywhere they're not going to run out of
it or anything like that any more than
the scorekeeper at a football game is
going to run up points your team kick
the shield go it's not that kind of a
problem once you understand that then
you realize the problem isn't where's
the money going to come from it's is
there anything out there for them to buy
because they need these tax liabilities
these property taxes out there in
sufficient quantity to get sufficient
things for sale so that their otherwise
worthless currency without taxes it's
not worth anything the dollar is a tax
credit thing that pays your taxes tax
credit is not worth anything without a
tax are these tax liabilities creating
enough for sale so they can go buy them
and if they're not the evidence might be
that the government starts paying higher
prices to buy the same thing that's
evidence that their tax liabilities
haven't been strong enough to create
enough selling pressure to keep prices
going up now there are other reasons
prices could go up one reason would be
that the taxation isn't high enough it's
not strong enough there's not enough
demand for the currency they haven't
spent enough that's one possible reason
now it's a theoretical reason it's
certainly possible reason but my how
many years now 50 years of watching this
stuff I've never seen it okay let stop
saying it I'll absolutely agree that it
is possible but we always get price
increases long before that happens in my
experience in this latest out of what is
called inflation is an example of that
so is that enough to get you started
here absolutely so let's Jump Ahead a
recent article came out from the
guardian that showed a bunch of the most
profitable companies over the course of
the last two years many of which were
claiming they needed to raise prices to
offset inflation and we're talking about
800% profit
333 per profit increases these are
increases not just where they were but
actual increases over prior earnings
yeah the actual salaries of individuals
however only Rose
1.6% as opposed to the 800% and 300% of
Amazon and others is this not abusive
Market power isn't this the smokey room
with the writing up marking up of
accounts to maximize return on
investment right well yes but that's
what they're supposed to do that's what
the law says they're allowed to do and
that's what's supposed to make
capitalism great that's supposed to be
what's lifted us out of poverty is that
when there are large profit margins it
attracts new businesses and then they
get competition and brings it down now
when that process isn't working the
government already has the laws in place
the antitrust laws to regulate and
supervise and make sure these things
stay reasonable and so what you're
talking about at this point could be a
failure of government to recognize a
non-competitive area where they have an
obligation to regulate where it's
competitive they're supposed to stay out
where it's non-competitive they're
supposed to regulate and that's not 1904
something I don't know when Teddy
Roosevelt brought in the antitrust law
but it's been a long
time but also Steve this has always gone
on it when were we reading about this
company that's buying drugs cheap and
then marking the price sell 7,000
million per and selling it you see all
these poor people can't afford their
insulin and things like that that was
long before Co it's been going on my
entire career so I don't see that as a
change that's material for the current
inflation discussion and I think the FED
did a study of this San Francisco or St
Louis or somewhere and they said that it
might be adding three t0 of a percent to
the inflection rate so I'm categorically
against it I see it as a failure of
government to fulfill its responsibility
to regulate when there's in sufficient
participants to have competitive markets
and it happens all the time and we see
governments that get elected because
they pledge to fail to regulate cut the
number of regulators and they give
corporations just handing them these
profits because I guess they're getting
it back from donors or something like
that right you get this negative
feedback loops from business we have
that but I think if we're going to talk
about this inflation I would scape code
going in that direction I'll go there
for other reasons I won't go there for
this so with that in mind we see fuel
prices going up absurdly high and yes
such a jump that the average person is
struggling now is this an issue of a
lack of Supply or is this price
gouging okay it's an issue of a single
supplier at the margin setting price
who's been setting price since 1973 and
that's Saudi Arabia and in the last
couple of years it's OPC plus if you
notice that's because Russia's involved
now and Russia got involved during covid
when there was a collapse of demand that
the Saudis could handle because their
production would have gone to zero and
Russia agreed to share the cuts but they
don't do this for free and so they how
they're sitting at the table with Saudi
Arabia and they become their weapon
supplier Saudis like them better than
they like us because they don't
criticize them for killing journalists
and for bombing him they support them
and all this so we've lost Saudi Arabia
as a strategic Ally
and let me give you the best way to
explain this when I explain this to you
there isn't a single oil analyst in the
world that's understood this any more
than any Member of Parliament member of
Congress understood that the sequence
that they were spending first so that
taxes could be paid afterwards yeah
everybody in the central banks monetary
operations knew this everybody I've
talked to for the last 50 years there's
no discussion about it just goes without
saying that can't to reserve drain which
means the economy can't make a payment
to the government unless the government
makes a payment to the economy first
they call that a Reserve Act because
it's a Federal Reserve Bank and they
call the bank accounts that they have
all the banks Reserve accounts just to
confuse everybody they say we can't do a
reserve drain without doing a reserve
app we can't debit an account once we
credited first what is a reserve drain
just start right there because this is a
term most people have never heard yeah
it's a payment that a bank makes that
causes the money in its account to go
down
like anybody else when you check the
account you write a check the number
goes down it's called a drain on your
reserves so instead of saying we're just
reducing their balance in their account
they call it a reserve drain because
their accounts and they're at the
Federal Reserve so it's a reserve drain
of
some you got guys like R Conor telling
people that we should raise taxes on
corporations to offset this
inflation everything I've ever read from
Randy Ray and others has been taxes on
corporations are a pass through to
Consumers one of the major impetuses
driving this has been Energy prices so
let's look at how the energy price goes
up and then tell me what a tax on
Corporation is going to do to this
process so right now the demand now use
round numbers is 100 million barrels a
day that's how much we burn every day
around the world and Saudi production is
about 10 million barrels a day and they
export about seven seven and a half
million they use the other three
themselves but SES are capable of prod
producing 12 but they don't they're only
producing 10 and you've heard President
Biden say he wants the saes to pump more
oil and I'll get back to that in a
minute which is an absurd statement and
you'll see why it's five minutes three
minutes let's say the price of oil today
is $115 a barrel and the Saudis set
their price at
120 so the rest of the world's producing
90 the Saudis have the last
10 and they're exporting 7 and a half so
the world needs 7 and a half million
barrels from the Saudis every day or
else we have to go shut the lights off
so if the rest of the world's at 115 and
they go around trying to buy the oil
they need 100 million barrels total
burning then the Saudis are using three
so they need 97 more so they're not
there they can only get 90 that's all
they producing so they can't get the
last seven million barrels which means
about 3:30 every day everybody have to
shut the lights off and stop driving or
something because we'd run out of energy
every day for a few hours because really
getting 93% of what we need the other 7%
of our time which is how many hours is
at hour and a half or something two
hours we right don't
so they have to go to the sities because
we need the oil on a daily basis to bur
and they've got it and their price is
120 there's no Market here it's a single
supplier for that last s million barrels
every single day our inventories now are
down to a minimum you say you can take
it out of inventory fine we're already
using the Strategic Patrol Reserve we
still need their last s because of
Russia's been cutting back because we're
not allowed to buy it and so you got
have to pay 120 to get those last 7
million barrels period Well in the
meantime you're not going to just jump
from 115 to 120 as you get towards your
97 or whatever you're buying for
everybody else then3 you're going to
start offering more and more to try and
get those last seven you don't know it
because you read it in the newspaper
because they say don't have it well I'll
pay you one6 don't have any I'll pay you
117 I don't have any 118 please I don't
want to pay SI 11 19 right I'll pay you
120 we still don't have I don't want to
go to the sais I'll pay you 121 we don't
have it okay I'll go to the sais and pay
120 what that does is it drives the
price of all the oil by the end of the
day to 120 now it's not just one day
there's averages and there's longterm
contracts and there's delivery lags of
30 days there's boats going in and out
loading and unloading but this is a
concept underneath it and over a day two
days three days this is exactly what
happens this is a supply issue but it's
an intentional scarcity where Saudi
Arabia who has a capacity to create
plenty of oil has chosen to keep Supply
down to drive the prices up no no no
here's the point the Saudis can set any
price they want for that last 7 milon
but they have to set a price they can't
just say we're going to go sell it at
the market there is no system it's like
if you're the power company and you have
the electricity for the city and you're
the only Power Company you have to set a
price okay down here power is 50 cents a
kilo it's a
lot our Water and Power Association W
waapa sets the price they have a meeting
and at the meeting they set the price
they set the price of 50 cents now usage
might drop during the month the price
won't fall we still going to go to them
and pay their 50 cents usage might go up
and they might run out of power have
brownouts but the price won't go up
unless the board gets together and
reachs and raises the price because it's
a single supplier at the margin at
least we have solar we're producing a
lot of our own power but at the margin
that we need power from them and their
power is needed it's a monopoly for what
for the portion that's needed just like
the Saudis have a monopoly for that last
seven
million and so they have to set a price
so so they set a price so let's say the
price Market was 115 that day their
price is 115 so then we'd be in Balance
how much would they sell they'd sell the
same s
million they're not going to sell more
as they spit the price the world only
needs a 100 that time if they raise the
price to 120 they're selling the same 7
million if they lower the price to 110
the whole price structure will come down
to 110 they'll sell the same 7 million
it's not going to change because that's
all the market needs say
the demand can't change day to day just
because the price Chang some things the
demand does change day to day but not a
low you don't stop driving to work
because the price went up 25 cents or a
dollar or something in fact the price
has gone up the last I saw American
demand for gasoline's gone up so it
hasn't even gone down with gas going $6
a gallon or whatever people just been
impervious to for whatever reason maybe
more people are getting jobs and have to
drive to
work so when you're a monopolis like
that you can't change the quantity all
you can do is set a price and let the
market buy what it wants at your
price you can't decide to pump more oil
you could decide to lower the price and
maybe the market will buy more they
could lower it to 20 maybe they'd sell
more probably would they could raise the
price to 200 maybe they'd sell less
probably would they have to do that they
have to change the price and let the
quantity adjust there's no other way to
do it you think about
it what else can they
do a demand
driven it's a fixed demand okay and
there's fixed
Supply and there's excess capacities
everybody else just sells everything
they have they say well the US has more
oil than Saudi Arabia we're selling more
why aren we price set we have a thousand
different sellers just selling at best
price they can get everybody else is
just selling at the market best price
they can get all they have Saudis are
looking at this saying I don't want to
do that if I sell my 12 million barrels
at the market try to do that just lower
the price it's going to go down to zero
or 10 or $20 it went negative not too
long ago and you can't do that doesn't
work they have to set a price or let the
whole thing collapse so they don't like
doing this they'd rather sell all 12 at
the good price but they can't because
they try and sell2 million barrels into
100 million barrels to the end it's got
a downward spiral till somebody body
stops selling or could demand goes
up is it an unfair ask that we do
something to bring the price of this
down or is this something that we have
to partially adjust
to so look the president and everybody
else all the analysts are saying Saudis
need to pump more to get the price down
now do you see how that's patently
absurd based on the simple Dynamics a
non-competitive situation right that is
an absurdity they say oh we'll get
Venezuela to pump an extra million
barrels and the price will go down why
that just means when the Saudis set
whatever price they set they're going to
sell six instead of seven they'll have
an extra million of excess capacity it
doesn't mean the price will
change Le Unleashed a strategic reserve
of half a million or million barrels a
day price didn't change it went up
because the Saudis are raising their
price now if we hadn't done that they
would have sold a half a million or a
million barrels a day more instead of
having 2 million excess capacity they
would have only had won them we had done
that but all we did was changed your
excess capacity can you see the Market
Force at work here see how it's
completely different from what you
thought it was 15 minutes ago yes my
question becomes this as I go down the
street here in Harrisburg Pennsylvania
and I see the gas set at 465 a gallon
I'm not a petroleum producer I don't
create barrels of oil I don't work in
the industry I'm just a guy that drives
a car to get to and from work I'm a rank
and file voter that's looking at the gas
prices and saying what the hell why
isn't my government doing for me to help
me out of this I can't afford to eat
then I look out in California and I'm
looking at 8 a gallon and I'm saying
what the hell so there are layers to
this wholesale arrangement to the retail
Arrangement Etc where is the inflation
that we're all experiencing at the pump
where is that generating from well the
margin is mostly tax California's all
tax you have a lot of state taxes if you
look at the actual margin that the gas
stations are making it's not where
problem is the problem is underlying
price of oil now in the UK across Europe
where they've had much larger taxes
where it's been $10 a gallon for a long
time and where the underlying price was
only $2 a gallon for a wholesale price
their increase might be the same $2 but
it's only 20% instead of 100% it's
because it's on a larger
base and there are a lot of places in
the world where there isn't any tax and
so it's still $35 but the wholesale pric
is for Castle so the wholesale price is
coming from the suppliers and that's
doubled more than doubled and nobody
understands where the price is coming
from so nobody's doing anything about
that except making idiotic comments like
they need to PP more it shows a complete
lack of understanding of how the process
works and I just got off exchanges with
some of major size oil Traders telling
me I'm wrong so they don't know how it
works either and how many Nobel Prize
winners told me I was wrong about
monetary sequence it's the same thing
that's why the debate finally changed
between Obama to say Bush to
Biden close enough they look a lot like
are B level presidents be to come and
under the last Co thing all they talked
about was whether this spending would
cause inflation nobody once thought the
checks were dos nobody said what
happened to Paul Ryan talking about how
we're going to be the next gree it's all
gone what happened to going to China to
check with our backers about barley what
happened to Paul Krugman with us we're
going to run up interest rates none of
that it's all gone so to that degree mmt
has had an enormous influence and it's
changed the debate from talking about
solvency we're going to go broke to
talking about we might cause inflation
now we're here talking about are we
causing inflation and I'm telling you
for the most part no what we're getting
our price increases from a monopolis
basic price now not from any kind of a
monetary inflation and this monopolist
is blatantly raising price and doing it
in Disguise method they don't just set
the price they set their spreads to
benchmarks which is indirectly doing
exactly the same thing driving the price
higher continuously it's been trending
up six or eight months now and it's
going to continue to Trend up while they
have the same pricing structure in place
it's a simple price setting mechanism
that causes the price to go up up up up
not every day but week to week month to
month
until people stop using it until it
breaks the economy which is exactly what
they did in 2008 I think they get up to
155 or 157 it broke the economy now
there are a lot of other issues that
collaps with it that we talk about
nobody talks about what the price of oil
did to the economy but it was the same
thing but today on an inflation adjusted
basis 150 is 300 right that was 12 years
you know 14 years ago and so maybe it
takes $300 oil I don't know when the
price breaks the economy and causes
demand to collapse it's going to keep
going up until the demand collapses
that's the Russia strategy this is their
extended war strategy against the world
they're working with the siis to make
sure their osps their called official
setting prices per set and widen of
spreads The Benchmark the apost value
which causes the price to just go up and
up and up every week as it's a simp case
of monopolis setting price in a very
thinly disguised Manner and it's not
going to stop until that's addressed no
matter what we do with interest rates
which we're doing backwards of
course no matter what we do with taxes
they don't care they're just going to
keep raising the price of oil till it
breaks it's like a kid breaking his toys
just going to hammer and Hammer and
Hammer till the thing breaks that's what
they do and there's nobody addressing
that period and they've got this noek
thing where we're going to file a
lawsuit against them for having a cartel
this is like a Monty Python
thing let's file a lawsuit against the
Romans violating human rights
okay you are listening to macro in
cheese a podcast brought to you by real
progressives a nonprofit organization
dedicated to teaching the masses about
mmt or modern monetary Theory please
help our efforts and become a monthly
donor at PayPal or patreon like and
follow our pages on Facebook and YouTube
and follow us on Tik Tok Twitter twitch
rockfin and

Instagram my try my P never s another
wait
turn tell it's my tolerance trying my P
and everyone to sing me just the erasing
of
the Jerome pal is talking about how
we're going to have to raise interest
rates and it's going to be a very
painful experience I talked to Randy Ray
the other day who written a paper
recently saying there is no soft
Landings coming basically from a Fed
jacking up vulker
rates can you talk to us about the 70s
with the OPEC crisis and interest rates
in vulker and then bring it for if you
can I already did it's the same thing
well I understand but I want to tie
vuler into this if we can do that okay
we just change the names
so you know we had Daran Burns and
Miller that was when I was were my back
when I was your age you know in my early
30s back when you studing around in the
conser race car right by the way waren
Mosler designed the coolest race car of
all time check it out look up it was
long before I did that I was born in
1949 so that was when I was 30
1970 I was William Blair went there 1978
so that was when I was the middle of The
Fray so to speak so you've got the Saudi
raising price and this cost P inflation
is what they called it the canans didn't
know what to do they had been running
things and everybody was doing things
counter cyclically and we've had the
golden years of low unemployment and all
that kind of thing and then when the
price of oil switched from the Texas
Railroad Commission was limiting
production of our
oil in Texas to make sure the price
didn't fall below $2 half dollars a
barrel because we had
overcapacity but as demand picked up we
used up our overc capacity and so they
couldn't do that anymore that wasn't the
problem anymore the price was getting up
over $3 and the excess capacity had
moved to Saudi Raman and now they're the
one setting price and they had a
different agenda than the Texas Railroad
Commission the Texas Railroad Commission
had kept the price stable for 14 or 15
years and those were the golden years of
economics and everybody just talks about
what caused the golden years was Texas
Railroad Commission keeping the price of
energy stable for the whole time so it
was an excess capacity and stable price
you have all the growth you wanted until
they ran out and the excess capacity
switched to the Middle East and then
they had a different agenda is to get as
much money as they could and they
started raising the price the price went
from 3 to 40 it's 11 times higher in
about 10 years which would be going
going from 50 today to 600 or 700 over
the 10e period of time and it completely
destabilized everything and it was cost
push inflation they called it through
Pastor it caused prices to go up in
general about that much and they took
all kinds of measures to counter it and
the Kens said the only way you can do
this with direct price and wage controls
nobody wants to that so that was the
last time we had a countering they just
totally discredited the themselves they
didn't recognize the way to go there's
not a viable
policy they deserve to go in other words
if that was what they were going to
proposed and the monitor came in and
started talking about how interest rates
could take care of this yeah like the
Saudis even knew what our interest rate
was what do they care they're just
raising prices so the price of oil kept
going up and then inflation kept going
up which were price increases which were
Cross by price of oil pushing through
and everything back then we used oil
itself for a lot of things and then
we had President Carter and he started
doing things that long term did help
actually he deregulated natural gas for
example which allowed the utilities to
switch from oil to Natural Gas we had a
lot of Public Utilities parting oil as
primary source of Our Generation and
they couldn't rely on natural gas
because most of the wells were cap
because there was a limit of $2 and half
dollars mcf maybe it was 50 cents I
don't know it's very low mcf mean a
million cubic feet natural gas it was 50
cents so it was too low for them to
bother to explore so their Wells from
Captain so even if the power companies
wanted to use it they could count on
Supply coming at that price so they just
didn't to it once it was deregulated and
they control for as much as they want
they knew Mo washing natural gas and
they could start switching over to it so
that helped but there was also a big
demand shock in 1979 with the recession
so what happened was Paul Paul came in
that's Paul V gu who talking about
remember the Boston Celtics had small
fall and Tall fall paulus was tall fall
and Paul wz small fall so then we had
tall Paul as our headed chairman
deciding to cap forign reserves which is
absurd you can't do that you have no
idea of monetary operations work so all
he did was shift interest rate
determination from the Washington fed to
the New York fed who was stuck with this
idiotic policy and have to send rate at
some
point what happened was the inflation
kept going so the higher rates promote
inflation because what do higher rates
do higher rates are nothing more than
the payment of interest from a
government's point of view it's the
payment of interest on the government
debt the public debt the dollars that
the government has spent that haven't
been used to pay taxes and they remain
out there until they're used to pay
taxes we know the government spends
first some of the money gets used to pay
taxes the rest is still sitting there in
government accounts Reserve accounts it
sells Securities so some of that money
switches is to save his accounts which
we call treasury Securities so just save
his accounts that now just sit there
forever the only way they can disappear
is if they're used to pay taxes you call
government surplus government raises
taxes and people have to use that money
to pay so the public debt it's just the
money out there it's 30 trillion now the
government has spent 30 trillion more
than it's taxed maybe it's spent 120
trillion and 90 trillion has been used
to pay taxes so that's gone the other 30
trillion is still sitting there in
treasury Securities and excess reserves
with the fed and the government pays
interest on that
money and that's an interest expense
it's part of the deficit it's deficit
spending when it raises rates it pays
more interest and so as they're raising
rates they're paying more interest so
they were pay couple hundred billion
it'll go to 300 billion or 400 billion
so when they raise rates it's What I
Call basic income it's just income being
paid by the government deficit spending
but only to people who already have
money who are those people that have
money the rich people by definition they
already have money right you're paying
interest to people who only already have
money and in proportion to how much they
have so you have some money you get
interest if I have twice as much money
as you I get twice as much subsidy from
the government so this is basic income
citizens income but only for people who
already have money proportion to how
much they have that the Federal Reserve
votes to pay out when they raise rates
and that's the only thing they actually
do they vote they raise their hands and
they talk and they write things down and
operationally the thing that happens is
they paid more money out to people who
already have money in proportion to how
much they have now there are a lot of
people in favor of one second that in
essence exacerbates wealth inequality if
you don't have any savings you don't get
it this is like a stimulus program but
only for people who already have money
in proportion to much they have so think
of it as a stimulus for people who
already have
money in proportion to how much you have
that's what it is that is paying the
stimulus and that's supposed to bring
down inflation to pay money to people
who already have money and if it doesn't
work they'll pay more if it doesn't work
they pay more I call it like the
carpenter with this piece of wood and
he's cutting and he says you know what
no matter how much I cut off it's still
too short the FED starts paying interest
and the inflation doesn't come down it
goes up they didn't raise it a lot and
oer raised it a lot it went up a lot so
they pay more so they raised it some
more we're not going to stop until this
thing brece like the beatings will
continue until morale improves right
old British Navy all right this is niut
well what does happen when you get
inflation is you get a money supply
shortage so if you think about this
let's say all prices were to double and
you used to go shopping with $300 in
your pocket now you have to have $600 in
your pocket to go shopping you need
twice as much savings or cash because
that's what it is or you need twice as
much credit of your credit cards buy
anything if Apple computer has 250
billion in cash and all the prices and
salaries and everything doubled now its
cushion isn't so much anymore it's been
cut in half now it needs 500 billion
cash so what price increases do is
create a shortage of net Financial
assets the public debts 30 trillion that
was 100% of GDP we double GDP because
prices double nothing else happens from
30 trillion to 60 trillion now the
public debts only 50% of GDP it's not
enough equity to to support what credit
structures needed to now support $60
trillion of GDP we've created a money
supply shortage every inflation creates
a money supply
short in the Civil War they printed
greenbacks I'm sure it was because the
inflation was creating a money short if
you look at vinar Republic was printing
money like crazy that was because of the
money shortage created by the inflation
that isn't what caused the inflation
that was a followup to the inflation
because people could make change with
their cash registers they didn't have
enough money because all the cash
registry suddenly need twice as much if
you have 100% a month in inflation you
need twice as much every month otherwise
you can't run your business this the
whole economy crashes down from lack of
money to make change just walking around
pocket money it's just a big fat money
shortage so this happened in 1979 the
inflation was 12% the deficit spending
was only six or seven so the public debt
whatever it was back then was actually
shrinking adjusted for inflation in real
terms was the same as running a budget
surus was the same as 7% budget surus
and the whole economy just collapsed
because of that and they all see the
interest rates yeah it brought down
inflation right right it also kept the
elephants out of Washington oh this
contactual stuff so now this is
happening again we're having price
increases we're getting a money supply
short we're getting a fiscal contraction
at the same time president's bragging
about how the deficits come down by a
trillion
and with 8% price increase 8% at 30
trillion is 2.4 trillion it's like a
collapse of n fincial assets of 2.4
trillion and you see that in the debt of
GDP ratio coming down I don't know how
far down it is now I don't get month mon
numbers but it's probably gone from 125
to 100 pretty big collap and you see
this after Wars all the time you get a
Big R and spending during the wars
prices go up then you get cut backs
there's a crash in net Financial assets
the real money supply and contraction
government spending you get a big
post-war recession or depression and so
we had a big covid war we spent all this
money prices went up because Saudis
pushed prices out I can show you
statistically how they did right very
little came from the spending I'm sure
it was less than 1% of the 8% came from
the spending there was some but it
wasn't a lot and total consumer
consumption isn't even up from where it
was as in CAU
up but it is a real fiscal contraction
coming from this post-war the co War
where we spent trillions and what do we
spending them people who had lost their
jobs got unemployment compensation that
was the big one people got stimulus
checks it was largely unemployment
compensation businesses got unemployment
compensation so nobody got more money
than they would normally have they just
got paid the stay home instead of to
produce mostly Services restaurants and
movie theaters Subway rides and things
like that the goods side slump but it
came back pretty
quickly and yes they had more excess
savings their savings went up but the
form that the excess savings took was
reduced consumer de so the credit card
balances went down and then they came
back up at a slower Pace they're below
where they would have been without all
the stimulus so you can see most of the
excess stimulous money I don't even call
it stimulus money crazy some bought
things but the rest turn into lower debt
burdens so the consumer now has lower
debt burdens than it had before and so
yes there's pent up capacity to spend
but from debt so people have room on
their credit cards to spend but they
don't have more money in their bank
accounts there's no money burning a hole
in their pocket there's credit card debt
ready to go at 18% interest if you're
really want to do that nobody really
wants to do that anyway and you're
starting to see it happen now only
because suddenly fiscal spending is down
and the transfer payments are down and
so I think Biden said he's celebrating
this 1.3 trillion in deficit reduction
here we go like brother Bill Clinton and
prices are up you got to pay more for
gas so when you pay on your credit card
debts up and if you can't pay it it's
18% so we're doing that because prices W
up because of this not because we're
partying for the good time well if
prices go up Yeah by percentage taxes go
up whether it be sales tax now
government receipts at the federal level
go up and we know that govern govern
taxation equals dollar deletion or
destruction yeah so this is creating the
grounds for that Surplus yes that
happens every cycle and so what it is is
the counter
cyclical automatic stabilizers the
automatic stabilizers the fact that
taxes go up when the economy grows
disproportionately cost deficits come
down and ends the Cy they're far too
aggressive they land any cyle and all
these people say oh we need more counter
cyclical so we are too many already
they've ended every recovery they've cut
it short cut it on its knees and there
some people say oh that's a good thing
it's not a good you lose real output
that's the worst possible there are
other things you can do if they're
creating some kind of other problem you
can regulate lending or something but
you don't have to cut the knees out put
people out of
work so this inflation what's happened
is inflation used to be something else
it used to be the continuous increase in
prices it was a monetary phenomenon it
was on the gold standard because you're
reserves would double or something like
that and the economy was always Reserve
constraint so this would allow the
economy to expand would inflate because
prices were always relative to your res
serves and I don't want to go into that
but we don't have that anymore but this
is not one of those monetary inflations
at all there's not any element about it
I shouldn't say there's not any element
the FED Studies have shown it's maybe.
3% can be attributed to that but we get
one and a half or 2% inflation any
anyway and so it hasn't added to that
that we were going to get anyway yes we
have isolated maybe more so than four
areas price gouging because we've had
more consolidation because of
covid Supply considerations have changed
so there might be fewer suppliers of the
same thing so they have more Market
power fine but that's all the realm of
antitrust law and that's what government
is supposed to be doing on the antitrust
side and the fact that we've eliminated
that to Department's budget is not an
inflation problem that's a regulation
problem so we got two final questions
and maybe we can bule them into one is
we're winding up here number one is when
those interest rates go up and the
payouts to the wealthy go up they end up
inflating a lot of assets like housing
housing is going up exponentially and
you see a lot of things getting crushed
with these interest rates going up now
as well but places like Black Rock
buying up mobile home Parks cities and
states writing up laws to prevent
cohabitation from sharing rent there's a
huge asset Bubble at least that's the
way it feels anyway that these prices
are rising
exponentially you're Joe Biden God
forbid I feel bad for you if you're Joe
Biden but you're Joe Biden in this
scenario and you have to fix this
re-elections coming up the Democrats are
getting ready to take a major bloodbath
in this next election as the return of
trump after watching fecklessness from
the democr atic party show its head the
Resurgence of the far-right fascists is
about to take place you got to try and
save the party how do you fix the
economy warrant am I supposed to do this
for free no no no trust me Biden's
getting so much money to do this I'm
sure through his Ukrainian connections I
know I know give me the high level how
do we fix this well we have to identify
what the problem is so let's say the
problem is that we had a bad crop and
all the Corin crop died we only have
half as much so the price D it's too
expensive and so people can only eat
half as much corn at this price they
don't have enough money to afford it
that did not used to be called inflation
that did not used to be something you
blame Biden that the coin crop died and
now it's expensive how are we going to
make it affordable again because what
are you going to do if you give
everybody enough money to be able to buy
corn at the higher price they're not
going to get twice as much corn just
going to drive the price up higher
because there's only half as much corn
if you take everybody's money away so
then now price of corn comes down
because they only half the people can
afford it because you're taking
everybody else's money away okay you've
got the price of corn down but only half
the people are going to eat the corn so
when you have scarce resources the
Market's allocating by Price that's not
an inflation that kind of a problem has
to be addressed either by people just
eat less corn and start eating other
things and it's just more expensive to
live your real standard of living is
down because there's been this failure
on the output side you don't have the
capacity to keep everybody's lifestyle
as high as you have before because of
this supply side failure and we've had a
little bit of that we had quite a bit
part of it was self-induced from the
tariffs of course president Trump 177%
tariff on Lumber because Canada wasn't
charging us enough kind of idiot policy
is that so what does Biden do he doubles
down on it so it's now 34% because
they're still not charging us enough who
are these guys
and so if you need to send somebody out
shopping for you don't send either one
or them they go out and punish people
for not charging them enough so they
can't come up with another solution
other than to punish them and try and
force them to raise prices when we're
out shopping in the
world and I understand all the
ramifications but that's not how you
address them that's the worst possible
thing and then they oh well lumber
prices are up so we have this inflation
so now we're going to take everybody's
money away raise taxes or something or
raise rates which is backwards but you
got the gun backward as they shoot
themselves in the face but look the
policy was to raise prices and now
you're asking me what can we do to bring
them down we get rid of the tariffs is
your policy higher prices or lower price
is your policy higher prices or better
for America or lower price you got to
give me a consistent policy President
Biden before I can tell you how to fix
it you have to tell me what's broken in
a way that makes sense prices are too
fine remove your policies or the raise
remove all the state taxes gasoline if
you don't want the price so high that'll
cut the price probably $2 a gallon
everywhere wholesale price is three and
a half doesn't need to be any
higher well yeah but we want the higher
price so that people will use less
because we're worried about climate yeah
we're worried about the environment well
so am I great so then why do you want
prices lower well because we want to
bring inflation down well what about the
environment well yeah we want to keep
prices up protecting come on so when you
ask me what advice to give these guys
they're so inconsistent in their
responses to
anything right yeah you can't give them
any advice that's going to work for them
because they don't have a consistent
agenda so it's not an applicable
question to their agenda their agenda is
contradictory to the
core so the agenda is a core
contradiction and you say okay how do we
fix it let's get a consistent agenda
it's not contradictory and then we can
give you some ideas asking the Saudis to
pump more isn't going to help anything
exactly giving Chevron the rights to get
oil from Venezuela is not going to help
what I heard you say though during this
is that we have a supply issue that our
supply chains are really what's causing
the bulk of this is what I'm hearing
that's what's caused this one time
adjustment part of it is self-imposed by
the terrorists that started the
disruption and then it continued with
lockdowns and everything else so if you
were to take a fiscal approach to this
would you invest instead in the supply
chains that are part of the national
infrastructure which would have a much
longer lead time I don't know how many
shovel ready jobs would be there to
impact anything but what might that be
it sounds to me like an investment
infrastructure is the best way the
government can respond and lower tariffs
states have the Dilemma of trying to
find revenues wherever they can find
them which is why they raise taxes on
gas because they have to have tax
revenues but the federal government
could replace it I agree 100% yes and it
could do it on a blanket basis like
we'll replace all the states equally
whether you already have a tax or not
and unfunded
mandates well that won't change the
gasoline price see that's what I'm
saying it consistent agenda so we could
say all right fine what you said but
there's not a consistent agenda for this
for infrastructure
what kind of infrastructure do you want
more oil drilling I don't think
so don't yeah okay well what does that
even mean when we look at all the dirt
that goes into producing electric cars
yeah do we really want to do that
nobody's got a consistent agenda on what
clean energy is it's just a slogan right
now and when we went into covid
lockedown within a week our emissions
dropped 50% across the board roughly
it's the first time you could see China
from
space nobody ever seen it and we did it
by eliminating nonessentials nobody
starved to death nobody went naked from
lack of clothing nobody had any lack of
real materials for the people that were
already like that yeah we didn't give up
any Essentials and emissions were down
50% we had just solved our mission
problems times a thousand because we're
trying to get a 1 or 2% drop in 30 years
or something we just dropped 50%
overnight 100% on conservation we still
had our computers we still had all our
toys we had more to go easily we weren't
limiting electricity consumption we had
shift digital and so what did we do we
said we've got to restore the economy
we've got to restore growth did anybody
say you know what we just got this jump
on of missions we've just literally
saved the planet for Humanity we no
longer have a problem of temperature
increasing past 1 and a half% in fact it
may start reversing at these levels this
is something unseen in 50
years why don't we bring this thing back
with things that don't make this
environmental problem worse it's going
to make it worse let's just not do it
was there any discussion to that
whatsoever no the discussion was 100% on
we got to get GDP back we got to get
people back to work and a year later
we're reopening and everybody's cheering
because now GDP is improved
the most on record about 15% because we
dropped
20 if you drop 20% you got to go up a
lot more than 20 to get back to where
you started that's just how percentages
were we're applauding that we got back
and our missions are back to where they
were we just last week announced record
gasoline consumption for us drivers and
everybody's saying congratulations we
fully recovered then they asked me what
are we going to do about the clean
energy what are we GNA do about the
environment what do you want to do about
it I tell the story about the Boy Scouts
who came home
and the scout master saidwell what was
your good deed what did you little boy
stupid he said 'well five of us help
this old lady cross the street he says
well why didn't it take five of you says
well because she didn't want to go
so is there any political will of
consequence
none so I got this point and what I want
to say is this is the final word Warren
simple letter grade A through F what do
you give Biden and Drome Pals grade
they're your students you got to pass or
fail what do you give them for handling
this situation where do they fit a b CDE
e or
F for handling it again it depends on
what rhetoric whatever I mean just in
general depends on what the agenda is
they're serving some agenda for some
people and I'm sure those people think
they've done a great job and other
people think they haven't they have an
election so they're running a popularity
Compass so I guess you go by the
polls polls say that Biden is losing big
time nobody likes Joe Biden right now
there you go all right well Warren thank
you so much for joining me today thank
you for being gracious with your time I
really appreciate it tell folks where
they can find more information about you
sir WB Mosler on Twitter is where I'm
most active now because I can say things
very briefly I like that two sentences
and get it out there without going any
more and mus economics.com is my website
where find links to my book The Seven
Deadly innocent frauds of policy which
is free online and it takes you about
half an hour to read and it's written in
non-technical terms that even a central
Banker could understand and so along
with all the other writings about
interest rates and anything else you
might want to know and you can message
me on Twitter also if you have TR
question awesome Warren thank you so
much once again for joining me today
again folks this was Steve grumba Mosler
we are out of
here
M macro and cheese is produced by Andy
Kennedy descriptive writing by Virginia
Co and promotional artwork by Andy
Kennedy macro and cheese is publicly
funded by our real Progressive patreon
account if you would like to donate to
macro and cheese please visit
patreon.com
progressives
I want the

TRU
that


## Keywords:
