---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UF6mykgVnc8
---

# Video
Moral Ambition with Rutger Bregman | What Could Go Right? S4 E2
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UF6mykgVnc8)

## Transcript:
if you see a building that's on fire
well what do you do right you the first
thing you do is you you call the
firefighters and you know they sprinkle
water over it that's that's what you do
first and then you start thinking about
all the other problems and that's also
how I think about poverty I mean poverty
just makes everything worse there's
there's even evidence that you know it
impedes your cognitive ability it
impedes your ability to think in the
long term to make plans for the future
and um sure there will always be some
people who will waste their basic income
but usually when it comes to richer
people we're not worried about that we
just called venture capital and we say
oh sure go on and and experiment try new
things and um yes we should consider
basic income as venture capital for the
people
foreign
carabelle the founder of the progress
Network and I am joined in our fourth
season as in our previous three seasons
by Emma varva Lucas the executive
director of the progress Network
and we have been over the past couple of
years been having a series of
conversations with people who we think
are
compelling figures focus on how we solve
our Collective problems doesn't mean
that they are not
acutely attuned to those it doesn't mean
that everybody we talked to is
cheery and wakes up with a smile on
their face about all the daisies and
lilies and chirping birds it just means
that they are in their way embracing a
sensibility that is not plunging us into
despair but is instead trying to lift us
into a collective future that we want to
live in this is a belief that we have
and I'm I know I'm being repetitive for
those of you who've been listening to
some of these but I I want to be
repetitive in that uh
creating a collective Sensibility
of how we go forward into a future of
our hopes not a future of our fears is
an ongoing work that is more about lots
of individuals coming together and lots
of organizations coming together the
progress network is a
collection of individuals and
increasingly we hope also a network of
networks so it is trying to build
critical mass or be a one of many voices
in a critical mass that
I believe we believe is an essential
component to solving problems and
creating that future and that there's
some historical precedent for when
societies believe that they are able to
solve problems they're more able to
solve them than when they're convinced
that they can
so in that Spirit we're having these
conversations and our first interview
of the Season uh Emma will tell you
about who he is but I think in many ways
is the perfect
iteration of some of these themes that I
just attempted to highlight so Emma tell
us who we are speaking with today
we're going to talk to record bregman
who's a historian and an author he's
published five books on history
philosophy and economics and you may
recognize uh two of them because they
were New York Times bestsellers
humankind and Utopia for realists those
have been translated into more than 40
languages bregman has also been twice
nominated for the prestigious European
press prize for his work at the
correspondent which is an online
platform he founded that's dedicated to
constructive and ad-free journalism
Rutger bregman thank you so much for
joining us and thank you as well for
being part of the progress network uh as
you know and just we continue to
reiterate this because these are themes
that we feel need reiteration you know
we're trying to focus on
a world of problems solved uh and not a
world of problems endlessly created or
endlessly dwelt upon but not
some sort of rose-tinted you know
pollyanish Voltaire we live in the best
of all possible worlds more of a
the only way that we will ever live in a
world that is even close to the best of
all possible worlds is by focusing on
our Collective ability to create that
world full stop
I really love that thanks so you've been
doing some
I think quite compelling work over the
past decade plus a little bit of an of
it in Dutch which I'm you know making my
way through really slowly word by word
but the the English translations of of
utopia and of humankind I think have
struck some real resonance
around the world
particularly the latest book and maybe
you can talk a little bit about how you
sort of came to because you're both edgy
right you know you're certainly not
um without critique of the systems that
we exist in
uh but you're also hopeful so maybe as a
kind of a delve into Rutgers personality
for a moment how do you how do you
square the edgy with the hopeful
yeah that's a good question I I think
that if you go back in history uh
Progressive views to be quite hopeful
actually if you think about something
like scientific progress that used to be
something that progressives were very
excited about but something happened
along the way is that when we think
about technology today
it's mainly uh Doom and Gloom that
dominates the conversation and uh sure
there are some good reasons for that but
as a historian I always love to point
out that yeah we have made extraordinary
progress and it's very easy to lose
sight of that especially if you live in
an incredibly rich country
um I mean here in the Netherlands I
recently looked this up if you have a
median wage you are part of the 3.5
richest in the world right we have
access to riches that you know even the
king of France in the 17th century
couldn't dream of
um so um I think it's really important
to have that perspective and in yeah in
my work I've always been interested
um in in the phenomenon of how
seemingly unrealistic things can become
reality how do we move from Utopia to
reality how do we actually make the
impossible happen and um yeah that's
been uh that's been fun over the years
to focus on that question
okay I wanted to drill in a little bit
into that question of how we do
exactly made the impossible happen you
know when it comes to incentivizing
human behavior
um and I think you know people have
different theories about that
um one that I picked up in your work you
know fairly recently because you've been
a proponent of effective altruism and I
see this this theme coming up in your
work generally is the role of Shame
right and it was really interesting for
me to encounter that in your work
because for me shame seems like the
worst kind of incentivizer right I feel
like
it stress people down doesn't give them
an off-ramp for their behavior you know
uh no one likes to feel ashamed but I
think you have the opposite perspective
so I would be really curious to hear
um your case for why shame is a good
incentivizer of human behavior or a
useful sure yeah yeah I really think
that shame is a quite useful tool
actually we are pretty much the only
species in the whole Animal Kingdom with
the ability to blush which is I think a
fascinating and telling fact that we
involuntarily give away our feelings to
other members of our species and that
basically helps to establish trust
between one another I think it's also
very disturbing when people are not able
to block you anymore I mean that's
sometimes true when we think about some
of our leaders right think of your
favorite politician and then think of
the last time you saw him or her blush
it's probably a very long time ago so um
um yeah I think that shame can sometimes
push people in the right directions so
I'll give you a couple of examples from
my personal life
um
I recently turned vegan and there was
actually because of my mother who is
she's uh 65 years old and she'd been
eating cheese her whole life but then
she encountered the arguments uh against
the exploitation of cows and and cows
and she was like okay I'll stop doing
that and then she caught me up and she
said Rutger you're you're this you
pretend to be this you know this
idealistic author and I see you going on
about all these things on television but
you haven't even turned vegan yourself
yet so my mother is very good at shaming
me and that was actually quite effective
so now I've turned vegan as well I I I I
often uh think that it can be a quite
powerful tool
is it funny you bring up the veganism
example because I you know and I don't
mean to insult you anyway when I think
of vegans I constantly think of them
being self-righteous and telling me like
why aren't you vegan why aren't you
vegan and for me personally it shuts me
down but then again my mom has never
called me up and made that argument so
maybe that's different the difference
there yeah yeah yeah yeah look My
Philosophy would be just whatever works
I think in general
um people are often more motivated by
I don't know the excitement of
doing things better
um so in the case of effective altruism
for example it's interesting you have
the philosopher Peter singer who already
in the 70s published a seminal paper
about children
drowning in a pond and that people dying
um in Africa from say malaria is the
morally similar and that we have an
obligation to help people very far away
it takes a what is it like four or five
thousand dollars to save one life
according to the think tank give well
but that guilt framing of the argument
didn't resonate all that much I mean
Peter Singer was basically on his own
for decades donating health of his
salary people were like oh that's
interesting Peter that you're doing that
but we don't really we don't really do
that we're not like that and then
effective altruism came along this
movement of people uh uh very rational
people who know how to improve the world
and they they came up with a different
framing like it's actually pretty
exciting to do good and to do good and
in a really effective way now I do have
some problems with that movement
especially lately but
I think the fact that they build a whole
movement around this excitement the
opportunity framing of there's just so
much you can do especially if you do it
collectively is isn't yet more effective
so and yeah I see your argument that
there are there are real limits to the
power of Shame as well
all right so let's pick up on that given
that it's a provocative topic about uh
not just the specific particular crisis
that some of the backers of effective
altruism had particularly in the form of
uh you know the crypto money and Sam
Beckman Freedom the money that had gone
into effective altruism altruism as a
movement precedes the money right but
then the the the ideas attracted the
money
there is a I would say fraught
relationship right between the idealism
that a lot of people have uh and a
capitalist system that also requires the
funding of ideas right I mean ideas we
don't live in a world that we lived in a
few hundred years ago where there were
sort of separate silos between let's say
ideas money power right
um those things tend to
commingle in today's world and you know
if you think about technology and the
people who the the initial wave of of
kind of utopian fervor in Silicon Valley
in the 90s and into the early 2000s
whether it's Google don't be evil or
whether it's you know we're going to get
rich and change the world and we look at
that rather cynically now as you know
give me a break you're just telling
yourself a story of pablum in order to
make yourself feel better about your
billions but these things clearly are
intertwined I'm wondering how separate
from the obvious critiques of sort of
pure venality and pure hypocrisy
uh how one navigates the you know we do
live in a world where the more currency
ideas have right the more backing they
have the more potent they can be which
requires money
yes yes look I think this has always
been an issue I was recently reading a
lecture that Ralph Nader the great
consumer Advocate gave in the 60s 1968
November uh at Harvard Law School and
his message to the students back then
was basically you're about to waste your
whole career you're about to waste your
life because you're probably going to
work for some you know stupid law firm
uh helping big corporations to sell crap
to to Consumers that's basically uh
what's probably going to happen but yeah
you there is a there is a small chance
that you may choose a different
direction and then there was this group
of of
um Nader's Raiders you know we've all
forgotten about this obviously because
Nader you know did some not very smart
things around the 2000 election but what
what he did in the 60s and 70s was
extremely impressive you know so many
young people uh at some point a third of
Harvard Law School apply to work with
them
um to basically fight the good fight so
think for example of the Clean Water Act
and the Clean Air Act I mean the Clean
Air Act has saved millions of lives and
the the Fingerprints of of Ralph Nader
students are all over it so um but this
has always been been an issue it's it's
basically often easier to earn a lot of
money
um while you're not contributing all
that much uh and um and vice versa I
mean it's not always true but
it is quite often true that doesn't mean
that you should be
how do you say that as an idealist you
should not be afraid of money or
anything like that if we think of the
great movements in history whether it's
abolitionism or the women's right
movement
um or the climate movement very often
there were very wealthy philanthropists
who played a very important role in that
actually I was recently studying the the
invention of the birth control pill
which was actually financed by a
suffragette and a feminist named
Catherine McCormick right she supplied
the money that that made this incredibly
important maybe one of the most
important inventions in all of world
history right it liberated women
basically and allowed them to control
their own fertility so um
yeah you don't you don't have to be
afraid of money in that respect but yeah
it's often it's often a dilemma I guess
for young idealistic people
um in which when they're thinking about
the rest of their lives
the problem being that you have to be
involved in some may potentially Shady
stuff to get the money it's very hard to
be a do-gitter and make money at the
same time but you know recognize as I
was listening to you speak I started
thinking about like maybe Nader is a
great proponent of the excitement
principle that you were talking about
like if we get people excited about you
know the change that we can make we can
get them on board and then I started
thinking about you as a proponent of the
excitement principle around taxes which
also relates to this discussion of money
that we've been having and I know that
we've had some progress recently in the
EU I'm in Greece here in the Netherlands
um around the 15 minimum corporate tax
rate so I'm wondering if you can give us
you know your your exciting explanation
of what's happening right now with taxes
and you know if we're going anywhere at
all with that
of course yes not many people know this
but we're actually making progress in
the fight against tax evasion and tax
avoidance uh there's some pretty good
news to share so in 2019 I was invited
to Davos and set some things that they
didn't like and they haven't invited me
back but since then
um if I if I just look at my own country
the Netherlands it used to be a huge tax
Paradise especially U.S corporations had
stashed hundreds of billions of dollars
in the Netherlands tax-free and that's
basically gone right now the the amount
of money that goes through the
Netherlands towards say Bermuda or the
Cayman Islands has been diminished
completely like the decline of 85 in the
last three years
um same is happening in on the European
level as you mentioned we're we're uh
we've just basically agreed to a 50
minimum corporate tax and what's now
going to happen is that other countries
are going to follow uh it's going to be
a domino effect because if they don't do
that then for at least profits that
corporations will make in Europe
um we'll do it ourselves so if the US
doesn't properly implement this minimum
corporate tax it's basically stealing
from U.S taxpayers or it's basically
giving the money to European taxpayers
in that way because yeah we'll just stop
it up and um yeah that's some that's
some real progress there because there
has been more transparency and some
great efficacy by experts like for
example Gabriel zuckman or Thomas
picketty Etc so it's this is a funny
phenomenon that very often when we start
to get angry about something
when something starts to get exposed
that's the exact moment when we're
already making progress and it's when no
one's talking about something like tax
evasion 20 years ago no one's was really
thinking about that that wasn't a big
issue and that was actually when it was
at its at its worst so that's I mean
that's that's often with the news right
it's completely deludes you about what's
actually going on and what the real
direction of History actually is you
know part of the challenge and I know um
you're you mentioned off air that you're
writing a new book about the rise of the
Abolitionist Movement
um so I've always had a personal uh
negative reaction to True Believers of
any stripe even while I recognize that a
certain kind of radical true belief
often drives history and and penetrates
or forces a break in in the status quo
you know NATO is a good example of that
some of the abolitionists were clearly a
good example of that you know these were
people who were who were morally black
and white and that drove their passion
in a way that this was probably
necessary in order to end something you
know that was sort of morally
unambiguously wrong
that being said you know people like
piccade and people like zuckman
um have a certain black and white view
of wealth taxes in the state that I feel
and I'd like your reaction to this
so what what it misses is the other side
of the Ledger which is it's one thing to
say uh that there should be a more
Equitable non you know that we should
all pay for the commons essentially and
that we have a responsibility to each
other the challenge that I think is
legitimate is often phrased on the right
is
the the the the institutions that we
have created the government institutions
we've created that are supposed to
create that Equity are often at least
outside of Northern Europe
um woefully incompetent and often venal
and corrupt themselves you kind of you
substitute one level of corruption which
is I'm not going to pay for the commons
with another level of either
incompetence or corruption which is
we're going to take your money and we're
actually not going to do a very good job
taking care of the commons it's like
kind of what you know what I feel like
both sides of that ledger are essential
and and one of the you know northern
Europe is one of the few you know the
Scandinavian countries the Netherlands
Singapore Taiwan you know there are a
few examples of countries that seem to
get this more right than not but there
are a whole lot more examples of
countries that don't get this right at
all yeah yeah I see that point look I
think that quite often on the left
there's a lot of talk about wealth three
distribution which is important but not
enough talk about wealth creation right
who are the actual wealth creators and
in that respect what I've been trying to
do with my work is to reframe that
question sometimes to basically just say
look the real wealth creators are often
the maintainers the teachers the nurses
the care workers or those who who have
these so-called essential jobs as we've
come to call them during the pandemic
um but yeah it's also about the
innovators about the people who come up
with new amazing solutions to our
problems and that's something that I
mean Ezra Klein recently wrote this in
the New York Times is that too often the
right can all only look nostalgically to
the past and then the left is completely
focused on the injustices of the present
but who actually has the courage to look
forward and this has been a frustration
I have for a very long time actually
since the beginning of my career as a
writer is that so often people only know
what they're against right they're
Against The Establishment Against Racism
against homophobia against everything
basically there was even a book
published a couple of years ago by a
major left-wing intellectual called
against everything
uh and what was the first chapter
against
exercise I think well
um sure I'm against exercise as well or
at least I don't particularly enjoy it
but at some point you also got to think
about what are you actually for what do
you want to create and uh
yeah I guess that that is a spirit that
can transcend the trend traditional
divide between the left and the right
um which you can see actually in many of
these movements that you just that you
just mentioned I've come to call it
moral ambition the the yearning and the
drive to create a better world and to to
make an impact and the most exciting
thing about that is that it's contagious
um this this drive it's not about
your genetics it's not about your
biology it's not who you are
fundamentally as a person no it's an
idea and you can be infected with that
idea it's something that Tyler cow and
the economist said once that one of the
greatest things or most worth all things
you can do with your life is to
basically increase other people's
ambition and I've never forgot that
remark and I've been ever doing trying
to do that ever since basically trying
to raise other people's levels of
ambition like whenever they say I have
this plan I said well do that but you
know top it up 50 or something like that
um so um yeah I sometimes miss that
Spirit
um among my uh friends on my left
I feel like you know I'm kind of doing
like a top-line view of your your
greatest hits here record but um
yeah you've done a lot of work on Ubi
Universal basic income and you know I
was thinking as Zachary's talking about
you know some of the common narratives
on the left and you were talking about
some common errors on the left another
narrative
um is that if there's just if there's
just enough money you know everything
would be fine like everything can be
solved by money and I feel like
sometimes with Ubi like my personal
hesitation around it is that it seems to
be presented as a silver bullet like
that certainly there are some people
whose problems are caused by money and
if they had more money the problems
would be solved but there are also
people in poverty whose problems are not
primarily coming from money right you
know if you talk to any
person suffering from addiction they
could tell you that money is not going
to solve that problem so I was wondering
if you could talk about about that a
little bit because you have that famous
phrase poverty isn't a lack of character
it's a lack of cash and I was wondering
if you thought about this hesitation I
brought up which I'm sure you have sure
yeah so obviously poverty is not the
only problem in people's lives right but
if you see
if we see a building that's on fire well
what do you do right you the first thing
you do is you you call the firefighters
and you know they sprinkle water over it
that's that's what you do first and then
you start thinking about all the other
problems and that's also how I think
about poverty I mean poverty just makes
everything worse there's there's even
evidence that you know it impedes your
cognitive ability it impedes your
ability to think in the long term to
make plans for the future and um sure
there will always be some people who
will waste their basic income but
usually when it comes to richer people
we're not worried about that we just
called venture capital and we say oh
sure go on and and experiment try new
things and um yes we should consider
basic income as venture capital for the
people
um I think in general it will be a
pretty great investment and especially
when it comes to Poverty there's there's
a lot of evidence that it actually costs
us
more money uh poverty is it's just too
expensive we can't really afford it
that's what I always believe whenever
whenever I'm say San Francisco or Los
Angeles I'm always astonished to see so
many homeless people on the streets
and what I see there is just an
extraordinary waste of human capital I
mean so many people who could have
fulfilling lives and who could go on and
contribute to the common good but there
they are
I mean we have a homeless population in
the Netherlands here as well but you
would have to walk around for hours in
Amsterdam to see as many homeless people
as you see in five minutes in San
Francisco probably so this gets but this
gets back to something I was saying
earlier which is you know particularly
in those cities the San Francisco and
Los Angeles
um the issue is actually not a lack of
cash that's being spent to try to
ameliorate the problem it's the way the
cash is being spent to try to ameliorate
the problem I mean there's some
statistics which I
don't have offhand but like the amount
of money that it costs to build a quote
unquote affordable housing unit in Los
Angeles is just you know mind-boggling
in terms of the hundreds or you know I
don't know if it's Millions but it's
it's it's far more than it would cost to
sort of rent every single person who's
on the streets
a room yeah a hotel yeah you know and
and that's
you know that's a systemic issue of
and the United States I think it's
unusual in this systemic issue right
it's an extraordinary affluence Society
no matter what it's no matter what its
issues are right it is in Aggregate and
extraordinary yeah society that often
spends money publicly in ways that are
mind-bogglingly stupid
yeah yeah as opposed to now
the hypocrisy is astounding as well
right we've all wrapped the uh time to
build essay by Mark and reason and I
actually love that piece and like yeah
let's build and then you hear that this
is the guy who basically he's spending a
lot of money to lobby for no
construction in his own neighborhood
right right and I don't wanna I don't
want to dunk on American Dreams and
specifically because maybe we're like
that as well I mean this this nimbianism
is is rampant nimby's been replaced by
banana have you heard the new
is not in my backyard banana is billed
absolutely nothing anywhere near anyone
(Laughter)
haven't heard that either I like that I
like that yeah there's a really great
book uh by Paul Saban called public
citizens
um about what happened in the US
basically since the 60s and the 70s and
about also how the
um how Progressive and specifically
Progressive lawyers contributed to this
so uh the book is that's why I earlier
mentioned Ralph Nader
um uh it's it's mostly about Ralph Nader
and obviously they uh this this this
consumer's movement or you know Public
public advocacy movement
um uh had a lot of Victories did a lot
of good but then also created a huge
amount of regulations for example
environmental regulations that are now
being used to block uh efforts to do
something about climate change it's very
very ironical
um and that's that's a real big problem
specifically in the United States you
guys just have way too many lawyers man
too many lawyers uh if if you're young
and if you're ambitious you want to do
something I mean the stupidest thing you
can do is to go to Harvard Law School
don't go there don't do it I mean do
something useful please there's just way
too too many people with the legal
mindset and again the numbers here are
astonishing five of the ten lost
presidents uh went to law school a third
of the House of Representatives half of
the Senate what's going on there right
these are all people who have been
schooled in procedures in rules in
regulations they know how to say no they
know how to stop things from happening
and you basically have a whole class of
of nimbies or bananas it's like the
Banana class
um so
that seems like a a big problem to me
um I don't know there should be some
kind of law against lawyers okay I do
have one personal example that might
cheer you up a bit my
um brother-in-law went to Yale law
school and now works on affordable
housing in New York city so there is at
least one lawyer out there who's doing
the opposite shout out to Roger sure
they're they're not all bad and look
every movement there are so many
different roles to play in every
movements right and it's not enough just
to shout on the south lines or to occupy
things
um which I'm I mean which is necessary
as well we need the extinction
rebellions as well but we also need
people with the
uh what's it called like an acceptance
of of plotting is that a word that
you're just willing to
do the homework and to know the
nitty-gritty and all the bureaucratic
details the blocking and tackling about
like you there are people that just have
to do the work
um you know as we wrap up I wanted to
maybe have you highlight a little
because it's very much in the spirit of
the progress Network this idea of
maybe infectious utopianism or you've
infectious idealism in a world where
partly why I created this Collective is
the feeling that
we were essentially you know we being
Western culture but in in many ways uh
one of the downsides of the pandemic
which there were many is it kind of
plunged everybody everywhere into a kind
of collective Gloom
um like there used to be some sort of
bifurcation between the Gloom and the
Western world and the optimism of China
or India or elsewhere and I still think
that's probably a little more prominent
there but we're kind of in a you know
a doom scrolling cycle not a
idealism cycle uh yeah and you know I
wonder you know when you look at Europe
now for instance post-brexit with
Ukraine
uh when you look around the world do you
find that you are
kind of Ally your your early
abolitionist you know a lone voice
crying in the wilderness waiting for a
change that you may or may not live to
see or do you feel like
there is in fact a a thaw in the in the
global freeze of pessimism I think
there's been a massive change in the
Zeitgeist I've recently went to my old
student Society where I was a member 10
years ago 10 12 years ago and I was
astounded by the difference I mean kids
at least here in the Netherlands are way
more idealistic than than we were just
just 10 15 years ago
when it comes to climate when it comes
to inequality when it comes to the way
we treat animals so much more awareness
um so I think that's real progress and
um as you said that can be infectious
um I recently wrote a small essay about
um the psychology of resistance Fighters
during the second World War I was really
interested in that question like what
what
what determined why some people had the
courage to hide Jews and and most other
s didn't and it turns out that there
isn't such a thing as the psychology of
the resistance hero there just isn't
it's it's a complete cross-section of
the population men women young old Rich
poor educated not not educated it's just
you can't say anything about that but
there is a sociology of resistance it
turns out that it was highly infectious
and around 96 of people who were asked
to join the resistance said yes and that
often it started with something small
like you didn't
um you know salute you didn't bring the
uh Hitler um greeting or you um you know
did something small you brought around
an illegal newspaper or something like
that and then it started growing and
then then I read another study about uh
the origins of the British Industrial
Revolution you've probably seen this one
by the historian Anthony house uh if I
pronounce that correctly
um he studied what is it like the
biography of of 1700 inventors who
played a really important role
in the 1700s and the 1800s and he
basically came to the same conclusion
there wasn't really a psychology of the
inventor but there was a sociology and
the sociology was that it was infectious
like like all these important inventors
they knew someone who had also come up
with something new so they got the idea
from somewhere that you don't have to
keep doing the way you've always done
them right you can change it he calls
this the improving mentality and I think
that this idea that there's no such
thing as a psychology but it's more like
sociology I think that's so liberating
right you don't have to be
um this this great person that you've
always been ever you know since since
high school or whatever no you can be
affected by the idea of of improving the
world and playing your part and being
morally ambitious
um and
what I see and what I would like to
contribute to is that virus spreading
further and uh I think that's what you
guys are also doing so uh thanks for
your work
yeah this is like the record bregman the
generous meme instead of Richard Dawkins
the selfish meme or like the utopian
meme or something like that yeah yeah
exactly so Rucker as we we totally come
to an end here I just want to give us an
overview of what you're working on now
sure yeah so as a historian I've always
been really interested in this question
what does it mean to stand on the right
side of History
we can look back on the suffragettes on
the abolitionists and we're very
impressed with their courage uh and
their fight in the face of
you know all this evil and then we know
the the tremendous price that they often
had to pay for their activism and for
their courage and then I then I wonder
who are the abolitionists of today who
are the people that are now being
dismissed as utopians uh idiots or maybe
even dangerous activists but who will be
seen by the historians of the future as
as the heroes
um so that's that's the focus of my my
next book
um I'm interested in well what what
actually made the evolutionist effective
I mean Zachary you mentioned that they
were uh you know very very idealistic
but I was actually surprised by how
pragmatic they were as well
uh extremely pragmatic actually for
example Thomas Clarkson one of the main
British abolitionists he was really good
at what they call moral reframing and
basically used different arguments to
um defend the same idea so for example
with um this the abolition of the slave
trade which he was arguing for you would
you would guess that they would mainly
say look the slave trade is horrible
because there are so many human beings
suffering incredibly right so many
Africans who are being tortured that's
what we would assume that the
Abolitionist said but actually they
focused on a different kind of argument
especially in British Parliament
um Thomas Clarkson discovered that
around 20 of the white Sailors died
during the voyage
the white Sailors actually the
perpetrators and then Thomas Clarkson
realized that that would be a much more
powerful political argument in
Parliament to use now for us that's
pretty bizarre right that they use
mainly use that argument
but it was super effective uh it was one
of the reasons why the the prime
minister at the time was like oh now now
I understand this slave trade is really
bad 20 of our guys are dying on these
voyages that's horrific
so I think that is uh
really powerful lesson that in the fight
against Injustice
winning is is our duty right it's it's
really important to to to get these
actual results and and and that makes
the uh the case of the British
abolitionist really interesting because
they were super idealistic that's true
but they were very pragmatic as well
they wanted to win
foreign
look forward to uh seeing that arise and
I guess the next couple years right
we'll we'll yeah we'll take some time
it's a lot of work writing a book oh and
yeah it's true anyway thank you so much
for your time and your thoughts and your
work and for being part of the progress
Network and we will I hope continue
these conversations
over the next months and years
thanks so much for having me Emma that
was a provocative conversation with a
unusual soul I'd certainly like this
idea and of course we would like this
idea of
ideas being infectious
um ideas being
something that build to a critical mass
and then suddenly spreads like wildfire
in a way that
isn't always expected and not always
predictable and and then there you have
it which means that a certain climate of
unremitting Gloom can suddenly give way
to something else and I like the fact
that someone who has a critical and
Progressive you know different from the
progress Network Progressive and kind of
the
the left sense of the word Progressive
um
is not as Rucker talked about you know
necessarily purely
focusing on problems and what they're
against
yeah he is definitely a rare bird in
that way you know most people when they
think about the left they think about
the unrelenting focus on all the bad
things that we need to fix
um so he's rare and
I feel like he also comes to things with
a real like cheerfulness of demeanor
you're like sometimes you meet people
and okay I never met Peter Singer
personally but sometimes you meet people
and uh they have infectious ideas to
share with a demeanor that doesn't match
but Rucker is like I don't know like you
really you understand why he you know
he's been so popular and his ideas have
gone on because I think he just really
approaches them with this kind of
enthusiasm for wanting to do good
um
and I think he's right too that the
Zeitgeist has started to change around
that I think I've seen it in the last
couple of years
um that we've launched the progress
Network
you know we did you and I did an
interview and I can't remember who it
was with with
um
uh a podcast team
uh that was let's say younger and I
remember with them at least some of our
attempts to talk about things in a more
you know not optimistic but the kind of
the way that we're trying to talk about
things in the patch while the progress
Network right like more problem solving
more focused on what's working more
focus on things that are kind of better
than we think uh that struck a really
difficult note with them you know they
were
almost angry
and felt again that that somehow that
Focus was undermining the urgency of how
bad things are and
it would be great to juxtapose the
conversation we just had with with that
sensibility as a way of saying you can
simultaneously be urgent
about things that are systemically
broken
and and not be
completely despairing and dyspeptic
yeah and and just just keeping
perspective right like it's it's
remarkable how quickly our perspective
starts to warp just depending like
Rucker is talking about if you make
median wage I think he talks
specifically about the Netherlands
you're in the top three point five
percent of wealth in the world right
like
wow wow
um that means I think he points out that
you have a lot of responsibility and
it's crazy that you could be in that
position in the Europe or us or
elsewhere and simultaneously adopt this
attitude of almost constant complaint
that you see sometimes on the left and I
say that with love uh you know I don't
say that to take anyone down but it's
it's fascinating how those two things
can coexist
so shall we turn to uh what's going on
in the world let's do it okay so our
first piece of news that we have for
today
um is actually from a couple months ago
but I think it really passed under the
radar and it has to do with the
conversation that we have with Ruger
about the power of money Congress in a
bipartisan fashion actually voted to
increase funding uh to the global fund
to fight AIDS tuberculosis and malaria
um solids funding from the US grow from
1.6 billion to 2 billion if that's uh
more than 28 year over year boost and
what's cool about that is because the
way the fund operates uh if a U.S
pledges more money the other countries
in the fund are also kind of forced to
pledge more money which just means more
money going to something that has been
proven to work pretty well the global
fund says something like 50 million live
saves over the last I think maybe 30
years that hasn't been super studies we
don't know that number is exactly
correct but a lot of lives have been
saved by that money this is all about
I'm saving lives there's no ambiguity
here working with Partners to ensure
that all communities are healthy and
strong at least have a shot at being
healthy and strong
but people everywhere can live in
dignity
it's hard to maintain your dignity when
you look at your child and see that they
are sick or ill with a disease that you
can't control
it's difficult it shocks you and it
deprives you of your dignity that's why
the United States is proud to be a
founding member of the global fund and
over the past 20 years through our work
together it's estimated the global fund
is saved as you heard before 50 million
lives
and again that highlights and then we've
talked about two times on the show and
you've highlighted in the newsletter
which is
the the primary focus on what goes on in
Washington is all the things that don't
work and and the law is not passed and
Congress being broken and sclerotic and
you know nothing happens and we talked
to Eric swalwell Congressman we talked
to Jeff Collier former governor of
Kansas we talked to Bob hertzberg who
was the outgoing Senate majority leader
in California
to try to highlight like there are all
these bills that are being passed all
the time out of in a bipartisan fashion
that we just don't pay attention to
mostly because they don't attract
controversy so you get this funding bill
for something that most people agree is
a good thing
and it doesn't get news because most
people agree it's a good thing and
therefore it's not news because everyone
agreed no one thought there weren't
hyperbolic statements they just decided
this was something we need to spend
money on we need to support globally
there's a big consensus that this is
something that we have the money for
that we should use the money for and so
we're going to spend it that way all of
which is great but then it attracts no
notice because it's sort of seen as
uninteresting and that's part of the
problem
it's too simple there are no hard edges
to sink our teeth did too but we're
doing our best here on the podcast
so after that
um the right to disconnect might be
coming to Africa so the right to
disconnect for people who don't know um
it's the laws that are in place for
employers not being able to contact
employees after hours or on weekends it
may be difficult for employers to call
their employees After official working
hours
has introduced amendments to the
Employment Act to protect employees from
working beyond the stipulated eight
working hours or even calling them after
hours the move is however receiving
stronger position in both a central
organization of trade unions and the
Federation of Kenya employers warning
that this could lead to job losses and
scare away potential investors but as
Brenda Zeta rodito now reports employees
on the other hand have welcomed the
proposed legislation
right now France Italy Belgium Spain
Ireland and parts of Canada and
Australia have enacted laws around this
and now Kenya is going to be the first
African nation
um to discuss it so Parliament is
discussing it this month we'll see if
they pass anything but uh
I think that most people listening to
this would probably be in support
does this mean I won't be able to reach
you now well great you know Grace has
not signed on also we have a time zone
difference going on which made things
yes how is that going to work
which hours will you have a right to
disconnect from that's a really good I
didn't think about that in terms of
remote work and how that functions let's
say you're a French employee working
outside of France
can your French employer contact you I
don't know I'll have to look into that
wow it's a it's a wrinkle it's a
disturbance in the force
what's to do about remote work globally
disconnected time zones in a right to
disconnect law okay we're gonna have to
table that one for the time being
things to think about going forward yep
and another thing to think about going
forward so this is another Trend very
much so on the early side
um Switzerland is the only country so
far that allows the therapeutic use of
psilocybin so sure you know the stuff
that's in shrooms the active ingredient
in shrooms and MDMA to treat depression
for psilocybin and PTSD with uh MDMA and
uh they do it in a very limited fashion
and then people listening to the podcast
probably know that Oregon and the US
also has
um they also allow that
Australia just became the next country
to allow it MDMA and psilocyburn
psychedelics found in magic mushrooms
and ecstasy and now said to be used on
patients with mental health conditions
across Australia this is a
groundbreaking announcement for the TGA
they're really taking the initiative and
leading the world a former Defense Force
Chief has been campaigning to use MDMA
on Veterans people I work with in my
not-for-profit uh post-traumatic stress
disorder Australia New Zealand tell me
that the only way we will ever cure
post-traumatic stress disorder in people
is to is the use of psychedelic drugs
today's drug approval will only be
prescribed to people with post-traumatic
stress disorder and depression starting
in the summertime in 2023 psychiatrists
will be able to prescribe MDMA and
psalocybin there's a lot of rules around
that and they're kind of like they're
not sure how exactly it's all going to
work but they are and it seemed to me
that there's a lot of surprise around
Australia being essentially the first
slash second country to do this
it has to say one of the things that's
happened in my lifetime that has
surprised me perhaps the most is how
quickly uh attitudes about the
legalization of formerly illegal drugs
has moved culturally I suppose that and
kind of broad acceptance of gay marriage
right the two things that seemed as late
as
uh the early 2000s to be a generation
away from having any you know major
cultural change and
and look this I'm not saying that as an
advocate of everyone should go out and
you know take chocolate shrooms it's
from the perspective of most of these
substances whether they're legal
substances like ssris or valium or MDMA
or mushrooms or acid or pot you know
they're all uh abusable and they're all
usable and they're usable from both
sort of pleasurable reasons uh and
they're usable for therapeutic reasons
and figuring out the risks and figuring
out the uses is complicated and requires
a lot of time effort hopefully with some
degree of
neutrality meaning without a priori
Prejudice about where the study of those
results will lead I mean that's a
idealism that I know isn't happening
anytime soon neutrality and the study of
drug side effects is not something we're
going to get to anytime soon but at
least it's a it's an opening where we're
both simultaneously scrutinizing drugs
that are legal you know that are FDA
authorized and taking a harder look at
are those things potentially harmful
even though they've been deemed helpful
and on the flip side looking at things
that we've thought were harmful and
wonder if they could be helpful and I
think that and a kind of a lessening of
law enforcement and puritanism and the
amount of money and time that we spend
creating an endless cycle of of a
incarceration in the United States
around the prevance of the use of the
selling of you know drugs that are
classified as illegal I think all that
has been just a massively positive
change a lot more work to do but still
that's funny that you you bring up the
change because I was um just on a
podcast and then the host was in its 50s
or 60s and I was talking about how I got
into Buddhism which happens to involve
some use of psychedelics and I said
something like you know nothing hard
just LSD shrooms kind of thing and he
was like well in my day that was a hard
drug I was like well you know not
anymore I think like in my generation
for sure it's it's just considered it
does have this flavor of like it helps
with psychiatric things it's it's not
considered to be that kind of hard drug
anymore
um and I'm very curious to see where
this is going to go in the next 10 20
years
right and the trends clearly are to
um remove
the state's use of
of power and violence to enforce a
regime that criminalizes the use of
these substances which is very different
than saying you should use them right
um the non-criminalization of alcohol is
not a an invocation of everyone should
go drink it's simply saying that this is
not an area where the state
should be involved and in you know
creating cycles of crime
and Punishment around the use of them so
I think that's an incredibly
positive development in the world today
and uh yeah and Australia sounds like
it's being very careful about it for for
those a human who may be hearing this
and worrying about it but if you're an
Australian you may be able to ask your
psychiatrist about it so that's it for
today
we look forward to uh
engaging all of you for the next months
as we continue these conversations
we're certainly here for suggestions so
go on to the progress Network
.org site and if you want to send us
ideas in addition to signing up for the
newsletter in addition to listening to
the podcast we are as they say all ears
we are listening to you guys and hope to
hear from you and thank you Zachary
thanks Emma until next time
foreign



## Keywords:
