---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cI7iyo2wv18
---

# Video
Naomi Klein and Vincent Bevins in Conversation
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cI7iyo2wv18)

## Transcript:
welcome to this hey Market live event
thank you so much for joining us my name
is Anthony arnov I'm the editorial
director of hey Market books and we
could not be more excited uh than we are
to have our two distinguished guests for
this important
conversation I'll just say that I think
the single two most important books to
understand our current political moment
in all of its
complexity are the two books that are uh
the subject of today's
conversation I will say a few words
about our our two speakers and our
format and then um we'll uh Get Off to
the Races Neil M Klein is the
award-winning author of international
bestsellers including this changes
everything the shock Doctrine no logo no
is not enough and on fire which have
been published in more than 35 languages
she's an associate a professor in the
department of geography at the
University of British Columbia the
founding co-director of ubc's Center for
climate justice as well as an honorary
professor of media and climate at
Ruckers University her writing has
appeared in leading Publications around
the world and she is a columnist for the
guardian her newest book published
September 12th by FSG is doppelganger a
trip into the mirror World which is a
New York Times bestseller and a New York
Times notable book of 2023
Vincent bevans is an award-winning
journalist and correspondent he's
covered southeast Asia for the
Washington Post reporting from across
the entire region and paying a special
attention to the legacy of the 1965
massacre in Indonesia he previously
served as the Brazil correspondent for
the Los Angeles Times also covering
nearby parts of South America and before
that he worked for the financial times
in London bevans is the author of The
Jakarta method Washington anti-communist
Crusade and the mass murder program that
shaped our world his newest book
published October 3rd by public affairs
is if we burn the mass protest decade
and the missing
Revolution we're possibly going to have
some time for questions after uh Naomi
and Vincent speak and uh have some
dialogue with one another um if there's
going to be time for that uh it would be
at the end of the program so feel free
to throw any question questions you
might have into the chat uh and we'll
consider those uh depending on how the
conversation is going if time allows uh
to kick off each uh Vincent and na are
going to speak for around five minutes
about their books uh and then have a
dialogue and with that I'll turn it over
to you
Vincent okay thank you so much to
everyone who's involved everyone who's
invited me to Naomi uh to hey Market um
I imagine this is something that uh know
we might hear often but I first read her
book her first started reading her books
in high school I think I put this in the
beginning of of my new book if you if if
we burn so I'm I'm truly honored and
grateful um so what I'll do yeah is I'll
try to explain where if we burn came
from and what it tries to do and then
look forward to hearing the same for
Naomi and then having a conversation
about the two works because I think they
both choose quite interesting and unique
ways of of coming at the world um very
different ways of coming at the world
and indeed different parts of the world
but we end up in in a lot of overlapping
places so I'm really looking forward to
the
conversation so if we burn is a book
about Mass protests and their unintended
consequences um this is a story which is
personal to me um in 2013 I was working
as a foreign correspondent in sou Paulo
the largest city in South America
covering a set of protests organized by
anarchists and leftists against the rise
in the bus fair in that
city um they had organized four protests
uh uh three protests which were quite
successful at shutting down the city
streets but had not convinced The
Establishment and certainly not the
media in the country um to come over to
their side on the morning of the fourth
protest Brazil's media called for a
Crackdown on these on these
protests and the Crackdown came uh the
brutal repression that went viral very
quickly and I think it is notable um
also hit journalists like me and people
that I knew in Brazil's media went viral
shocking uh uh uh uh many people in the
country and Brazil's media changed their
approach to what was happening on the
streets they went from saying this is a
group of punks and anarchists that we
need to clean off the streets to this is
a patriotic Uprising in defense of the
right to rise up in defense of something
um and as millions of people people came
onto the streets they came into the
streets with a new ideas as to what was
happening on the streets uh these new
arrivals entered into verbal and then
physical conf confrontation with the
original organizers the leftists that
had been on the streets uh for the first
four
protest and eventually these new
arrivals that we could now recognize as
the beginnings of a farri movement in
Brazil as the beginnings of the
bolsonaro movement in Brazil um
violently expelled the original
organizers from the streets just a few
days after this this shift in public
opinion now in this strange pressure
cooker of June 2013 in Brazil uh in this
strange ball of energy that is Unleashed
onto the streets and with and that
nobody knows what to do with including
the original organizers various groups
and movements are born which help to
over the next few
years call for the impeachment of
democratically erected democratically
democratically erected sorry one more
time Democrat Al elected uh president
doar Rusev who was the first woman
president of
Brazil they called for they helped to
support a movement which put Lula in
jail and then they ultimately helped to
elect ay bolsonaro in 2018 so jumping
forward 5 years it appears that the
people of Brazil asked for one thing on
the streets of June 2013 and then got
the opposite so like many other people
that lived through this many people who
lived in Brazil uh over this time period
when other kinds of explosions like this
unexpected apparently spontaneous huge
bursts of people into the streets from
2013 on to the end of the decade in 2020
I paid very close attention thinking
well is it going to go the same way that
it did in Brazil uh I hope it doesn't
sometimes it did sometimes it did not
sometimes there was was somewhere in the
middle but this was a concern of mine
because this strange Paradox of what had
happened in Brazil 2013 really haunted
me as I think it haunts a lot of my my
peers and friends that were living
through it and then I also began to Look
Backwards I began to look at the
explosions that began uh in North Africa
in 2010 and 2011 because I came to the
conclusion that not only in 2013 but
after the explosion in Brazil that it
would not have gone the way it did if
people in the The Press including people
in my class the the international
correspondence task with covering the
the country did not interpret June 2013
as if it were somehow like the so-called
Arab Spring so what did I do with this
uh very specific uh uh set of concerns I
decide to construct a history um I
decided on a project which was perhaps
silly in its ambition I just started to
tell the story of the decade 2010 to
2020 as if the most important thing to
happen in that decade was mass protests
that got so big that they fundamentally
destabilized or overthrew existing
governments I think you might as well
tell the story of that of that decade as
if it is the thing that um is the most
important um obviously you cannot
actually tell the story of a global
decade so like every every history is
built around a set of concerns it
excludes and it includes based on what
matters to us now in the present um and
the big question around which I build
this narrative history constructed
through 200 and 250 interviews with
people in 12 countries is how was it
possible that so many mass protests
apparently led to the opposite of what
they asked for um so I think that the
answer there's no answer the answer is
in the in the the story itself it's in
the book and I hope people come to the
book with different experiences
different ideas um and different
concerns and come away from it with
different answers and I'm happy to start
to discuss the the the the themes that
emerge but that's what I tried to do I
tried to build the history of that
decade around this strange Paradox that
I live through and that I thought think
matters to how we will live uh the
decades uh in the future so thank thanks
for your interest and I'll and and I'll
pass it off to
to thanks so much um well Anthony and
everybody at hey Market um Vincent I
really want to thank you for the
incredible contribution uh that this
book represents um and I can't wait to
to dig into it with you I think it was
Ryan Grim who pointed out in his
interview with you after his interview
with me for for deconstructed that he
noticed these
parallels in our two texts um that maybe
we hadn't noticed ourselves and so a big
thanks to Ryan as well because that I
think is what what what what birthed the
idea of this
conversation so doppelganger is actually
a little bit more difficult to to
summarize um in five minutes than than
than my previous books were uh simply
because it is more a work of uh creative
non-fiction than my than my previous
books were sort of traditional um
non-fiction text that had a sort of
thesis uh upfront and then you know a a
series of chapters that built on that se
thesis and attempted to defend it and
and then summarized it at the end
doppelganger is much more of a winding
weirder tale it still attempts to do
what I try to do with my books which is
create a political map of the moment um
but it's a weirder map and the journey
is kind of the point on this one um so
so sorry if I fail in advance to to to
to boil it down to to just a few minutes
um it does use the fact that I have a
real life doppelganger as a starting
point as somebody who I have been
perennially confused and conflated with
for oh these many uh years going decades
uh the non-fiction writer Naomi wolf who
during covid became a very active
purveyor of medical
misinformation um this is not the
subject of the book it is really a
device that I use to get at different
kinds of doubling and mirroring that I
think are reshaping our world including
our social movement so I look at the way
um and this is a theme that I explore in
my first book that Vincent read when he
was in high school making me feel very
old um but the rise of of Lifestyle
branding you know when I wrote no logo
in the 1990s the idea um that every
Corporation should be a brand um was a
relatively new idea and regular people
and social movements did not openly
think of themselves as Brands
celebrities maybe but not just everyday
people so of course social media changed
this changes this we all have marketing
firms in our back pockets in the form of
our iPhones and we now have this ability
to perform a kind of commodity version
of ourselves and so do our social
movements right so this is one of the
this is a kind of doppelganger because
that that that that brand version of us
that brand version of a social movement
um you know with it with with its
protected uh um slogans and hashtags is
is is is both us and not us is both our
movements and not our movements it's a
market in the same way that marketing
always misrepresents um and always is an
act of repetition so the book explores
what is this doing to our relationships
with one another how is it shaping
the kinds of movements that we have um
also look at other kinds of of of
doppelgangers doubling including the way
AI uh creates this kind of mimicry
machine um where it seems like we're
creating new things um but actually all
we're able to do is sort of endlessly
replicate what already exists um and
then it gets into the way politics
increasingly feels like a mirror World a
sort of society split into um and
increasingly uh reactive where rather
than having um uh U movements that are
defined by a legible set of principles
and values that are embodied regardless
of circumstances increasingly I think we
have um something leftish and I don't
think it is an actual left uh that
responds to whatever the right is doing
in a very reactive way you know I write
in the that that we we kind of are the
yin to each other's Yang um so if
they're against something we're for it
and this and vice versa and this became
I think particularly acute in the period
that I look at closely in the book which
is the period where where you had the
most um kind of intrusive covid Health
measures um and when the wri went off
into conspiracy land about vaccines and
and and um lockdowns and you know my
Doppel gang are talked about this as a
plot of the Chinese Communist Party to
bring a social credit system to the West
she called it a fascist coup and so on
then the response from a lot of
progressives was very kind of obedient
you know roll up your sleeve get your
shot as if this was the sum total of how
we thought our governments should
respond to the pandemic and of course
the left has much more ambitious ideas
than that um so I look at the way
there's been um a a co-optation of a lot
of core issues including critiques that
I came up in of big Pharma big Tech
corporate consolidation more generally
and these issues kind of get left
unattended and then figures like Bannon
or Georgia Malone absorb them into a
far-right agenda um and that is a big
problem because these are potent issues
we know them to be potent we've
organized around them over the years
we've seen them bring um uh you know
millions of people into the streets
worldwide and if there isn't a left
agenda that is speaking to public rage
at you incredible levels of corporate
consolidation and many of the movements
that you track in the book Vincent are
were such movements if we don't if those
movements are no longer really speaking
to that then the ter the terrain is ripe
for for right-wing cooptation and we are
in this moment where we are seeing uh
the farri um surge around the world um
so the final uh uh third of the book uh
it you know I call the section
shadowlands um some people have referred
to this as the Jewish parts of the book
uh and this is I you know my most Jewish
book I have to confess um so this mainly
refers to two chapters um that have been
feeling uh painfully relevant of late
one is called the Nazi in the mirror and
the other is called the unshakable
ethnic double and they wrestle with many
themes uh um many different kinds of
doubling including the Persistence of
anti-Semitism as an ancient conspiracy
Theory and kind of an ancient double
that is projected onto all Jews Philip
Roth called it you know shy called that
figure after after Shakespeare's
Merchant of Venice character um uh and
it also looks at the dangers of a
particular kind of trauma inforged
trauma forged identity Politics as they
play out in
Israel so I get into many of the ongoing
debates about how the Nazis were
influenced by European colonialism and
racial segregation in the Americas um
into what uh Deo and M Cesar wrote about
as as the Nazis as a kind of
doppelganger um and Hitler as a sort of
as a shadow um of uh European Colonial
violence and how a failure to reckon
with those connections shaped and warped
Israeli history and exiled Palestinians
into an unbearable Purgatory that today
looks very much like hell on
Earth uh in literature and film
doppelganger stories often feature
characters trying to annihilate their
doubles so if you back to Dusty or Edgar
alen po you often have these
doppelganger stories where the where the
protagonist uh tries to kill their
doppelgangers tries to stab them or some
such and ends up stabbing themselves uh
so as a Jewish
person this is what I have long help
felt to be happening in Israel as it
moves further and further to the right
in attempting to banish and destroy the
quote other my people risk destroying
themselves in spirit if not in body so I
don't think we get out of any of this
unless we find powerful new and robust
models of solidarity that go beyond the
Branded self and the Branded identity
group um and so I think it's especially
important to have these kinds of spaces
to think critically about what
transformational movements can learn um
from the missteps and failures of the
past um I think it's our only hope so
Vincent I'm gonna I'm G to start with a
question for
you um you talked about about this
amazing assignment you gave to yourself
uh of looking at this decade of mass
protests and doing a a reportorial audit
of of of you know did they achieve what
they hope to achieve
um what is their legacy and looking
really unflinchingly at places where uh
where where the mirroring and
co-optation was so extreme that actually
ground was tangibly lost um so often
books that are critical of leftwing
movements are written from the outside
um whether by somebody who you know had
no involvement no stakes in them or
someone who was part of them but has
since seen the light and is kind of
blowing the whistle on all of their
failures um your book is written I think
I think I feel like from a place of of
comradeship a place of shared goals um
but it is unflinching in its critiques
and
evaluations it seems to come very much
from the tradition of uh uh you know
what Latin America in Latin America is
often called autocritica
self-criticism um as opposed to the more
North American call out um so I guess I
just wanted to ask you personally why
you felt it was so important to look
back in this particular kind of spirit
um uh to take this particular kind of
stock yeah um yeah thank you so much so
I absolutely hope that in every case uh
in the book um I start from a position
of sympathy I think it would be quite
disingenuous uh uh uh it would be
dishonest about my own position and I
think it would be quite ugly if I were
to start a chapter about people going to
the streets and risking their lives um
for what they conceive to be a better
world without starting from a position
of trying to understand this huge energy
that really exists to try to change the
world um and uh uh uh uh so at the same
time that I try to be as um sympathetic
and yet yet Perhaps comradely as
possible I don't choose theep the the
episodes based on my right so I I choose
them based on how big they get um I
choose the ones that really turn out to
be so apparently successful that they
either dislodge or destabilize an
existing government and so um that means
that they end up all all over the the
ideological map um they they're not all
things that are exactly where I want to
be but I think that we have to reckon
with this very obvious desire to change
the global system and everyone you know
there are different interpretations of
of what that means but if we look at the
amount of people that protest from 2010
to 2020 I think that there is a a clear
desire to change the global system and
then also to look where this led in each
individual case um for I think several
reasons um one it's just fundamental to
understand where we are now um I think a
lot of these cases were experienced as
euphoric Victory by the sort of global
public and then the journalists people
like me went away and we sort of lost
track of what happened even though the
long-term consequences of many of these
explosions are fundamental uh to where
we are now I think you know two of the
biggest geop geopolitical um ongoing
geopolitical crisis both in and around
Gaza and Ukraine are related to the 2011
and 2014 moments in North Africa and
Ukraine so reason one is this is is I
think it's this is a an important way to
get to 2020 and understand the nature um
of the global system as we as we Embark
in this new decade two
um
the willingness the desire to be the
decision to be unflinching and to ask
really what happened is something that I
found my interviewees were very excited
about it was the people that sat down
with me over four years of very
difficult conversations that often said
that they would not be doing it if I
were just going to try to figure out
what happened and what was the source of
these horrible uh experiences they their
desire to participate in the in the
project was a result of their belief
that there was something to be learned
from what we had been through um so the
the the book would not have been
possible or um imbued with the same
spirit I think if if the people that
spoke to me did not believe in getting
together across 10 13 however you want
to counted countries um and trying to
learn from the Tactical decisions that
were made because you know ingredient
one is there there's a huge amount of
desire to change the global system I
think that's clear
um but they wanted to learn from it and
then finally I think that in the long
long long term these aren't necessarily
failures yet I mean so some of the some
of the cases in the in the book lead to
short-term victories or or some modified
victories um but in the long long long
term I many many people would like to
see a world in which they look back upon
some of these uprisings as the beginning
of a bigger Victory but again that only
happens if um they believe many
interview he told me um something has
learned from what happens and and this
tactical adjustment uh takes place
so again so I'll ask you also a question
about
Choice um I looked at apparent losses or
apparent you know
setbacks um you look at a lot of people
that are written off as lost by many
people in the mainstream or or or or
left of center establishment in the
United States you look at so the
question is why look at what some people
would call conspiracist or nut jobs
people that have you know gone off the
deep end Why Try to to understand what
what drives this rather than you know
I'm playing it Devil's eye perhaps it's
obvious rather than just saying okay 20%
of North Americas lost their minds
whatever that was that country with you
know United States and Canada were in
say in the first place we got to figure
out something else uh some some other
revolutionary subject which is important
why try to understand what was fueling
this rather than just insisting that
they go away or in an extreme case just
asking our Tech overlords to deplatform
them forever and pretend like they don't
exist
yeah um it's a good question uh yeah I
think you might be lowballing it on the
20% especially in the US uh you know I I
I would have I would get these questions
a bit on book tour particularly in the
UK and a sort of a very snotty
aristocratic accent of like why give
them attention as if we continue to be
we you know you know liberals on in sort
of Legacy Media are continuing to be The
Gatekeepers of attention um as if there
are not is you know platforms that are
in many cases many times larger that are
being developed by figures like uh you
know uh May Jordan Peterson Joe Rogan um
you know then than what's what's even
offered by you know Legacy Media like
CNN um so my doppa gang or wolf was
deplatformed uh and and and her
deplatforming was much cheered by by
liberal Twitter uh she's since back on
uh under musk but but uh because I had
decided to try to understand her and pay
attention to her and also because I
didn't have a choice because when she
would go on Fox news with Tucker Carlson
um you know I would hear about it
because people would think it was me and
they would get very angry at me so I was
aware that after she had seemingly been
deleted from from you know polite
liberal Society she was getting access
to to to platforms much larger than she
had before precisely because she was one
of these ex- liberals willing to um to
say that that that that the left had
descended into fascism under Joe Biden
um and so I started to listen to her on
Fox and in particular on Steve bannon's
Daily Show which has a huge following
where she would sometimes be on every
single day and you know so on a basic
level I pay attention because you know
this is a you know when it comes to
somebody like benon I mean I think he
has a track record of showing that he
can change our world like we can ignore
him but that doesn't mean that he's not
going to continue to be a strategist for
people like Donald Trump and you know we
will we we will we will have to live in
the world that they create and and
Bannon is a very internationalist figure
right uh you know when he was ousted
from Trump's white house because I think
Trump felt he was being
upstage he went off and woved together a
network of far-right parties that
includes uh bolaro that includes uh
Georgia Malone and and Victor Orban and
and you know he he um I think barakus
calls it the Nationalist
International um uh they take
internationalism very seriously they
trade strategies they look at what works
in one National context and apply it in
another you know transphobia gets tons
of traction in Brazil it pops up in
Italy right um and you know that's
partly because
of the sort of network that Bannon is
creating I was really struck when I
would listen to him every
day that he had more international
coverage than a lot of liberal media
that he was covering what was you know
what was happening and and I didn't
trust his coverage but he was it was not
nearly as kind of parochial an insular
as a lot of North American liberal media
is um so I guess we have to pay
attention to it because they're powerful
um us not giving them attention atton
does not mean that they go away like we
can't just like close our eyes and
ignore them and imagine that we still
you know like control the spigot of
attention
um and also I think as as um you know a
lifelong leftist I was really struck
by the ways that Bannon in particular
was taking issues that I that are
familiar to me as a leftist and and
absorbing them into this very nefarious
far right asoph obic
transphobic uh um you know Neo fascist
agenda so like sometime sometimes he he
I you know people may have heard me talk
about this before but you know I think
the moment where my blood ran truly cold
was when I was listening to his show and
he played this audio
Montage of um like MSNBC and CNN during
the pandemic and and it was just
different different ho different hosts
and and intros and out outros to to big
shows going brought to you by fizer
brought to you by Mna um and and and he
said something to the effect of you know
it's by the rich for the rich and
against you um and there was something
about that that was so familiar from the
teachings of the alter globalization
movement and I was just struck by the
fact that you know post Bernie there
really didn't seem to be that much
discussion of the oligarch class of the
billionaires of corporate
consolidation and he is just a master of
absorbing the issues that we leave
unattended he did it with free trade in
2016 and I was watching him do it with
big Pharma with with big EG with big Tac
and you know I think I think we really
should pay attention when our like it's
it like we can't stop the right from
co-opting parts of our agenda but what
we can do is we can make them less
available for co-optation by speaking to
them
ourselves yeah
fantastic no fantastic and that is
um very convincing in the book so I
really enjoyed not only the points of
unexpected overlap with my concerns even
though I'm coming at a different thing
but but that part is is quite convincing
the the the ways in which when we you
know mainstream media Central left um
you know those of us that consider
ourselves you know acceptable thought
leave leave an issue entirely ignored uh
they're not it's not going to be ignored
someone else is going to go go out and
grab it um so let me ask another
question but I think that is I think
related to your work and also mine yours
uh of course coming first uh and this in
this in this case and influencing mind I
want to ask about the relationship of
these topics to The History of Violence
Empire uh and repression that I think we
both see as some of their preconditions
um it seems that to gang or is about an
AB an
ability for a lot of people to correctly
identify and effectively challenge
neoliberal
structures but also that this inability
itself is precisely or can be linked to
neoliberal subjectivity the types of
person that is intentionally
individualized always concentrating on
themselves viewing viewing the self as a
business or a personal brand and
suspicious of any Collective action
right so it seems that there's not only
this big structure but there's the type
of individual that it's formed that runs
over here to these easy answers uh or
just turns back on itself rather than
than um um looking over here at the big
at the structure that that is really
oppressing them um and so as we both you
know your book um the shock Doctrine
very famously explores um neoliberalism
didn't just pop out of nowhere did not
appear naturally on planet Earth uh
people with guns had to had to enforce
its arrival severe and widespread viol
was required for its implementation so
you know that's a long way of asking a
very simple question what's the
relationship between the shock Doctrine
and doel gangers do you think there's a
relationship between that violent
repression and the particular types of
responses that we now reach for to this
very um exploitative system um even
though they tend not to be very
effective yeah
um you know in lots of ways I think I
think this is a equal to to the shock
Doctrine I mean it also draws on some of
the material in no logo around personal
branding but but it it's a book really
about a State of Shock right because and
a State of Shock is um it is not just
something big and bad happening it's
something big and bad happening that we
don't understand we go into shock when
we don't really have a way of processing
an event that we experience um and so it
you know as a reporter I have covered a
lot of different uh um uh disasters
moments in
history where societies have gone into
that state and there has been a
deliberate attempt to exploit that in
order to push a you know Pro corporate
agenda um so shock Doctrine begins and
ends with Hurricane Katrina as an
example of that and looking at how that
that shock was used to to privatize the
school system and get rid of public
housing and so on um but as you say Alo
looks at the way neoliberalism was
introduced with blood and fire um and
and very deliberate strategies of
exploit of creating and exploiting
states of emergencies uh in the
aftermath of of military
coups um so I think you know it's it's
related in the sense that part of the
reason why conspiracy theories are
surging is that they are stories they
are stories that enter into a vacuum of
meaning and Co was a yeah Co was a novel
virus um I think be technology enabled a
kind of of shutdown for people who were
privileged enough to be shut down and be
served by workingclass People Who Bore
all the risks that you know that wasn't
possible during previous pandemics I
mean pre- Zoom pre- remote teaching pre
like all these these technology allowed
a kind of a
isolation that was not an was not an
option there have been pandemics before
but but but but not with these
technologies that enabled that that kind
of possible response um so I think that
that's part of the reason why why
conspiracy culture surged in the way
that it did um but in answer to your
question around the relationship between
violence and the particular kinds of
subjectivities or failure to respond I
mean this is something that really
preoccupies me
um you know I think that we agree that
that the the GL the left globally
experienced a kind of a politicide um
through through through Terror and and
and the global South experienced
it more violently than the global North
but there were Global North variations
of this that were overwhelmingly born by
um by black and brown people in the
global north um so in in the shock
Doctrine I quote the Great
um investigative journalist in Argentina
Rolo Walsh who was he was gunned down in
the streets of Buena um right after he
had written this very famous open letter
to the military hun where he um where he
where he outlined many many of their
physical and economic crimes like the
the disappearances the tortures um but
also the shock therapy that they enabled
and as I was writing the shock doct I
was very haunted by this line in the
open letter where he where he predicted
that it would take 20 to 30 years for
the left to recover from the terror that
they experienced um because you know
what politicide is trying to do is not
just affect the people being tortured or
the people being disappeared it's a form
of mass commmunication and it is a
warning it's saying if you step out of
line you will be next and so um it you
know Rola he was right in that almost
exactly 25 years after he wrote that
Argentina uh came into the streets in
2001 in one of these kind of mass
uprisings that you catalog in the book I
mean you don't catalog that one because
it's not in your decade but it is you
know they they overthrew five presidents
in a week it was one of those everyone
uh moments and it was it was
rejectionist in the sense that you know
the slogan was Casey Vantas it was you
know basic threw out all the bums
it was very ideological it's very you
know I thought about it a lot in reading
your book because it was like a lot of
it was informed by hor horizontalism
John
Holloway so it was another one of those
examples where PE okay okay just to back
up I think reading your book what what
what what is clear to me is that there
is a the thawing or the Resurgence right
that what that that Walsh was writing
about it doesn't happen all at once it's
almost like the body is able to fight
first right so in in in Argentina in
2001 people would say the dictatorship
just ended and a and and I was like I
was confused you know because I was like
well I thought it ended 12 years ago um
but what they were saying was they're
ready to fight again you know um and and
that Spirit of revolution is back but
the I think the effect of of of that ter
on the mind on the
imagination it takes longer to recover
right so people are willing to say no
but the ability to say yes to actually
put forward a vision of a socialist
future of an ecosocialist future of an
ecosocialist feminist future like really
say what do we want instead of this and
as you say in the book you know to have
a plan of how to get to A and B that
that took longer to shake off um so
yeah I want to ask this same question of
you which you know that that that you in
the Jakarta method um you you dug very
deeply into this wave of of anti-left
Terror um and and if we burn you are
tracking the the the social movements
that emerged after that Terror but how
do you think the terror shaped the the
other thing you know this theme that
runs through the books h of of wanting
to confront power but not take power not
you know say no but not say yes uh or or
or be a bit Cy about what the the yes is
is that really ideological or is that a
hangover of
Terror no that's a great question and I
think that
like most things like this it's both and
it overlaps to different degrees in
different countries um um over the
decade
um but I really like that I really like
the idea of of like a body politic or or
or a national political culture of
resistance getting back certain you know
certain muscles come back first or
there's the thing that's easy to do now
but it's not easy to do this later and
it takes quite a while because you do
see this I think you can trace this also
in the book you can look at the ways in
which they are some countries are
further along at at recovering from
decimation uh and others uh are are are
more
really responding or forced to respond
in a certain way by concrete decimation
so just to answer that question uh maybe
think a lot of different things at once
but to answer that question I'll try to
explain like the the core package around
which I build the book is the book is
really
about a recipe of tactics a very
particular form of response to Injustice
that becomes hegemonic in the 2010s
often sometimes seeing as the natural or
only way way uh to respond to Injustice
and that is the Apparently spontaneous
leaderless digitally coordinated
horizontally structured Mass protest in
public squares or in public uh spaces
and what I try to demonstrate is that
each of those things comes from
somewhere uh like like anything else
that humans do it's not written on
our on our hearts uh by God we've
learned it through processes of of
ideological um and material Evolution um
um and what happens in this
decade is that this particular package
becomes incredibly powerful and often
much more so than expected now the
relationship to the first book I think
does
shape the ways in which this becomes the
easiest thing to do or perhaps the only
possible to thing to do in certain
National circumstances so Argentina 2001
does matter quite a lot in the book I
only spent a couple paragraphs on it but
I spoke to a lot of people that lived
through it um and this is you know the
experience of Argentina 2001 really
informs the Brazilian movement um that
organizes the protest in 2013 they're
watching um uh documentaries about this
mov they're they're understanding what
happened and they really believe in
horizontalism as a guiding philosophy
they live in a democracy in which
perhaps it was possible actually to
enter into negotiations with the
government or to elaborate a set of uh
of Demands to uh the workers party at
least this is what the Workers Party
would say now this is what they told me
um in other cases that
horizontality the apparent spontaneity
the apparent uh leaderless the horizont
the the the the the ways in which uh it
really seemed to be a lot of individuals
coming together very quickly that didn't
know each other was not was less
ideologically driven it was the
consequence I'm thinking now of Egypt in
2011 uh it was the consequence of the
concrete
decimation of the structures that would
have done things perhaps slightly
differently it was a consequence of
Decades of death decimation of the
organized left Civil Society groups and
workingclass organizations that would
have been perhaps in a position to do
things differently so many Egyptians
would have loved to have some kind of a
Vanguard party or some kind of a
revolutionary agent or some kind of big
uh uh um and well structured labor
movement they just did it it had all
been crushed and so so what came
together very quickly and which was made
a little bit easier by social media was
this big Mass protest and so across the
decade I think we see the combination of
those two elements the material and the
IDE ideological you see in some cases
this is what is left this is what is
available um strikes which often help to
put real pressure on um um existing
governments in these moments of of
contestation proved impossible if the
labor movement had been all killed or or
destroyed um some kind of a leftwing
party maybe would have been able to say
you know we're going you know we we
would like to take power in in after uh
uh uh um uh this chaos in the case of
many countries in the global South East
people have been actually wiped out my
first book chakar method is about the
employment of mass murder against the
left or people accused of being the left
in 22 countries so to explain the where
this package comes from this very
specific recipe I think you have to have
both you have to look
at Terror Unleashed against the
organized
left against the organized working class
and against other civil society
organizations that happen starting in
the Cold War and through the ne liberal
era um but also the ideological factors
the elements that were I think um for
understandable reasons were quite
popular um at the beginning of the 20
Century and then into the 2010s thinking
that perhaps the internet changed the
rules that perhaps we could skip all of
the tough uh the tough movement building
that had often been historically
necessary um and that you know even that
ideological moment even that ideological
component can be linked perhaps to
McCarthyism to the to a generation that
experienced either any association with
the traditional left as dangerous um
politically dangerous in the United
States or tainted by um what they saw as
the failures of the Soviet Union so um
that's a long way of saying I think it's
both um I think it's
both um yeah thanks for that well I W to
I want to get
into the you know I think the scariest
part of this which is what what fills
the vacuum um created when there isn't a
political program understanding that you
know I think in some cases ideology um
there there is a there's a clear
ideological commitment to not putting
forward a political program you know in
Argentina like the the our dreams don't
fit on your ballot a sort of um and
there were fights about I mean I
remember it at the time of of you know
whe whether to put something for put
something forward in a in an electoral
context because there were elections
happening or whether just to leave that
space to the peronists and and that
ended up happening and they you know
were lucky in a way that some of the
movements were were that you that you
that you track in the book were not in
that you know there could have been a
right-wing Resurgence in that moment it
was very close it didn't happen now it
has right um but then you the the Egypt
example
is is an interesting one and you know I
think about Al AB Fat's writing and his
Incredible Book um uh you have not yet
been defeated where he goes over and
over and he's still in prison and and
and you know he has spent much of his
time in prison thinking about what went
wrong and doing that kind of autocritica
um and and and talks about
how right that right before the
elections they had they had been begun
this process that was modeled on the
South African Freedom Charter to try to
collectively write a constitution but
democracy does take time right I mean if
you're get that wasn't a radical
commitment to like not having a
political program for power it was just
a commitment to developing it in a
democratic way but the trouble is if you
don't have a that kind of democratic
commitment
you're going to be ready and waiting
with the plan right and if um you know I
guess one of the um advantages to having
a a religious movement is that you know
you said you said it isn't written uh on
our hearts by God but what if you think
it was and then you and then you
actually already have the book in which
God wrote those words and all your job
is to is just to translate that into
law um so yeah I was hoping that could
talk about what you have seen in terms
of you know the left opening the space
and more regressive movements filling
the vacuum um you know we' talked a bit
about Egypt maybe you could talk a
little bit about how how what that
looked like in Brazil um Hong Kong um
yeah what whatever Springs to mind
because I think this is so important in
this moment understanding that this is
not about it's not about blame it's it's
not about oh you guys screwed up it's
like this is you decimate the left uh
you don't have the structures that are
capable of engaging in a democratic
process um you do have some forces that
have stayed organized me um and they
move into that space so give us some
examples and then maybe we can talk
about what to do yeah and I mean that's
a fantastic question because I think
this is really the Striking place which
the books overlap is this the importance
of vums in the quick the quick the the
speed at which they will be filled um
because as a way of answering that
initial question how is it possible that
uh so many movements um led to the
opposite of what they asked for it
wasn't it isn't that they screwed up
what often happened is unexpected
success this recipe that was often put
together not really with the intention
of actually overthrowing the government
this this you know they wanted a lot of
people to come to the streets but it was
often not planned that that many people
would come to the streets so it is often
this initial unexpected wild success
that creates an opportunity that creates
a power vacuum and then
tragically many of these movements are
horrified or the original organizers at
least are horrified to find that they've
created a power vacuum either there's a
government which has been overthrown or
there's a government which is badly
weakened and would like to give
something up would like to give some
power over to the streets um and they
found um in many cases this is a very
broad rubric for understanding the
outcomes that a
protest uh specifically especially a
protest of this kind apparently
spontaneous leaderless tally coordinated
brought together very very quickly is
very poorly constituted to take
advantage of a power vacum a protest
cannot form a revolutionary government
protest often even failed that
elaborating to a weakened and scared
ruling class what they would what they
would um accept in exchange for leaving
the streets and so as a way of
understanding what happens you just have
to see who ran into that vacuum um in
some really tragic cases um and this is
another way that the I think the both of
our books end up being accidental or
indirect prequels is that a lot of
very after this moment of um apparent
Victory there is this horrible
realization that oh despite the internet
despite the end of the Cold War we still
live in an imperial global system like
there may be a foreign power that is
coming in over the bridge to crush us
Saudi Arabia might March March its
military over the over into bakra and to
crush this uh Uprising and the power
vacuum is filled by the biggest Dem
meanest guy in the neighborhood um or it
might be NATO using legitimate
complaints about the government of
Gaddafi to launch a uh a regim trange
operation uh it may be domestic actors
those that are most organized whether
they're on the right or they're on the
left left but there're those that have
often formed Collective bonds come up
with some kind of an idea of what they
would like to do and they're willing to
move in quickly um
so that is a general uh uh overview of
how this works Brazil goes slower
because Brazil is in a strange situation
it's very strange because Brazil has a
democratically elected president she's
very popular at the beginning of June
2013 but it becomes clear to
everyone that there is a as I said a
ball of energy on the streets and no one
knows know what to do with it the
government doesn't know what to do the
original organizers don't know what to
do with it and so a group of well
financed cynical and
Savvy libertarian right right leaning uh
no right-wing us funded kids recognize I
think correctly that the meaning of the
streets is up for grabs so what they do
and this is a very very do ganger moment
this is a very miror World moment they
form a group whose name is an
intentional copy that is meant to be
sound sound the same as the group that
has initially organized the protest in
June 2013 the original group is MPL they
come up with a group called MBL and
MBL pretends to be all the things that
the original group uh actually was which
is fully committed to autonomy from the
state fully leaderless Grassroots
digitally coordinate coordinated uh uh
um movement that was not directed by
anyone but really they are they're
getting money from the United States one
of these kids is trained into the Cook
Brothers and they know exactly what they
want they they want to move the state in
a more neoliberal Direction they want to
privatize everything and they ultimately
I think win to the point where
tragically I go back to Brazil in 2021
to do interviews for this book and I
tell a bunch of people I'm back you know
I'm interviewing Hadad who's the the
mayor of saal the time now the foreign
minister I'm interviewing um uh members
of the npl and Brazilians thought I said
MBL because the MPL is a player now
they've replaced the MPL as an on on the
stage so they recognized I think
correctly cynically though that there
was something was up for grabs and they
had the funding and the in the in the
cynicism um to to take advantage of it
in other cases as I said it may just be
pre-existing political Elites or the
biggest baddest guy in the neighborhood
that says oh the government's
destabilized I'm going to go and do that
thing that I wanted to do for a long
time I mean and then I want to again
take this back turn this back to you
because vacuums I think are really
Central they run through your book even
when you're not explicitly talking about
them um the the ways in
which a vacuum of narratives or I think
the uh yeah the the the term that really
strick me in the introduction was the
ways that narrative vacuums are always
filled that when we as human beings
don't know what's happening we don't
know how to especially moments of trauma
or moments of like a pandemic where
really it's quite difficult to establish
what's happening there is a hunger for
someone to supply some kind of a
narrative um but this one you know both
of our books are about I think very
difficult questions but I think this
seems this one seems really difficult to
me uh for a couple reasons I
mean the first is that our societies and
and the global system is now so complex
far more complex than in the 20th
century far more complex certainly than
when you know the classical political
economists were
operating it it it's it this complexity
makes it that intuitive knowledge or
self-directed study you know doing your
own research are really often going to
lead you down the the wrong path it's
really difficult for people to
comprehend the real real the true
reality based on facts of the world uh
if they're if they're if they're being
directed in the way that we have always
been directed I think as as contemporary
subjects as individuals to you know
figure it out for yourself and do what's
right what's right for you and then
there's the other very big problem that
the business model for journalism
traditional journalism the type that was
always very very imperfect and I think
always served to some extent the
interests of the ruling class especially
in the in in powerful First World
countries and and often would apologize
for uh foreign policy disasters but even
that even that very imperfect thing just
seems to be going away and the internet
as it was as it was conceived or made
possible initially to us has been
enclosed I like this that it's you know
this is an enclosement carried out um by
Tech uh oligarchs so I mean this is a
difficult question but I mean how do we
deal with the problem of the ease of the
simple incorrect narrative entering a
narrative vacuum in the face of an
incredibly complex system and no
mechanisms for passing down centuries of
human knowledge I mean is there any way
to sort of is there any way to claw back
or avoid total epistemic collapse
without somehow being authoritarian or
insisting we're the ones with the real
knowledge we we'll give it to you um and
or and you know put it in another way do
the existing tools of communication we
have do we need to take them back do we
need to nationalize Twitter do we need
to do we need to do something how do is
there any way to to escape this very uh
difficult situation that I took a long
time
describing yeah well I I was definitely
thinking while you were talking
that that maybe job one is fighting for
the internet is fighting for what the
internet um could have been but wasn't
and this is you know something else in
your book that that that that I think is
incredibly important is that this form
of of digital Communications is not the
only one on offer we both remember a
time when you know that sort of euphoria
that promise of the of what the internet
could
represent was not just you know people
declaring Facebook revolutions and
Twitter uprisings it was the um you know
the early email lists that knitted
together uh the zapatista Uprising with
the global alter globalization movement
and those Indie media that the global
Indie media networks um that you know
though imperfect were not commercialized
and um and and you know I remember when
I you got in got it got an email from
you know an early hacker involved in
some of those um you know that the sort
early movement internet um experiment
saying there's this cool platform called
Twitter you really should try it you
know like it's we really think it has
big potential I'm really mad at him if
he's
listening because you know we we need to
contest for this you know I I quote Ben
tof's book internet for the people know
about how we can still uh uh fight to
treat the internet like a Commons like a
public utility I don't know if that
means nationalizing Twitter though I
continue to be in favor of that or at
least turning it into a users Co-op or
some other Twitter rival I mean I think
people are are trying to do that but it
is it is difficult um when you have
these platforms that are so large and so
many people are invested in them that
when you develop a alternative that may
be governed by better values it doesn't
provide what that other space was
providing which is exactly what Elon
Musk said it provided when he bought it
which was a digital Town Square which
you know is pointing to a to to the
problem why should one man own the
digital town the global digital Town
Square um so yeah you know and this you
know in doppelganger I think this was a
moment when I really realized something
something that that that you theme that
runs through the book which is that the
right gets the facts wrong the
conspiratorial right often gets the
facts wrong but the feelings right so
wolf you know I mentioned sort of
quickly that that one of her big claims
during covid was That vaccine
verification apps you know that we all
downloaded onto our phones were actually
a covert plot to bring uh CCP social
credit to the United States and have us
all under Mass surveillance and that
these vaccine apps would be able to tell
the government everywhere that we are
and not only that they would be able to
listen in on our conversations with
people at restaurants Even in our own
homes and there was this very kind of
sned response from a lot of liberals
which was this um wait till they hear
about cell phones right um which you
know the first time I saw that line I
laughed and thought Oh yeah these people
like they're so silly they think these
vaccine verification apps are doing all
these but it's actually our cell phones
and that begs the question of whether or
not we're okay with the fact that our
cell phones are hoovering up our data
selling them to third parties um that we
are you know that they're able to make
kind of Doppel data doppelgangers of us
um and predict and nudge our behaviors
and all of that um and shape our
movements right because if our movements
are playing out on these platforms then
you know I saw a question that from from
uh uh somebody about you know what was
uh let me see if I can find this
question but um there by the way there's
lots of really good questions coming in
um you know about whether there was you
know a moment a particular moment and um
when of this went really wrong and I I
think that is that depends on where
we're talking about um but I think there
is something
around the ability of the right to
co-opt the critique of big Tech you know
and when we started to hear this from
not just figures like
Bannon um but the whole sort of Peter
teal funded wi of the Republican Party
um that they were the ones who were
saying you know why should these tech
companies be be allowed to decide speech
for us and so on and mainly what they're
doing is grifting and saying come on
over to our Tech platforms where we'll
decide but the idea of seeding that
territory I think was so incredibly
dangerous so um yeah so I think I hope
that answers it a little bit I mean one
of the things that I think is yeah I I
do want you to yeah can I ask a really
quick followup because I detect a
problem here and I think I mean not a
problem but something we would have to
face because I really I love this idea I
agree of taking back the internet
but then the idea of treating it like a
public utility or treating like the
commons treating like let's say we treat
it like a public utility you treat it
like uh the public school system in the
United States we treat it like the post
office this means using the state right
this means using would it need would we
would it be required to
use a government you know the entity
that has police that has a military to
carry this out and would that not be
quite would that not
um how would would we would would an
answer be required to the people like
Naomi wolf that say well this is okay
it's happening really it's happening the
government is taking away the media from
us whereas really it actually doesn't
belong to us it belongs to to Elon Musk
sure yeah yeah but I I mean I think that
um I think I think you know tarof makes
the argument that that it really needs
to
begin you know at a at a sort of
neighborhood by neighborhood level with
remunicipalization uh you know we have
some examples of that around access to
like treating internet as a utility in
Barcelona you know the the right uh
right to access um but that doesn't
solve the larger scale problem right um
and I but I do think that that's you
know I think this is a critique we can
get around just because we have a model
which is kind of public broadcasting at
its best and its Heyday which is not the
government I mean it is possible to
create an arms length uh um you know
media kind of public utility that yes is
funded um by the government but no is
not controlled by the government uh and
is expressly not controlled by them I
mean this is I think there are
regulatory ways of responding to the
concern no it does not need to be uh um
State there's a difference between State
controlled media and public media the
problem is all every every public media
that you could point to it has been
starved by the um you know the logic of
austerity in Canada right now huge cuts
to the CBC and it's really a shell of
its former self so when we look at these
public
broadcasters you know they don't Inspire
in the way that they might have you know
20 years ago in terms of what would be
possible about you know be precisely
because of the success of the neoliberal
project that we've been talking about
one of the things that I was thinking
about reading your book and maybe we
should go to the questions just I mean
it has to and this relates to something
I'm seeing in the questions around um
uh some of the political responses to to
this right because if we think about
some A Moment Like Occupy Wall Street I
mean I know you deliberately didn't
didn't didn't focus on North
American uh um uprisings and I've heard
you speak about the about why um but but
we've also seen attempts to learn from
the vacuums that we've talked about
right I mean and I think we could see
the Corbin campaign the Sanders campaign
pmo Sera as as in a you know partially
PE people who came out of the movements
of the squares um realized some of their
limitations and said okay we're gonna
we're we're also going to throw in with
electoral politics so um I would love to
hear you speak on that a little bit Yeah
so I I
um I the part of the reason that I I I
didn't spend time on things like that
occupi 2011 or George Floyd 2020s cuz I
hope that people like you that actually
have experienced one them would come to
the book with their own uh the people
that lived through them would come with
their own idea of what happened there um
and

um read it with that in mind um because
I I wasn't there and I think that I
thought that would happen naturally so
um I'm I'm I'm I'm happy to have that
happening um spontaneously uh to use a
word that comes up often in the book um
yeah no I think that's right I basically
think that the this kind of I like this
thing that uh this um image that I only
started thinking about when you brought
it up an hour ago of like a body slowly
re re
regaining it's its muscles like
the energy Unleashed not only in North
Africa but North America in
2011 got as far as it could go I think
in this particular form but then people
started to build power in other ways and
I think the in North America I think you
point to you point to this very very
quickly in the book I I think um the
rebuilding slowly of a labor movement
after it had been totally decimated uh
in the United States Amazon Starbucks I
think Hite um but now of course
UAW um doing things that I think a lot
of people would have not considered
possible 5 10 years ago that's the
beginning of various muscles you know
being retrained and coming together and
yeah absolutely learning from uh
learning from what happened the
uprisings that began in 2011 and led you
know I think to a a big Consciousness
shift and then to part of that
Consciousness shift um was the
recognition that new practices new
experiments needed to happen tactically
which is absolutely happening it's
absolutely but at the same time on the
other hand the kind of explosions I read
about did keep happening um but they
didn't happen in a vacuum and they
didn't happen on their own there were
there were new attempts to build
different things in response and and I
totally agree
um I wonder if no I I do I do just want
to sort of shout out some of the
attempts to and there there's a question
one of the themes that comes out of both
of your books is the way that media and
more Savvy political organizations will
speak for our movements if we don't
speak for ourselves but how do we do
that effectively in an age of Media
consolidation and fractured left um you
know it's it like I find myself thinking
about about exceptions to these claims
that we're making like you know
ticktockers giving incredibly Lucid
seminars on settler colonialism in
Palestine um and and doing this popular
education on these corporate platforms
um that were not designed for that um
but yet are going viral and are
educating people um you know I think hey
Market has done an incredible service
with these seminars I think Novara media
you know is is is an example of of of
not just leaving it to social media
hammer and hope you know coming out of
the racial Justice reckonings and
identifying the need for a place for
longer form writing not just fighting it
out via hashtags so I mean I I do think
that you know movements evolve movements
learn from their mistakes and there are
lots of examples of that happening and
you know I'm sure people are thinking of
other examples that I haven't mentioned
so uh just in the spirit of of um you
know not just sort of finger wagging
here like it it people are experimenting
and trying to do this work but over to
you Vincent you were going to I think no
question no no yeah I think that is I'm
absolutely right I think that this is
one of the questions we can answer in
indirectly uh and then perhaps move on
to another but I think that yeah it
became clear perhaps in the 2010s it was
you know there have been experiments
going on throughout all the 20th century
but it came clear that really mediation
the representation of movements is
really a sight of struggle also in
building alternative uh media is a way
to to participate more um more actively
in every set of you know in every in
every Link in the chain not just causing
the eruption but fighting over what it
meant fighting over what's actually
happening um so yeah one of the the
final question that I was just passed is
something that we were probably was
inevitable we were going to speak about
anyways and it comes up at the end of
your book um so one of the questions uh
how do we
combat uh the claim that opposing the
Israeli government is always in itself
anti-semitic is what what what can be
said about that in this moment of mass
protest um you know as you trace in your
book it's it's uh it's easy to
understand where a certain Israeli
mindset came from um but what do you as
someone who knows a bit more about uh uh
um that ideological history what you say
to that to that
question
um yeah
so you know I think there are just huge
cracks in Israel's propaganda machine
right now and um the
heroic uh um uh journalism being done by
Palestinians on the ground at just risks
like I've never seen before I'm sure
Vincent that you are blown away by the
um just the commitment and just you know
every morning checking and seeing
whether folks are still alive it's just
probably the worst um ritual I have ever
experienced uh of My Life um but uh you
know I I this is something that they're
not able to control so we are up against
various distraction machines including
this perennial smear than anybody who
criticizes Israel as anti-semitic I
think is working much less well than it
used to as somebody who who has been
critical um of uh of of Israel for my
entire adult life um and you know have
been accused of being a self-hating Jew
and a capo and all the things that they
like to say to us um I think that that
that people are are witnessing genocidal
violence with their own eyes day after
day um and and this idea of well we're
just going to show you more examples of
terrible things uh that Hamas did on
October the 7th and that is somehow
supposed to justify this it it just
people don't believe that I mean they're
smarter than that they understand that
you can um uh oppose the targeting of
civilians by Hamas and you can oppose
genocidal Violence by the Israeli State
um so I would just say just don't get
distracted by the distraction machine um
it is impossible to have an honest an
honest accounting and investigation of
what happened on October the 7th until
Israel stops the bombing um until Israel
agrees to at minimum uh a lasting
ceasefire and so the idea of blaming us
because we're not focused on October the
7th when you have hundreds of new people
being killed every single day is not our
problem it is the it is what they
created um and they are trying to smear
us uh to distract from their violence
and the more violence uh the more war
crimes they commit the more frantic that
distraction
um and and and and and sort of claims of
self victimization
become uh we just have to stay focused
not get intimidated you know it isn't
just the smears it's also that people
are getting fired people are getting um
you know arrested for putting up
anti-war posters um and all of this once
again is designed as mass communication
you know Vincent and I talked earlier
about how terror is a way of sending a
message um and we are getting a message
right now now with these are very
high-profile event
cancellations um uh um you know
high-profile people losing their jobs at
magazines at museums at universities all
of that is designed to send a message
that we everybody else should shut up
you know if they're willing to go after
a polit or prizewinning novelist they're
willing to go after you but the thing is
that they cannot silence as many people
as are speaking right now um and so like
this is just in my view one of those
current moments like stick with it it's
working that's why you're hit getting so
much propaganda thrown at you um you
know let yourself get intimidated let
the ranks of people speaking out dwindle
and we lose um strengthen numbers like
like just just like you know uh uh
whatever we whatever we who are not in
the blast zone are afraid of is nothing
compared to what people are risking um
right now in order to give us the
evidence that this is happening at all
let alone what people um you know just
are facing by being Palestinian in Gaza
and the West Bank right now so uh don't
worry about the smears uh also uh don't
put up with anti-Semitism real
anti-Semitism in any form um respond to
it right away um um and you know not
performatively but really understand um
that this that that this is the oldest
conspiracy my most persistent conspiracy
theory um and it has been used to
destroy movements in the past to pit us
against each other and if we want to
build the kind of broad uh International
movements that can stand up to
International Capital you know we um we
can't allow ourselves to be divided and
this is one of the tools of division um
we have to we have to we have to resist
it I think that's yeah that's that's I
think that's a fantastic answer and uh
if it's okay with you I have I found
another question that I think is tough
but in a good way uh since we've both
talked about Argentina I think we both
kind of uh liked the idea that the
country slowly put its MUSC you know the
answer I'll just read it in the words of
uh Karen the use of Argentina as an
example of getting muscles back in 2001
is interesting in uh in light of the
recent election how does the Lurch back
to the right fit with a picture um that
you both are painting of South American
politics I kind of know what I think but
you want to why don't you why don't you
go if you kind of know what you think I
think that

is an answer a very bad answer to the
same question that a lot of um movements
around the world have been responding um
and this move the anti-political move is
one that I think that is really Central
to to my book um and it also relates to
the discussion we had a second ago why
it was that this particular um
repertoire of tactics became so easy
compared to everything else is is that I
do think that since the end of the 20th
century there has been a real crisis of
representation people people believe
more or less correctly the governments
that are supposed to represent them do
not they respond um first and foremost
foremost to to powerful economic
interests and so
globally since 200 whenever I'm
forgetting when I'm from California when
we elected Arnold CH shener but in
general almost every time that I can
think of in
in uh global politics in the last 25
years the voters have been given the
opportunity to say screw you to the
people in power they usually take it now
usually what happens is that four years
later the country says oh my God that
that was horrible and they go back to
some kind of a very establishment figure
in California went back to Jerry Brown
the guy who' been running the state
forever Brazil goes back to Lula um
there is I think there's a pattern where
this tends to not work out because it is
the wrong answer
and I think it is understandable again
um that
Argentina
would opt
for the screw you answer to a body
politic that had been put back together
sort of since 2001 but not really all
the way I mean if you look at the
economic um situation in the country
since 2001 you can you can't really
argue that the country has has moved
past this I think it's a tragedy um that
has to be fought just like J bolsonaro
had to be fought and in Brazil J bonaro
was fought with as decimated as they had
been as weak as they were in comparison
to some of the moments of mass politics
in the 20th century that um both of us
look back to in our
books but bsar was fought with the
remnants
of parties organized the organized
working class a collective subject
people coming together and making
Alliance es across Civil Society to do
what was necessary to fight and it was
indeed because of like organizations
like the PT the MSD the cot the the the
the the labor union Federation in Brazil
that they just barely got over the line
and restored um at least a leader uh
that believe that it's not trying to
destroy destroy democracy so this
picture I think I you know I think it's
a tough and a good question from Karen
but I do think that the country was like
is still in this process of constructing
and and then we still have it has the
particularities of of

parismj or or or or wasn't yeah put
forward in the same way um but I do
think that it points to I mean beyond
beyond what you said Vincent around um
you know the ch to say screw it and
really that should be a very important
warning to uh people in the US um uh
ahead of a an election where Trump will
be offering people that kind of
opportunity once again it looks like um
you know never say never um you know I
think a lot of people in Argentina
thought for a while that this was just
too outlandish he was too clownish a
figure um uh to to be possible but but
but yeah don't underestimate the desire
to lift the middle finger uh to to the
whole political class um also I think
the power of conspiracy culture um is is
a huge part of it and we are seeing this
not just at the at the level of national
elections but also at the level of
referendums so the Chile Constitution
also Australia just had a constitution
that had like a modest that would have
provided you know very modest
representation for indigenous people not
really uh you know in Australia's
government really just consultation but
it was just lied about in the same in
the way that you know covid vaccines
were lied about and it was like this is
a un takeover that's going to destroy
the country and you know they use the
telegram channels that were developed
during covid to spread vaccine
misinformation to now pivot to
misinformation about the referendum so a
lot all the sort of informational
infrastructure uh that I track in
doppelganger that would that that was
you know some of it pre-existed the
pandemic some of it was much of it was
developed during the pandemic to spread
covid misinformation is still there and
now and it's being used in all of these
um uh electoral contacts whether
referendums or national elections I
think to wrap up we should maybe look at
these these sort of double questions one
from glass shank about parasocial
relationships uh H H um how have
parasocial relationships changed
people's sense of identity in the age of
the internet and Spencer acans For You
Vincent how well has public leaderless
served the protest movements of the past
decade you know so I I mean I would the
parasocial
relationship um you know in a way that
this speaks to what I was saying about
branding um uh and the you know when we
when we create a brand version
of ourselves to represent us on social
media this sort of very curated very
polished version of us um we we are
inviting people yeah to think to think
of to think of us as a commodity and the
trouble with branding is that it really
is um an exercise in discipline and
repetition and you know this I think
relates to very much to this discussion
that we've been
having about
uh the need to learn from our mistakes
right the need to change the need to
look at evidence and say okay that
didn't work now we're going to try
something different I mean in many ways
that is antithetical to the logic of
personal branding or branding movements
which demand a kind of repetition um and
credit taking in order to succeed you
have to you know you you have to keep
doing the same thing and you have to say
that you did it and you have to get the
credit for having done it because that's
your business model that you know that's
how you get the clicks that's how you
get the followers and that's how you
monetize you know and maybe that
monetization takes the form of going to
foundation and saying our group did this
and give us more money to keep doing it
um it's kind of antithetical to the
principles of solidarity that build you
know a broad social movement um but you
know that that but then I think there
are also questions about the opposite
which you know Spencer amman's question
speaks to about this claim that there
are no leaders whatsoever you know part
of what I'm tracking in my book is the
kind of leader by follower count right
where where um you know few figures rise
up because they're good at social media
and then they become they become the
deao leaders uh but you're writing about
something that is related but also a
little bit different which is an
ideological commitment to leaderless and
the question is how's that worked out so
I would say um your the dynamic that you
point to is really important I'll get to
it quickly the the ways in which leaders
appear even if you try not to have them
but to answer the sp's question directly
I think how well is public leaderless
serve the protest movements the last
past decade well in movement one poorly
in movement two uh it had this the
belief that everybody's invited this
particular like I said this this very
particular recipe this explosion this
explosive combination has done a great
job of getting people out in in
unexpected ways and in moments which
actually surprised government so much
that they actually uh were overthrown so
this idea that the the invitation is
extended to
everyone you can come as you are or
whoever you are um that has been quite
effective um at generating these vacuums
that we talk about um what that has been
the problem at least in um when we one
is concerned with a very particular
phenomenon around which I build my book
is then what to do with that vacuum uh
especially because I think that even
when there is an ideological IAL when
there is no ideological aversion to
leaderless or to leaders even when there
is no ideological commitment to
leaderless nowadays in the era of
digital coordination you're going to
have quite a lot of concrete
horizontality that's going it's going to
be the case that there are mass protests
with a lot of people that are not in
some dedicated organization or believing
very explicitly that they're behind this
or that movement I think that some
element of leaderless
um some element of horizontality is
going to be a feature of um it's
certainly Mass protest movements but a
lot of just political resistance going
forward that's just the the structure of
our society but in the moments when you
have these very specific vacuums and
there's a commitment I to no one's going
to ever speak for this we're never even
going to decide who might be the person
around which uh we can organize or you
know many people in the books said that
we wish that we had organized well
beforehand we wish that we would have
been an organization with clear goals
before the explosion came that is when
there is a very difficult uh they have
there's a very difficult very it's very
difficult to take advantage of uh of
that of that um of that of that vacuum
and then so I only we only have two
minutes left but this is there's another
good question which I think get can't
it's really hard so I'm going to throw
it to you but you can throw it back to
me too cuz it's basically what this this
person is asking and I'm I'm summarizing
uh is how do you create a world in which
everybody doesn't want to give the
figure to The Establishment how do you
how do you defend very very very
imperfect publicly controlled
democratically
constructed
systems while we know that they're
deeply imperfect how do we how do we how
do we are we stuck in this double game
for a long time until we can figure out
something new are we are we like
defending against worsening conditions
this imperfect form or is there a way in
which you see a bridge from here to a
world in which everybody will not vote
Yes screw you whenever given the
opportunity yeah I
mean sorry I uh just I just lost the
Mouse um I think we should give the
finger to The Establishment I I don't
have a lot of time left so I'm just
going to say that I mean I think that
the that where this becomes this kind of
toxic form of of political ople gangers
is that is that these are very very
right-wing dangerous figures who are
absorbing a um a a a a a righteous Fury
at Elite power and are
impersonating uh um actually being
anti-establishment
and are in fact committed to protecting
uh Capital including their own vast
capital I mean these are almost reliably
very wealthy figures who are claiming to
be anti-establishment whether it's
whether it's you know Trump or or rubert
Murdoch or um you know so you know I
think the way you fight a kind of a a
doppelganger of the left is to have a
real left uh that has a political
program that is actually redistributive
um and is not a joke and it's not just
about uh um sort of saying you but
actually about um you know getting a
huge amount of that ill-gotten wealth
and redistributing in ways that are
going to concretely improve people's
lives um you know as a start and
so and so yeah I think the only way you
fight these sort of uh um uh a synthetic
uh uh caricatures um is to offer a real
alternative what do you say yeah so it
sound it sounds like what you're saying
and if so then I agree that we need the
answer is to give the finger bet you
know uh don't put down the finger give
the finger to The Establishment but give
it better and at the point at which
you're doing you know performing this
communicative action of of screw you
also building alliances with other
people that that that that with which
you can collectively build a world that
everyone doesn't want to say screw you
to so ex that's what you're saying give
the finger from the right direction at
the same time but but don't only do that
work work work in the background to to
build the connection connections that
will help us to uh to do more than that
if that's what
you're that's where I come out at least
yeah yeah no I think that that sounds
really good um you know when I say give
the finger I mean actually confront
those forces right um I think people
have very very good reason to be angry
at the people who've been running the
show for a very long time they've seen
their living uh conditions deteriorate
we are surrounded by all kinds of mass
death um and the reason why these
figures are so nefar I is because they
capture that anger at Elite power and
then pivot it and direct it towards the
most vulnerable least responsible uh
people in our society uh and so it's a
bait and switch um and so you know I I
think it's a good place to end on a Hay
Market seminar to say the same thing we
always say which is we need to rebuild
the left uh we need to have a horizon
that we're working towards um and uh we
need a world uh that is not pitting us
against each other um which protects
life um and uh that yeah we wouldn't
want to give the finger to because we've
invested it and we built it together so
thank you Vincent uh it was really a
pleasure at long last to have this
conversation with you I hope we get a
chance to do it again in the future and
thank you everybody who listened sent
great questions um and thanks to hey
market for being hey Market thank just
want to that say thank you so much to
you and to everybody that made this
possible and that uh gave us their
attention tonight so just truly thank
you

thanks

oh

oh
w


## Keywords:
