---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rBazDnubwwA
---

# Video
No, the police cannot be reformed. w/ Professor Alex Vitale
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rBazDnubwwA)

## Transcript:
hey I'll how are you doing I'm great
thank you so much for asking it's me Kim
and I'm back for another video as I
promised a couple weeks back I'm going
to be continuing having conversations
with people who do not believe policing
or prisons should exist this one is with
Professor Alex Vitali professor bite Ali
is a professor of sociology as well as
the coordinator of the policing and
social justice project at Brooklyn
College he has been studying policing
for 25 years and guess what he doesn't
think that they should exist so we
talked about his very very popular book
the end of policing and why after all of
the research that he's done all of the
studies that he's read he does not
believe that the police in this country
can be reformed here's a conversation so
let's start off with your background you
have been studying policing for how long
well really for about 30 years now so
it's I started at the San Francisco
Coalition on homelessness around 1990
and was really working on housing issues
at that time but that was when we were
beginning to see this uptick in police
harassment of homeless folks and my boss
at the time asked me to look into this
and that was really the beginnings of
broken windows policing the idea that we
could you use police to micromanage the
the behaviors of folks and that somehow
this would magically cause there to be
fewer homicides which homeless people
were not committing any homicides so
what it really was what became really
clear because I was coming at this from
a housing perspective was that the city
of San Francisco had given up on the
possibility of actually housing people
and was just going to turn the problem
over to the police to an advantage yeah
yeah so we will get into the kind of
like creep of what the police are
expected to do but something I thought
was so fascinating about this book was
there's been a lot of discussion about
how multicultural these recent protests
have been and how they've taken on a
kind of anti-capitalist bent and you
offered some really illuminating history
about the origin
of police and police things in the end
of policing and I've heard a lot before
I read the book about the connection
between the origin of police and slavery
but I know a lot less about how police
were meant to tamp down the working
classes they were meant to preserve the
power of the moneyed elite
so could you talk a little bit more
about that sure so what I like to think
of is that policing is a state tool that
facilitates and allows regimes of
exploitation to continue to move forward
and in the 19th century when most police
forces are formed those primary systems
of exploitation were things like
colonialism and slavery but also
industrialization so in a place like
London it doesn't really make sense the
link policing to slavery Britain slavery
is happening in the West Indies it's not
happening in London that was about
shaping this population that's flooding
into London into a stable and docile
working class by breaking their unions
suppressing strike activity but also
micromanaging their everyday behavior
and we can see this also in a lot of
northern American cities so eventually
you know northern police do take on a
role of slave catching and as northern
cities become more racially diverse of
course police play a major role in
maintaining the color or line but
initial formation of policing in places
like Boston Chicago in New York in the
early to mid-1800s was really about
class politics but of course when we go
to the south and we look at the big
cities of the South like Charleston and
Savannah and New Orleans policing
emerges in direct relationship to
slavery it's about managing what is
really a mobile slave population in
these cities because in the big city
slaves work outside the homes of their
owners
in the kind of newly industrializing
southern economy and so they're on the
move it's not like being on a plantation
with an overseer and everyone's stuck in
one place and you can have slave patrols
you know minding the roadways there's
actually the majority of people on the
streets and in a place like Charleston
or black people and whites are terrified
of this and they need policing to create
their idea of what security is so when
you see all different kinds of people
all different groups and a lot of those
the people of those groups being from
working-class backgrounds is that
surprising for you and in these crack
this current moment of protest well it
is a little surprising because it's not
exactly like this is the organized labor
movement that's out on the streets I
think it's really about the rise of a
deeper left political analysis among
young people in the United States that
we can see expressed and like the
popularity of Bernie Sanders and
Democratic socialists of America and
what's been encouraging is that this new
left politics has a pretty decent racial
justice analysis that includes police
and prison abolition as a kind of
founding principle so that they didn't
need to be explained about this they had
already been doing this work and and
I've seen this firsthand over the last
three years
you know Criss crossing the country I've
been in about 25 cities a year and
speaking to a lot of young white
audiences who are trying to figure out
how to relate to these these movements
around the police and prison the
abolition and racial justice so what do
you think has cost that I mean a lot of
people would point to social media in
the internet do you think that's it
no I think that's just a reflection of
it I don't think it's causing it I think
that the the popularity of this
socialist analysis is tied to the
failure of the leadership of both
political parties to do anything to
address fundamental problems I mean
what's going on with the environment
what's going on with growing economic
inequality what's going on with
corruption in our political system and
of course what's going on with issues of
racial inequality and mass
criminalization in some ways it's like
the coming together or of Occupy Wall
Street and black lives matter yeah yeah
so something that you just alluded to in
that intro and what you talked about in
the book is the expansion of policing so
could you discuss a little bit about the
things that police are expected to do
now that they did not have to do in the
past right so we talked a second ago
about this kind of 200 year history of
problematic policing but then we've got
this extra layer of criminalization and
mass incarceration that's happened over
the last 40 to 50 years so I think
there's a lot more awareness about the
the mass incarceration part thanks to
folks like Michelle Alexander who
explained so clearly about this rise
from you know 200,000 prisoners to 2.2
million in a very short period of time
after a long period of stability and
really you know no one goes to prison
who hasn't first been arrested by police
so what we've seen is that there's been
also at the same time this expansion of
the scope and intensity of policing and
really it's it's tied to this issue of
regimes of exploitation so you know we
don't exactly have slavery and
colonialism today at 13th Mint Amendment
aside right what we have is this kind of
neoliberal austerity politics which is
producing this tremendous inequality and
is leaving huge numbers of people out of
the global economy
so it's producing mass homelessness
untreated mental illness and substance
abuse problems mass involvement in black
markets of drugs and sex work and stolen
goods because folks don't have access to
real economic participation and then
those problems have been turned over to
the police to manage so when the schools
fail we put in school police when
there's an opioid overdose crisis we
intensify narcotics policing when there
are no mental health services we send
the police to respond to mental health
crisis calls and that's really the the
root of this problem here is this
turning of every social problem which
was created by politicians then those
politicians turn those problems over to
the police to manage so they don't have
to really address the root of the issue
yeah and something you also get at is
the police are expected to do all these
things and they're not that great at it
right well police are violence workers
yeah and that's what distinguishes them
from all other parts of government and
so if you don't want violence you
shouldn't get the police involved if we
don't want violence directed at our
children in schools don't get the police
involved if you don't want violence in
your home when your son is having a
mental health crisis don't get the
police involved so that there's when the
police have gotten involved in all these
things that then there is violence and
then people say oh my god there's too
much violence we need to give them
special training to be less violent but
this doesn't make any sense because the
whole point is their violence workers
you you can't train them not to be
violence workers and to the extent that
we're trying to turn them into social
workers or counselors we should just
hire social workers and counselors yeah
yeah and I just realized I use like the
euphemism not great I mean they're like
they're actively bad like they're
actually creating more car it's like
really what I probably should have spent
there yeah
now's a moment now is a moment when we
don't have to pull our punches yeah yeah
let's be honest ready like we're we're
seeing what we're seeing out in the
streets right now is a reflection of how
I'm actually deleterious the stuff that
they are engaging is and is so I wanted
to talk about that reform part so we
recently saw the rise and fall of the
eight can't wait campaign did you get a
chance to see okay I know those guys
okay yeah so just for people who might
not be familiar so um
campaign zero led by DeRay McKesson laid
out these suggestions for eight things
police should do to be better and it
seems like a big problem with that is
that a lot of the major police
departments have already adopted many if
not all of those reports and they're
still out here brutalizing people so
it's my sense of that correct I mean you
know you mentioned early on in the book
that reform is probably not going to do
it do you think that there are those
kinds of target of reforms that we could
suggest that could fundamentally alter
what they do the short answer is is no
most of these reforms have not worked
and they really they can't work because
they misunderstand the nature of the
problem yeah now some are better and
worse than others and some might provide
some reduction in the violence if
implemented but these this idea that we
can substantially reduce the violence
and policing I think is misguided and
some of the reforms especially those
that came out of the Obama
administration are just laughable things
like implicit bias training which is
included in the new house just just
leasing justice bill you know this is
just patently ridiculous it imagines
that the problems of race and policing
are completely unconscious and
unintentional you know miss miss in
aligned behavior by a few individual
officers I mean we got a problem of
explicit racism in a mirror
and policing but also the racism is
baked into the political decision to
turn the problems of black and brown
communities over to the police to manage
and so it doesn't really matter what the
individual officers attitude is or what
their unconscious bias is and we have an
ocean of research that shows that the
race of officers has almost no impact on
communal communities just doesn't help I
wish it did I wish it were that simple
but it just isn't well so I found that
to be so fascinating because we hear so
much about community policing and hire
more police of color and black police
and brown police and what I did not know
before reading this was that often when
you look at the misconduct sheets of
black police officers often they have
worse a worse history of misconduct then
their white peers is that true some it
is sometimes true it is sometimes true
now there's a few new studies that have
come out just in the last year long
after I finished writing the book that
you know they show some areas where
there there might be some benefit to
having black police officers in black
neighborhoods but the effects are really
quite small and it just doesn't get in
you know it doesn't address the fact
that a totally lawful procedurally a
proper unbiased low-level drug but
arrest is still gonna ruin some young
person's life for no good reason it does
not make them safer it does not make the
community safer it does not prevent
anyone from getting drugs right it's
just an extra burden on black and brown
communities that their young people are
ending up in the criminal justice system
instead of getting access to jobs and
decent housing and healthcare and things
like that I also assume that you saw Joe
Biden the statement and the suggestions
that he put forth about the community
policing stuff and throwing money into
police and training
um what I guess I have a question about
is why do so many Democratic politicians
put forth these suggestions when there
is such a large body of research about
why the stuff that they are suggesting
will not work I mean we have so much
data on it why do we keep returning to
the same failed policies so this is why
it's so important that we have a
political economic analysis about
policing because when we understand that
the problem of over policing is about
solving a set of political problems then
we see why politicians are committed to
not really doing anything about it
so what I mean by that is right the the
decision to use government to push
resources up the economic ladder to
subsidize these already most successful
parts of society tax breaks to
corporations these downtown real estate
deals with all the insider trading and
stuff that goes along with that both
parties are committed to that kind of
economic program that led to all these
problems that are now being policed so
and this includes the the black
Congressional Caucus this includes big
city Democratic mayor's they want to
make their downtown real estate deals
and they get big campaign contributions
to do this and policing makes it
possible for them to get away with it
and so they don't want to dial back
policing because that would require that
they actually divert resources from
these deals into actually lifting up
communities and creating more you know
equality and stability in people's lives
so the only way they can approach this
is to tinker at the margins with some
little superficial papering over of the
problem you know can you just please
shoot fewer black people so it doesn't
create such a political problem for us
and if you listen to
language coming from both parties even
Trump when he announced his executive
order it's all about how can we restore
trust and police how can we get the
community to trust the police
like like it's our fault you know that
we don't trust the police and it's just
a manipulation of perception and it's
not doing anything to produce racial or
economic justice Oh professor of Italian
it sounds like I mean you're you're
talking some abolitionist talk here do
you consider yourself to be a prison
abolitionist definitely definitely I
mean I want to live in a world where
safety doesn't come from people with
guns and putting people in cages and I
think that that that analysis right that
well that desire combined with this
historical analysis of policing and
prisons playing a role in reproducing
inequality what that does is it helps
guide our work in ways that allow us to
avoid certain mistakes mistakes around
embracing reforms that turn out to be
superficial and ineffective because we
have a better analysis of the problem so
phrases like abolish the police and
defund the police are very scary for
people even for people of color black
people who understand that this is
basically a regime of brutality that we
live under it's really easy to fear
monger around that but people are not
saying we should shut down the police
tomorrow right so could you talk a
little bit about the strategies of
divest and invest I mean if you know
where that magic switch is that can
eliminate all police tomorrow I'm sure
there's some people who would be
interested in trying to flip it but but
there's such switch right there's no
city council in the United States that's
going to zero out the police budget this
year so that you know people who suggest
that they are the ones who are being
naive and really disingenuous right
they're not actually interested in
listening to what we have to say a lot
of the time there
trying to come up with arguments about
why we can't have what we want the the
this is the movement that is led by
people who have experienced a profound
lack of safety in their lives I mean if
you look at the mostly black women
leading this movement they have been the
victims of domestic violence of
interpersonal violence and police
violence and what they're looking for is
a way to actually enhance Public Safety
especially in those places that have
historically been abandoned or worse
have had state violence imposed upon
them and they have ideas based in
evidence and examples about how to
enhance safety better than relying on
armed police you know but the challenge
is for four decades these communities
have been told you only have one option
to produce safety and that's more police
more incarceration so you know people
have capitulated to this if our choice
is nothing or police to deal with a
violence problem or you know a serious
disorder problem or hobby that then some
people are going to choose police out of
desperation and my hope is that this
moment is really opening up the
political possibility enough for people
to start asking for what they really
want because almost everyone who says we
need more police also and this has been
in my experience doing this work for
decades right is that they also want a
better youth center for their kids they
also want safe housing they also want
better schools for their kids right but
they've been told they can't have any of
those things and so they quit asking for
them in a lot of cases now is the time
to ask for what we really want put that
out on the table and quit limiting
ourselves to things that we think we can
get in a system that's hostile
because that's what a lot of these
reforms are there are little incremental
things that people said well we can't
really get the boot off my neck but
maybe we can at least get a couple black
police officers hired and maybe we can
get them to do some special training but
that that's not gonna fix a problem yeah
so look we chose to divest from the
police forces what would that look like
right so it's if you look at the
movements that are underway around the
country that we're all happening before
Minneapolis right this is about going to
budget hearings and lobbying City
Council members to shift spending from
police and jails and youth lockups to
community identified public safety
initiatives things like community-based
anti violence centers domestic violence
shelters and counseling services more
real mental health services for people
in their community real access to high
quality medical drug treatment more
counselors and social workers in the
schools right there are very concrete
things that people are trying to win
through normal political processes so
the big thing that comes up when we try
to have these conversations is okay so a
lot of people agree that a lot of our
crime maybe most of our crime could be
eliminated if we invested in different
kinds of institutions in these countries
the mental health stuff as you said
education getting people equitable
employment like fair wage but do you
think that there's always going to be a
population of people who are just
dangerous homicidal prone to violence
want to dominate and if you think that
they're gonna be there then what happens
to those people right so in any system
is going to have harm any system is
going to have harm and we do need
structures to
try to manage those harms policing has
not done a very good job of that right
policing is usually what happens after
the harms have already occurred and then
we start trying to figure out how to
punish people no system is gonna be
perfect
there's no world where no harms are
gonna occur what we're trying to get to
is a world where there are many fewer
harms than we currently have people will
say well what about school shootings
yeah what about all those school
shootings we got an ocean of police in
our society and yet people keep shooting
up our schools maybe it's time to try
something different yeah and as we do
that we dial back our reliance on
policing and we see what's left and we
work on that and we try to build to this
better future right but it does not
start with zeroing out policing it
starts with investing in communities
investing in fixing these problems in
ways that allow us to reduce the harms
that come with turning things over to
the police yeah so this is so
interesting I have so many conversations
with black women and a lot of their
primary concern is about violence
violence in the home violence in their
communities and a lot of that is gun
violence right and it's like police
aren't really gonna be able to do
anything as long as our gun laws are the
way that they are as long as access to
firearms is so widespread but still
people want to feel like there is a
barrier once those firearms have been
acquired between themselves and the
potential danger how do we kind of
bridge that the understanding that like
it's not doing what you you think it's
doing well there couple things here I
mean first I mean I'm all for reducing
the number of guns in society and on the
supply side that means things like you
know gun control legislation
restrictions on and manufacturer
firearms I think that's going to be
really
difficult to accomplish but I'm for it
but it doesn't address the demand side
why are people picking up guns and
mostly it's out of insecurity people
carry guns defensively and then they get
used in all kinds of different ways
suicides domestic violence you know road
rage incidents accidental shootings
right so so what can we do to drive down
the desire to have all these guns I mean
when we look at whites right it's it's
racism is a big part of it right it's
fear of the other they're stockpiling
weapons ovale rights activity gun sales
go up in the black community there are
other they're also real problems of
insecurity right we've done the police
are not able to produce the kind of
security that would allow people to
reduce their reliance on carrying guns
also a big factor in this is drugs
the war on drugs drug prohibition has
created this massive underground black
market economy where disputes are
settled with guns and where there's a
constant risk of robbery and no ability
to you know call on the legal system so
people are carrying around guns and then
somebody looks at somebody funny or cut
someone off on the road and that gun is
tandy and it gets used so we need to
look at violence interruption strategies
to work with young people to break that
cycle of violence to help them feel more
secure more connected to their
communities less alienated one of the
things we know about youth violence is
that almost every young person who was
involved in committing an act of serious
violence has been the victim of serious
and that trauma that experience never
gets addressed until they go out and
commit violence and then they're
incarcerated which just throws them into
a world with even more violence so we
got to break that cycle and we have
evidence-based strategies for doing that
that have shown real success in reducing
homicides reducing shootings reducing
gun carrying and we need to give those
strategies a chance yeah not to put you
on the spot or anything but can you name
off the top of your head a community a
city where divesting from police and
investing in other kind of community
programs has done something meaningful
to reduce the amount of violence so the
problem right is that we're in the
middle of a long term trend of
increasing policing so we've not been
given a chance but having said that you
know in New York we have a cure violence
program and we did a very high-quality
study where we picked neighborhoods with
similar demographic characteristics
around race and age and income and and
we gave one of them a cure violence site
which is you know hiring people from the
community to work with young people in a
really intensive way give them access to
services and pathways to employment and
then neighborhoods that just have
policing and the cure of violent sites
soft 50% of hire reductions in shootings
and homicides then the non cure violent
sites the policing only sites now that
didn't involve a dialing back of
policing and what we hear from the cure
violence workers is that they're still
having to deal with the police and that
that is actually making their job more
difficult
um I've recently heard people mention
Camden New Jersey as a space we're
moving away from traditional policing
has worked do you know anything about
that
so Camden is tricky
I mean Camden is not certainly not what
I'm proposing Camden was in part about
breaking the Union there so that they
could bring in more officers at lower
pay with no work rules so that they
could have them work crazy shifts and
stuff and arrests in Camden have
actually gone up more people are getting
arrested
it's an intensification of policing but
it's being done you know in this highly
community policing oriented style so
people's perceptions have improved and
there have been some reductions in crime
which may in part be because the
corruption of the old police force has
been taken out of the equation and and
people have kind of hit the reset button
but the police in Camden have now formed
their own union and the crime declines
are not really continuing and I I
suspect we'll be right back where we
started in a few years unless there's a
major effort to actually invest in
community-based solutions that's
depressing yeah something that I wanted
to talk about so I do consider myself to
be Pro labor but it really seems like
police unions are a huge reason why
meaningful reform just won't happen I
frankly been really disturbed by the
public statements from the SBA the
sergeant's benevolent association in New
York like they're the things that they
just tweet or whoever is behind médicale
I'm in other unions across the country
they just have no couth it is very
strange to me do you think it would be
possible to work with police unions so
that they might reel themselves in a bit
I think if we just gave them some
implicit bias training that would fix it
I mean in these these unions are
straight-up racist there's just no other
way to understand the discourse it's
coming out a lot of these unions and
they
actively defend officers accused of
racist misconduct they cover up the
racism on the chat boards the Facebook
pages and make excuses for it you know
so what do we do well I'm also a
unionist a fourth-generation unionist so
I'm not really in the habit of breaking
unions I think once we could go down
that road that's gonna come back to bite
us in the ass what we have to do is we
have to limit their political power and
to make it clear that they're not part
of our labor movement so the Labor
Federation in Seattle just voted to
exclude the local police union from this
from the local labor council and I think
they should be that should happen across
the country they should be taken out of
the afl-cio those those that are in it
most are not even in it they don't even
want to be part of our labor
we should sever as many ties with them
as we can but more importantly I think
we have to neutralize their political
influence on elected officials and the
way to do that is to make their
endorsements and contributions
politically toxic we have to expose
every politician who takes that cop
money and that cop endorsement and say
that that person cannot be our friend
anymore that's it we're done with you
because by accepting that money you're
embracing a racist politics designed to
keep our communities incarcerated and
brutalized because that's what that cop
money is about it's not about getting 2
percent on their pension it's about
enabling a whole right-wing ideology
that says the only thing those people
understand are handguns and ticket books
and handcuffs and batons and and that's
a racist worldview so I have been struck
by how often it seems like local
politicians are afraid of police I can
think of
a few instances across the country where
it seems like mayor's and you know
governors and that they are so hesitant
to call it thing a thing and say that
was violent heard that was wrong or that
was stupid is it because of the
political power that those unions wield
you know I think it's important right to
understand that it's not just the
members of the union that that these
unions have become a kind of
institutional home for a whole set of
really conservative right-wing politics
so white homeowners groups and gated
communities and also elite interests
downtown real estate interests right
they also embrace this ideology and so
the Union speaks for them as well in
many ways and so that's what politicians
are afraid of and we have to just point
out how rancid and races this politics
is at every turn
not just to neutralize the police union
membership but all those people who are
inline with it so for me you know when
you mentioned right-wing politics that
concerns me as a black person and that's
a woman because we know that's racism
and misogyny animate so much of that
that stuff and something that I do worry
about is that we divest from police and
we build up these new institutions and
we put it in communities or we brought
in social services and that the racism
that is currently in the police system
and also currently in a lot of social
work and all back in the stuff and the
sexism that's there that it's simply
recreated that we are just reproducing
the kinds of marginalization that we're
trying to get away from by abolishing
policing how do you think that we might
be able to avoid some of that yeah this
is really important right we all know
the history of Social Work in denying
women benefits
because they find you know a man's
toothbrush or razor in the bathroom and
and their role in you know pressuring
women around birth control and things
like this so there's obviously reason
for concern here I think part of it has
to be that this does not come as a kind
of prepackaged top-down program telling
communities what they need that this has
to be a bottom-up movement of
communities demanding what they think
will work and that they have some say in
how these things are implemented who and
that we're we're hiring people from the
community to do this work I think that
that's important I mean they're gonna be
problems it's not gonna be perfect
they're gonna be high school counselors
who turn out to be jerks you know so
it's not gonna be perfect but I think
it's a lot better than relying on armed
police yeah you know I think that what
you you mentioned earlier about we're
not going to flip a switch one day and
all police are gonna be magically gone
like thinking of this more as a process
can be really can be really helpful
there yes yes and it's about you know
not just bringing those social workers
that people have to deal with when they
need a childcare voucher out into the
community it's about creating new
institutions and new structures and
hiring new people and creating new
missions right for those folks that are
really rooted in community safety not in
you know micromanaging the poor yeah so
do talk about funding because I just
read this book called decriminalizing
domestic violence by lis good mark which
was so interesting and she talked about
how after the passage of the Violence
Against Women Act and also after the
passage of the 1994 crime bill both
authored by Jobar
by the way um gave hundreds of millions
of dollars to police and the outcomes
have been just bad like really not good
for women of any race when it comes to
domestic violence and like catastrophic
when it comes to black communities about
the crime bill so much of these
conversations are still about money more
money new money whatever why does not
give why does giving police money not
work well first let me say that Lee has
written a great book and really
encouraged people to take a look at it
and also you know Beth Ritchie's book
arrested justice that really talks about
how turning domestic violence over to
the criminal justice system is not
helping women especially black women and
you know Lee spent has spent decades
working in the domestic violence field
trying to help women and she says the
criminal justice system is not helping
these women and we need these
alternatives so every dollar that we you
know let's talk about this on the
federal level for a minute since you
mentioned VAWA and the 9400 crime bill
what that did is it it subsidized this
process of mask from utilization it
poured billions of dollars into policing
and prisons it incentivized States to
make drug laws harsher to end probation
and parole programs and the Violence
Against Women Act took what had been
primarily a community based movement run
by women and turn it over to the
criminal justice system and said you can
only have money if you cooperate with
the courts and you get become integrated
into the parole system and the probation
system and that you you inform on people
to the police and right which killed the
credibility of these programs just made
in an extension of criminalization so
one of the things that's being talked
about now and there's a national
movement the People's Coalition for
safety and freedom that includes a lot
of important national groups like law
for black lives in the Center for
popular tomorrow
Christie and the Advancement Project
there they're calling for a complete
reversal of the 94 crime bill so instead
of subsidizing school policing we should
be subsidizing school counselors and
restorative justice programs instead of
turning domestic violence into a
criminal justice issue we should be
funding all these community-based
initiatives that would give women and
families resources ideally to keep
families together right most people want
their family to work right they don't
want their partner to be brutalized and
criminalized they want the family to
work but but the Violence Against Women
Act is just about criminalizing people
and tearing these families apart which
is why women don't call the police
because it's not helping them so what
can we do to shift the resources out of
policing and into actually helping these
families yeah and there is a bill that's
being discussed by folks like Ayanna
Presley and and Omari Alon and some of
the other more progressive members of
Congress that that would propose doing
exactly this so keeping along the paths
of how women are affected by this and a
lot of the conversation about abolishing
the police and defunding the police and
moving away from policing as an
institution it often centers black men
and black boys and the the chapter in
your book that I was really really
struck by was chapter four and it's
called we called for help and they
killed my son and it we often don't hear
the stories of black women who call the
police because they they want help for
somebody in their family they call the
police because something is happening
inside of their home and the police
because they are a violence institution
as you mentioned they escalate and often
kill and maim so could we talk just a
little bit about how black women in
their homes and in their communities are
so negatively impacted by the way that
the police function
it's such a huge problem I mean in
overall between a quarter and a half of
all people killed by police in United
States are having a mental health crisis
and of course this burden falls
disproportionately on those communities
that can't afford high quality health
care that don't have a mental health
component to their to their health
insurance or don't have any health
insurance at all and rely on emergency
rooms and state hospitals and you know
so so this is even if the police say
well we just go where the calls are but
there's the reason the calls are
concentrated in these places because
they already are at a disadvantage
and so we've told these families that
when there's a crisis they got a call
9-1-1 they don't have a primary care
physician they don't have a
community-based mental health clinic
that can handle problems in the middle
of the night and a lot of these families
don't have access to good ongoing
quality care that would prevent a crisis
from happening in the first place
Jumaane Williams who's the elected
public advocate in New York City issued
a report recently that lays out a plan
for getting police out of the mental
health business and it starts with
creating real community-based mental
health care facilities drop-in centers
regular primary mental health care and
then if someone has a crisis a high
quality 24/7 Crisis Response Unit
capacity that doesn't rely on armed
police where they can go and deal with
this as clinicians including dealing
with situations which are volatile
because you know using guns and tasers
is not the only possible way of dealing
with someone who's acting out and often
when we introduce someone with a badge
and a gun
we actually further destabilize that
situation we make the situation worse
better someone who can come in loath
no one's getting arrested
no one's getting shot there's that no
one's gonna be able to commit suicide by
cop which is what the cops always say
well we didn't have any choice he picked
up a gun we had to kill him that's only
because the person knows that if they
call 911 with a gun is gonna come and
shoot them if they want them to yeah
yeah all right so we just got to break
that whole dynamic down um so I'm gonna
revisit this because this is the big
thing any time we talk about best people
have been so upset about okay so we get
rid of policing are you not worried
about the serial rapists that are
walking down the street are you not
worried about the serial murderer of
course I'm worried that's the whole
point of this movement we're we're
worried that we're not doing a good job
of catching those serial murderers and
rapists now we need something that's
better now we don't know exactly what
all of these strategies are gonna look
like what is producing that behavior in
the first place that is a behavior that
just falls out of the sky from nowhere
you know remember I said before people
who commit violence have been the
victims of violence that's true in these
cases as well all right these are folks
whose lives have been powerfully
disordered by violence and abuse and by
limiting our approach to the criminal
justice system we we wait until these
things become so out of hand that so
many people have been harmed that it
seems like well the only option is to
put them in a cage but where were the
earlier interventions I mean almost
everyone who gets caught eventually
doing these horrible things this is not
the first time someone said this person
is a risk there's something scary about
this person but nothing was done because
they weren't caught in the act by the
police and because
there was no other way to respond look
at school shootings almost every single
school shooting there were people who
suspected that this person was gonna do
something but there was no system in
place to do anything about it
sometimes the cops got called and they
went to someone's house but what could
they do that they can there's nothing
they can do because they only get
involved after the harm has been done
yeah yeah I mean that you just touched
on something that I try to reiterate to
people all of the time particularly when
it comes to domestic violence situations
is unfortunately when we see those
stories about people who have been
killed and talked about school shootings
when we talk about women who are killed
by their partners those women have often
done exactly what they are told to do
when they're scared our police does not
prevent violence it might postpone
violence in my postpone harm but it is
not really meaningfully intervening in
the cycle that causes people to be
killed it's not fixing it right it's not
and those those killings are never the
first incident yeah there's always a
long trail that's leading up to that and
where were the interventions earlier in
the process yeah so to wrap it up we are
I don't know if this is a moment I don't
know if this is a movement but something
is happening how do you feel about the
prospects that we might actually be on
the brink of a a broad social
transformation and moving away from
tradition as we traditionally know it
well
you know it is it is a it is a moment it
isn't opening but we've got it we've got
to move from just Street protests I mean
we got to keep the street protest going
that's the only reason we're having this
moment right but we also have to take
that energy and we have to turn it into
real political power yeah and that means
we gotta you know oh not just occupy
streets we got to occupy City Hall we
got to occupy City Council offices we've
also got to take more
all over our communities you know we've
got to occupy those those neighborhood
meetings we got out we got to occupy
those precinct community council
meetings you know we got to be there
saying we've got a better vision for our
community and ultimately that's gonna
require community organize because we
can't win this in abstract debates we
got to convince our neighbors right next
door that we have a better strategy for
keeping them safe yeah that means we got
to talk to people you know one on one
and do that hard work that's what we
learned from the labor movement right
the late unions get formed and develop
power because they go out and they talk
to each member one-on-one and address
their concerns and involve them in the
process and we got to do that at the
community level to do as much as we can
yeah well that's all I have thank you so
much for taking some time professor
Battaglia I really appreciate it
great conversation I really enjoyed it
yeah I'm have a good day and again I
appreciate you for squeezing me in thank
you and also the inter policing is great
I don't think it's like nobody can find
it so I've just been sending people to
PDF it's free right now it's free to
download for free on verso books com
we've made it free they've been over
200,000 free downloads of the blow up
and the print copies some more have
arrived and more will be coming so if
you're one of those people who likes to
write in your book you know it's it's an
inexpensive book and more copies are
coming thank you so much for watching be
sure to like share and subscribe leave a
comment down below please read the end
of policing it is super illuminating
it's available for free in many places
get the PDF read it share it with your
friends super important hit me up on
Instagram or Twitter shout out to the
patrons shut up to the members love
y'all so much I think y'all solve this
before everybody else cuz I had some
questions thank y'all for the feedback
sign up for the email newsletter are you
guys
finally in a position where this
newsletter is gonna be a thing I'm
actually very excited about it sign up
for that
take care of yourselves get tested if
you can social distance if you can wear
a mask I will talk to you later bye


## Keywords:
