---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a02tlv2kSaM
---

# Video
Noah Goodman - Understanding rational speech acts
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a02tlv2kSaM)

## Transcript:
okay I'm very happy to be here this is
really fun session in conference so this
talk is about what words mean and how we
understand them in context it's a pretty
short talks web has made it jump
straight to the theory and hopefully
over the course of the talk you'll start
to see why that theory becomes useful in
particular interesting examples that are
sort of the intersection between
philosophy and psychology so Chris as
most of you know a research program on
understanding many was an understanding
and it was based on the idea that
language was an action saying something
most action is taken he says this quote
what it might have ages to see
it's a special case or variety the
purpose of indeed rational behavior in
the decades since Christ a lot of people
have built on this night Vienna and then
realized practical behavior in a lot of
different ways I tell you about is the
way that I some others have been
approaching this where we draw on the
mathematical framework of Bayesian
decision theory as a way of capturing
what it means to take a rational action
so I've been today that you start it's
very simple you simply say look there's
a probability that a speaker above X 1
will make
whether it's given the state of the
world and it's simply proportional to e
to the utility of that other internet
world so so far that doesn't really say
anything beyond their some function u
that describes how good in under in
cities in particular so to capture the
Gracey an idea that people are being
actually helpful quadrant we had first a
very simple utility that says that the
utility is actually something that's
based on the updating of a literal
decision so this is the probability that
a literal listener will cast the correct
world given the utterance we take a long
to turn it into units of information and
then finally in order to fully specify
that we have to say well what does the
literal listener do to if their beliefs
with a hair evidence and we simply say
literal listener starts with their kind
of beliefs about what the world is they
multiply it by this Delta function which
says look up the denotation on the other
hand see if it's true in the world
and if so you're good otherwise we run
out that world and then remark applies
so this is a Bayesian updater whose
assuming the other X is true and now we
have a model where there's speaker is
taking the rational action in order to
be informative right others tend to come
to this notional literal listener so
what we've done is basically realized
braces may be an idea
but instead of appealing to seven Gracie
and Maxim's to capture the constraints
of international speech we captured that
in the form of utility function that's
nice because it starts to make
quantitative predictions which I'll show
you the other before I show you the data
let me just show you take a brief detour
and talk about this literal meaning
things that we need so in the
formulation of the last slide we have a
pretty standard which functional
denotation this brand-new thing and
really think of that as being derived
from a compositional semantics something
that Montagu worked it was very happy
and used to seeing it takes the other
engine and directs a function from
world's to yes we put in principle relax
that and say well it doesn't have to be
a function that says yes or no to each
world they could assign a number how
good is this world for this utterance
it would straight from our to revise the
model we just say okay now there's a
function the utterance is a function
that takes the world and you two are
done over we multiply the tire by that
real number and then we were normalized
so this is just a soft version of the
same the same motion we mostly haven't
done this over the years because it
wasn't clear it was useful but recently
we kind of
ourselves until we decided to try this
again so the context was these very
simple reference games so on the left
you can imagine being a listener you've
seen this kind of objects you get a
little chat to go where you can talk to
the speaker maybe you say hi which
object are we training to guess and then
the other person is the speaker over
here they see the same set of objects
the complementary chat window but they
have one of the objects selected that's
the target and so they take back
whatever they want to maybe they type
back something like the target is a
little orange mission it turns out that
a referential expression like that
little orange fish is very typical of
what people do but if you start to think
about it it's kind of puzzling because
in order to pick out this object all you
need to say is fish okay and so you know
a rational speech production kind of
story it seems basically impossible to
get that people should add extra words
that aren't necessary to pick up the
record and this notion of over
informative generation for referential
expressions has a long history and this
pointing to
yeah but there's many people who have
worked on this all the co-authors so
this is a problem for the basic speech
act idea so people do tend to produce
over informative referring expressions
with deterministic meanings of the
rational action approach can't explain
that however if you assume that the
meetings actually are not deterministic
but their continuous value what that
means is that you know for instance in
this situation if you say you have a
small chance that dog will be
misinterpreted as not gone or that this
will be interpreted as being time and so
if you add extra terms like you know a
scary-looking dog that's that that is
redundant information which is useful
for decreasing the probability of
miscommunication so once we make the
very small move of relaxing the meaning
to be a real number
all the soaking this this thing that was
called Bluebird informative ax T is not
over informative it's actual actually
redundancy so we wanted to test this and
heard to test this we were going to have
the same kind of reference game settings
where we manipulated how closely the
distractors were in terms of category
distance to the target we needed so
number to plug in though for the
this continuous value literally named so
we went back to ancient history and you
know 30 years ago when people were
thinking about category technicality we
did an arming experiment where for every
target object and every now we simply
ask how typical is this object for Table
four dolphin four etc that gives us a
number which we were scale to zero and
one for the connection between the now
and the object and we just take that to
be the literal meaning for denotation
it's kind of nice because the extreme
cases do what you want you know people
will say that this is very atypical as a
bear do you get 0 x9 falls and it's
pretty typical at the table so you get
close to one vertex like true but there
are other things which recommended a
typical tables that will have
intermediate values on this measure
okay so we take those those typicality
ratings we plug them into the denotation
and then we can get model predictions
where we systematically vary how closely
the target and distractors are won't go
through the hole in the details here and
the world of the story here is that you
just
look at the conditions they sort of how
close the distractors are to the target
the people and the model say that you
should be over important if more when
the distractors are closer and less when
they're farther apart and the next thing
is that this these predictions by the
model are there only because the model
is able to stay and in some extra words
provides a rationale for mode of you're
going to obtain in this case it's not
just afterwards it's also it could be
dog versus pup versus an animal so the
level of description more satisfying
this is a scatterplot fitting model
predict the probability versus the
empirical data and that this is not
collapsing across my nose so this is the
incredibly messy and actually pretty
sparse raw data you can see that there's
a very good correlation still between
the actual production behavior of people
in this experiment and the production
that the model thinks is the reasonable
okay so take away from this is two
things one this what's actually a fairly
simple rational production model is not
a bad model production that leads to
these sort of things and two it requires
relaxing the semantics to something
that's a little bit more continuous in
order to
redundancy is useful okay so let's move
on from production to comprehension now
so this was what Christmas was mostly
now they're thinking about how a
reflective listener with interpreting
utterance if they believe this weaker is
being an irrational speaker and we could
capture that in a very important way we
simply say that the listener is a
Bayesian belief updater who's going to
update her beliefs from the data that
they've observed up here in the
utterance critically the generative
model that they have on the
together its came from is a model of a
speaker whose irrational election
rational Leonard selector so this simply
said is that there's some prior beliefs
about which World War II we assume that
the utterance came from the speaker
choosing what to say and as the rational
speaker from slides ago and then you
read normalize and that's basically it
says okay now I have a posterior
believes given the utterance just the
way you know this is actually a fairly
complex model even though it looks like
one simple line because this model
refers to the S one speaker model and
then the S one speaker model refers to
the L 0 mover listener model right so
there's this kind of social recursion
and I think the new thing that I think
so my co-authors and I have for a better
reverse of this the rational speech acts
model because of the idea that the
listener thinks of the speaker as
Tuesday approximately rational speech
acts and I wanted to point out that it's
very related to a bunch of work in game
theoretic pragmatics and linguistics
going back to an interesting
intellectual history there that I was
getting so you can use this model of
comprehension for a lot of the
interesting but standard phenomena
in particular scale implicature so you
can capture it things like some is
interpreted as some but not all except
when it isn't
for instance what there's only partial
knowledge from the speaker you can
capture behavior of both adults and kids
in terms of these scalar integers of my
friend has glasses I don't want to tell
you in any detail about any of that
there's a lot to say but it's not as
exciting to me is where I'm going next
which is to say there's a small catch to
this model so far namely the pragmatic
listener has to imagine a particular
speaker or to interpret an utterance but
if you a little bit if they often be
that the pragmatic listener is not sure
exactly what kind of speaker they're
hearing from right so what should you do
when you know that you're getting an
utterance from a helpful speaker like
I'm not sure exactly what time is
speaker that's well as if a patient you
should just do a joint difference so
here I'm writing theta to represent all
of these speaker specific information
anyway
okay the probability that hundreds from
a speaker depends on the world and also
which kind of speaker that is there's
maybe some prior ovirt-engine speakers
and then we do a joint difference of the
world and the kind of speaker okay he
turns out this is a very small change to
the model in Iran this turns out it has
huge profound and interesting
consequences and the consequences to
depend on exactly what aspect of the
speaker you lift it this way recently so
we work that I won't tell you about
today they show that you can introduce
and lift a topic or PUD and that gives
rise to not literal understanding like
hyperbole a metaphor you can lift being
prior this.w aspects of the background
of knowledge and that seems to give rise
to some presupposition of a projection
from rimmel though there's a lot of work
to be done still on that what you talk
about for the rest of today is what
happens when you imagine that that
speaker might be in some
and you're not sure exactly what so if
you have uncertainty about the details
of the lexicon the details of Porter
Phoenix so let's dig into that and then
I'm going to Indian by switching gears a
little bit and reminding you all about
this crazy class of words both main
adjectives so they technically
adjectives are adjectives like tall that
seems to refer to a degree along the
scale and they're interesting because
they have three properties of their
characteristic of vagueness so the first
thing is their class relative so the
tall building is totally different than
a tall man and that already tells you
that there's something kind of swirly
and interesting with the meaning of tall
it's not self-contained depends on and
these are the things is composing the
the second thing is that there are order
line cases so there are people who would
not have agreed that they're tall that
you would not agree that they're not
taller just I don't know right I am
terribly
finally there's this this great classic
paradox going back to ancient Greece
history that's a pity
and here's a particular example of it
the Sears Tower is a tall building many
people agree okay a building have to be
in order that a tall building is a tub
only how many people agree and all
publics in Chicago works on how many
people agree so the puzzle here for me
there's a couple of ways to think about
why this isn't one is permanently like
what should our lack of work length
given this paradox but the interesting
part for me is the psychological puzzle
of what is it that people are doing when
they agree or disagree such that they
are very happy to endorse the first two
parentheses here but they very firmly
rejected the conclusion which seems to
follow from mathematical deduction so we
started thinking about this and we first
went to the what's basically standard
lexical semantics for for magic tips
scaler gratitude tips so just assume
that there's some scale so for tombola
scale right and it would be reasonable
if you figure out whether the ending
is true or not by simply comparing to
some threshold along that scale so you
say okay that boy is tall that he's
taller than a meter great this by the
way is the useful semantics for
explaining a bunch of compositional
semantics details which is what people
like Chris Kennedy were using it for it
feels like it could be explanatory about
the interpretation of adjectives if we
do have a set the threshold as we don't
so the idea here is well let's just
treat the threshold is one of these
unknown but inferred aspects of how this
speaker uses language so you know you
say to me Bob is tall and I think okay I
don't know exactly what you mean my tall
there's some fresh hold music I'm gonna
have to defer it while I interpret this
utterance okay so normally you can
basically say let's let lexical items
introduce free variables it's very
standard they want to do it so that this
manner specified and then let's live
with three variables to be resolved by
the pragmatics list
okay so basically all I've done is
change the original RSA model rationals
Detex model by introducing this data
variable which is impaired at the
literal and the pragmatic listener and
it's passed down and its uses here and
the denotation function and whatever way
- that's all it does it just gets
inferred by the pragmatic listener and
used in an appropriate way by the
invitation and for us with the adjective
tall
it's simply providing the threshold
comparison okay so if we take that model
and then we look at and posterior
inferences when you just hear about this
call you get interesting behavior so
this is a kind of simplified example
just to show you what the model does so
the black curve here is the assumed
prior distribution over Heights so you
know people are about 0.5 tall but with
a normal distribution the yellow line is
the distribution over the prior
distribution of our thresholds the
design informant you have no idea how
the speaker can use this magic gift all
huh
the interesting thing is the red curve
here which is the posterior distribution
over X after you hear talk so you have
inferred that the person is taller than
the the upper area the average not
maximally tall but pretty tall energy
standard deviations and that's basically
because there's enough
the pragmatic reasoning where we'd
figure out you know where you should put
the phone you don't want to put in too
little because then it would be an
informative letter it's to say to all
and we think that speakers are trying to
be a part of it you don't want to put it
too high because it would be very
unlikely to be true we think that things
said the world is like the prior matters
in determining what the world is like so
instead we put the threshold is sort of
a happy medium middle where it's
informative but not impossible
okay how does this help with the
surroundings well in terms of this
kinematic dimension that's the Sears
Tower the mention has the building have
a metre shorter than the Sears Tower so
this is being the part of the
distribution over thresholds where the
shorter building will still count as
tall and as you can see that's most of
the probability mass right so it is
going to be not preferable I'm not
certain but very likely that the
slightly shorter building is still tall
and that goes through even if you don't
have a particular known height to start
with so you say condition of me being
quality the small epsilon and asked
whether B minus epsilon is filled
as long as epsilon is small that would
be true with high probability so that is
the inductive premise is not validated
doesn't it probably would have won but
in it's very high probability it's a
very reasonable conclusion okay so we
wanted to test this first we had to get
the actual prior knowledge there's some
range so we elicited prior distribution
over crisis context and black ops
sweaters and watches and then we took
those prior distributions and put them
into the model then we had that target
judgments which were both the simple
usage of black victims watch the US you
know $3,000 it's expensive and we're
disagree and then the inductive Rainey's
premise sweater that must be colors less
than inexpensive sweater is also be
expensive agree or disagree and we
systematically marry the category and
the prices that were in each of these
utterances so on the Left showing you as
the concrete premises the model
prediction versus the mean human data
and you can see first of all the the
model predicts the human they are very
well and second of all it's a tentative
between classes all of the different
colors are more or less on high watches
maybe a little bit screwy detective all
there's radiation including these
borderline cases in the Middle where
people as well on the right I'm showing
you the behavior for this Arabia dr.
Prentice and so when the epsilon is
people are happy to agree to that
premise and the model says that they
should be happy too interestingly as the
epsilon gets bigger you know a lot of it
cost a million dollars less than an
expensive watches expensive no and so
both people and the model will start to
say no that's not okay I'm out of time I
wanted to play so the basic idea here is
we're leveraging the idea that there's
an underlying scale and that the
semantics could be a very simple scale
which is only what's complicated because
of the pragmatic inference that idea can
be exported to a lot of other words in
other domains so my graduate students
Michael Murray Tesla is around here
somewhere
and some really excellent data and work
on generics where we do exactly the same
thing assuming that the underlying scale
for the generic is the predictive of the
probability of the property
other kind here's just a you know here's
the beautiful slide showing that the
model is able to predict the data and
critically it predicts the data even for
a bunch of philosophically puzzle in
cases it's like mosquitoes carry malaria
fortunately or evil all even though I
can't describe it there's going to be a
poster on this so please go Michael
Henry's poster to hear all of the
amazing details about generics Mitchells
the last thing on Saturday but this will
encourage you to go it's such a great
poster okay that time the basic takeaway
here is that there's this formalized
version of uncertain rational speech act
interpretation the use for an
uncertainty of the speaker that provides
a quantitative theory of how language is
interpreted in context and in some sense
formalizing the Gracie and notions with
some other words refining and doing new
things and I only should be one example
but I believe that this kind of approach
is really fruitful
philosophically interesting cases
because we can get a lot of leverage
from very simple semantics undergoing
complicated interactions with prior
knowledge and reasoning about the
speaker


## Keywords:
