---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aVKYD6YAaqA
---

# Video
Noam Chomsky on Tactics of Active Resistance (Protests, Boycotts)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aVKYD6YAaqA)

## Transcript:
in the upcoming video n Chomsky speaks
about tactics to be used in active
resistance be it boycotts or protests
let's get to the video and following are
some key points of chomsky's views on
tactics of resistance can people take
power and fight against arms trade drugs
trade and so on and if so can they
should they do it by violence well you
know just just forget about principle
for a moment and just think about
tactics I mean you want to pick tactics
that are likely to achieve something
otherwise it's just posturing well if
you if you if you look for tactics that
might achieve something you don't uh uh
accept the
Battleground that your opponent
prefers now the state power prefers
violence they have a monopoly of
violence you know no matter how much
violence protesters will use they'll use
more that's why say from the 1960s when
I talking to students about uh activism
I I advise them not to wear helmets in
demonstrations I mean yes the police are
violent but if you wear a helmet they'll
just get more violent and if you come
along with you know a rifle they'll come
along with a tank you come with a tank
they'll come with a B-52 you know that's
it's not it's a battle you're going to
lose uh and their you know their
strength is violent uh
the strength of the opposition is
popular mobilization and nonviolence
actually that's what happened in Iraq
strikingly in Iraq of course it's never
discussed that way uh you know the
governments and media and intellectuals
don't want you to know about the power
of of about popular power and what can
be achieved by nonviolence but if you
think about in Iraq that's pretty much
what happened
uh there was violent
resistance us easily crushed it you know
they can kill insurgents they can level
fua they can you know destroy towns and
Villages no matter what it is they have
much more violence at their command what
they could not do was deal with
nonviolent
demonstrations when the ayatolla sistani
called for people to come out in the
streets and demand elections
which the US was trying to prevent they
were all the way through they wanted to
prevent elections to impose their own
clients and so on they just couldn't
respond they couldn't do anything with
hundreds of thousands of people in the
streets so they permitted elections then
they tried to control and manipulate the
elections well they ran into the force
of Iraqi nationalism finally at the end
it's what I said by January 2008 they
were insisting us that they have to have
permanent military bases permanent right
to carry out military actions and
control Ira Iraq's oil resources they
had to back down in the face of mass
popular nonviolent resistance well those
are the tools of uh of the weak you know
it's what makes you strong I think that
boycott and is a very good idea if it's
properly targeted so I think it makes
good sense to boycott say American
corporations or French corporations that
are operating in the occupied
territories I mean they're criminals and
they should be blocked but what about an
academic boycut
you and personally I've never been in
favor of academic boycotts even South
Africa and in this case either let's put
aside any question of principle and
reduce it just to the question of
tactics again uh now you have to
whenever you make tactical decisions you
have to ask who are you trying to help
are you trying to help yourself so that
you'll feel good or are you trying to
help the victims so that you'll do
something for them now that leads to
very different tactical choices always
in this case uh suppose that the
question is boycotting say Kaa
University that's a gift to the
hardliners
they're going to immediately say and
correctly you're a total hypocrite why
aren't you boycotting the sban or
Harvard or
Oxford their countries are involved in
much worse
atrocities so why boycott hii University
so it's total hypocrisy it's a gift to
hardliners uh who can undermine the
content of the the goal the theoretical
goal of the boycott it may make the
people who are doing it feel good but
it's harming the
Palestinians uh that's pretty common for
example in during the Vietnam War I was
rather struck by the fact that the
Vietnamese were strongly opposed to U uh
actions like say the
weathermen young kids nice kids you know
I admired them I sympathized with them
but their way of posing the war was to
go down the street and break store
windows
okay Vietnamese were strongly opposed to
that because they want to survive they
don't care if American students feel
good and they understood correctly that
marching down the street with signs and
breaking store Windows just increases
support for the war which is exactly
what it did it's a tactic that it's a
Feelgood tactic like I'm doing something
but it's harmful to the victims what the
Vietnamese were impressed with and said
so is U you know if there was a silent
demonstration of women at a grave let's
say that they thought was impressive and
it's kind of thing you should do and
it's true if you want if your goal is to
help the victims and the same is true in
this case if you want to help the
Palestinians think about what the
consequences of the tactics are there's
also questions of principle but I've put
that aside what about the the
consequences okay and it's not hard to
figure out Chomsky believes deeply in
understanding the underlying causes of
social problems he emphasizes reading
research and critical thinking is
crucial for Effective resistance Chomsky
argues that social change requires broad
public awareness and participation he
encourages people to engage in
discussions Community organizing and
activism at the Grassroots level Chomsky
sees dominant media Outlets as tools for
maintaining power structures he
encourages people to critically analyze
media content and seek out independent
sources of information while Chomsky
acknowledges the necessity of resist
throughout history he generally
advocates for nonviolent tactics well I
hope you like the video and give the
channel a subscribe if you wish you can
join the channel as a member it would be
greatly appreciated also if you would
check out and subscribe to my other
channel Progressive Movement link is on
the homepage and in the comment section
thank you now take care and bye-bye
















oh


## Keywords:
