---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o8EG_YTnrYQ
---

# Video
On Patterns of Commoning and the Commons
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o8EG_YTnrYQ)

## Transcript:
Welcome to our peer-to-peer
podcast um today we're going to be
talking about the commons and patterns
of commoning uh we've got some peers
with us today uh we have Sila hrich
David Boler and Nicholas
parin uh so to begin I thought that we
would uh each take a moment to introduce
ourselves in true peer fashion
and uh so I'll I'll start uh my name is
Tammy leem Meer I live in what's known
as
Vancouver uh and in in the unseated co-
Salish territories of the musqueam the
Squamish and the slooth
people I sit on the board of directors
for a small Credit Union called
CCE and that stands for Community
Congress for economic
change and I am am an affiliate with
sensora which is an open value Network
that has a Fab Lab in Montreal and help
and produces Open Source
Hardware uh I sit on the working group
as a member for the working group for
indigenous food sovereignty and I also
live in a community home where over the
last 10 years I've lived with over 300
people and so Sila I would invite you to
introduce yourself
yeah first of all thanks for the
invitation my name is ZKA hel I'm from
East Germany that is I I I grew up very
close to what has been the system border
between East and West Germany and then I
guess I became a kind of Cosmopolitan
I've been working in Latin America for
um a few years and when I came back in
2007 I started to work as freelance on
the com coms co-founder I'm co-founder
of um a Loosely connected group of
comments activists David among them
called Commons strategies group and in
Germany as well I co-founded the commons
Institute wonderful thank you so much
Sila
David um I'm uh David Boler I live in
Western Massachusetts and I'm an
activist
blogger book author uh with a primary
focus on the commons I spent many years
in Washington DC as a public interest
activist with Ralph nater and later with
the TV producer activist Norman leer
I've been working on the commons for 15
or 20 years increasingly with
International activists and Scholars
including Sila hrich and Michelle Bowens
of the peer-to-peer
foundation and uh essentially we tried
to advance the commons Paradigm in a
variety of ways culturally politically
economically and through
activism wonderful thank you
Nicholas yeah hi my name is Nicholas pin
nice to see you all um I am I guess from
Kansas in the States but also currently
here in Vancouver in the unseated Coast
Salish territories and I think probably
most relevant for this conversation is
um
uh my participation in the metac
currency project which is a group of
people currency designers and coders and
kind of cultural hackers that are um I
guess in support of scepter which is a
recompose medium for distributed social
Computing it's kind of a a blockchain
like code architecture that we'll be
launching in 2017 that we think is a
kind of um grammar uh for constructing
pattern languages around commenting and
so I'm super excited for uh the research
you all are bringing
together wonderful so I thought we might
start with language which is a critical
commment and something that we all share
some of us uh have more languages than
others um but it is important for us to
really understand what is the comons and
what is commoning so I would invite uh
either David or Sil
to uh to share
that well I can I can stop because David
already mentioned that he looks at
Commons as a paradigm right but in fact
if you look at the commons literature
you will find very different
perspectives kind of different entry
points to defining the commons there's
one when one very common approach which
is I would call it a resource focused
approach that is basically defining the
commons as collective resources which
are owned collectively and shared and
stewarded um uh collectively so this is
a kind of resource focused approach
where it matters very much if you look
at if you share water or if you share
knowledge a second entry point would be
for me and this comes closer to my
understanding of the comments is
focusing on social relationships and on
the social
process that enables and enacts Commons
so to say this is something we call
commoning and commoning as social
process is determining in in the common
discourse and
framework and perhaps and this connects
back to what David just said um a third
level would be looking at the comment as
as an attitude as a world viw as a
concrete expression
specific in each context of an ongoing
paradigm
shift and I would just add to all this
that part of the challenge in building
the commons is escaping a lot of archaic
language that we don't even know is
archaic because it is an artifact of the
20th century industrial era of thinking
that for example the idea of thinking of
Commons just as a resource is a very
conventional economic perspective as
opposed to what language that realizes
this is about Dynamic social
relationships that are changing that
have to be negotiated and coordinated
which is a different plane of discussion
which our language needs to reflect so
part of the challenge that I struggle
with myself is escaping the limitations
of of existing language and to develop
new ways New Logic new vocabulary to
adequately Express what commoning is all
about well you basically you cannot
describe the commons with the word of a
market based
economy you need to come up with new
Concepts which are kind of focused on
how to deepen social relationships how
to really assess the social process how
to assess complex social systems and you
cannot rely on mechanistic ontologies uh
when doing
I I think by shifting from the emphasis
on the commons to commoning you've
actually you know really successfully
plac this sort of at the center of the
storm so to speak it's not necessarily a
sort of a an Nostalgia or reaction to
enclosure but there is a way I think
that you're moving more towards the um
knowledge economy um sort of ontology in
the way that um speaking and sharing
there's there's a different way I think
in which you're speaking about commoning
than the Commons in the resource uh
management I wonder if you might not
spell that out a little bit more for
us well um sorry if you look at if you
look at common taxonomy so or common
categorizations let's say in the Commons
literature you will very often find Cate
like the digital comments the material
comments the traditional comments Etc
and this is a categorization based on
this resource focused thinking for
instance people say and economists say
this is basically neoclassical economy
that you have resources that get more
that get become more when we share them
and you have resources that become less
when we share them and we should treat
them differently which is correct but
this doesn't make up yet for a
categorization as
if a water comment would be different at
its heart at its core from knowledge
comments I believe that it isn't I
believe that every comment has a
material basis every comment being it in
a digital world or knowledge comments or
producing Wikipedia at the very end of
the day needs to use material resources
from from the planet energy for instance
food to feed the people who who produce
knowledge for instance so each comment
has a material
basis at the same time each comment as a
knowledge comments because it doesn't
it's not important whether you manage
Ste and share water or knowledge you
need to know first of all how to do it
you need to know how a commoning works
and most importantly each comment is a
social comments because this social
process of commenting is at the heart of
whatever comments you can think
about yeah the other thing I would add
add to that is we're so accustomed to
thinking in terms of
individuals that U we that becomes the
category of analysis when in fact the
collective is often the more relevant uh
category of analysis I we see this
happening I think in a lot of different
academic Fields such as evolutionary
science where they're now starting to
talk about natural selection occurring
at Collective levels group group levels
as opposed to by an individual organism
and I think in the digital world a lot
of Silicon Valley is focused on
designing software for
individuals uh presumably individual
consumers but in fact social networking
the whole ontology is about the
Collective and the Dynamics of a
collective and how they interact as a
group as opposed to thousands or
millions of individuals so these are the
kinds of uh ontological issues that are
not just interesting philosophical Side
Stories but I think at the heart of what
needs to be
addressed and I I wonder in that just
very quickly as a followup if moving I
guess the implications of my question
were more if we don't have to have some
sort of knowledge Commons where we're
developing a practice around shared co-
patterning in order to actually begin to
govern resources as a common Z in and of
themselves and so if that there if these
two things aren't um co-terminus uh I
mean I guess they're I'm saying that
they are but if that's fair to say um
that the two scales are dependent upon
one another more so than we just have to
have resources it I'm just wondering why
we haven't already had these Commons if
that isn't the case uh well Nicholas I'm
not sure I really understand your
question because it's a kind of um it's
a bad connection over here over the
ocean but um if I got it correctly um if
you look at uh the title of our last
book David and I do a kind of well we do
three volumes um uh laying out the the
diversity of the Commons Commons
practices and Comm Commons approaches um
today but if you look at the title of
our last book which is the second out of
three it's called patterns of
commoning and this is precisely it
builds on the pent Theory um from
Christopher Alexander who who and it
tries to make us understand that it is
important to have a look at the
resources in the middle of a comments is
also important to have a look at the
institutions we need the legal
Frameworks we need the organizational
forms we need to kind of host uh the
comments but it is even more important
to look at what happens actually Within
These institutions and you're very right
in saying that we would need a kind of
patent approach that is coming up with
solution that works for that same
problem that come up over and over again
in the comments
who is in who is out who will be
excluded who not how are decisions being
taken on what based on which kind of
principles how do we deal with
um um free writers how to resolve
conflicts who is entitled to resolve
conflicts in a common Etc and you're are
very right that what we are missing
right now is kind of not developing
recipes nor panaceas because there is no
such thing as a Panacea in the commment
each commment is is one of a kind but
coming up with those patterns that can
Inspire us to apply them in our
context bring them down to earth root
them in our context and still help us
knowing how to Common that is look at
the Practical side of how to do it and
I'm very convinced that if we come up
with such a powerful pattern language we
can enable a lot of project which are
already under the way trying to build
their commoning process but constantly
being threatened coopted or corrupted or
not being able to deal with inner
conflict
to to try to respond to Nicholas's
question is in a different way while of
course it makes a lot of sense to talk
about the resources historic Ally That's
embedded in has been embedded in the
standard economic approach which has
been resource and object focused which
has put the social Dimensions not to
mention the inter subjective personal
psychological Dimensions totally in the
background as as Side Stories as
peripheral as not really consequential
and the whole point of talking about it
in an integrated way especially as
patterns of commoning is to bring those
soci and psychological and even
spiritual and meaning making Dimensions
into the
foreground uh and the the the resource
is part of that but it's not the
dominant uh aspect of it so it's kind of
a a shift of perspective without losing
sight of some of the of the
characteristics of
resources one of the pieces that I
really appreciate that you're really
putting your fingers on with the commons
is there's uh there's we're we're in an
economic framework that is an is a
framework of exclusion and so when we
talk about the commons we I think that
it's important for us to know that this
is what uh these are these are things
that we already that we should share uh
and that many communities of practice
are finding ways to do it but these uh
patterns of comining are ways that we
can actually model how it is that we're
doing the work rounds I would point to
Sora as one example of an open value
Network in in what they're doing with
creating open- Source Hardware and
there's quite a few workarounds that
they have to do in as as Incorporated
bodies because a network can't be
incorporated a network can't get
insurance uh who has
responsibility uh for uh for if someone
has an accident at the physical lab in
Montreal and so so what they've done is
they've created a network of of uh um of
pieces that interact together so there's
a custodian that is a nonprofit that's
Incorporated um that is the custodian of
the assets of the network and and then
there are people that come into the
network with their Standalone projects
and participate as Sovereign units
within the system and so it's a hack um
but it points to the fact that our
systems are designed for non-human
entities Incorporated Incorporated
bodies that are persons under the law
that have migrated a lot of the power
that should that need a lot of the power
that exists today into non-human
entities that are not there to serve the
commons so I think it's important to put
our finger on that uh because what we're
doing is we're we're we're really
looking to breathe life into the commons
through doing it and modeling it for
each
other um
so I guess I'm interested in in is some
of the one of the things that I love
about your work is both of you is that
you've had created anthologies many many
stories of people uh communities of
practice and people who have been doing
the action of commoning patterns of
commoning themselves and I think that it
is a way to model the distributed
network of people that are already doing
this and help to shed light in real and
concrete ways so I'd invite you to share
um some of those people um that are
modeling the patterns of of commoning in
a way that's really inspiring for you
guys well it's it's an overwhelming task
because there's just dozens and dozens
of such examples we tried to sort of
highlight some of them because they
range from indigenous people in Peru
managing the biodiversity of potatoes to
time banks in Helsinki to the people who
create a Libra office as an alternative
uh software program and it just it's
it's this diversity and I think part of
the issue is that we do not have a
shared imaginary and language for
describing these highly disperate and
dispersed phenomena but in fact they're
an ancient form of social
organization that within the context of
our Market industrialized culture need
to be rediscovered reasserted made
culturally visible again so I think
that's part of our challenge is to make
it make commoning culturally visible as
a credible alternative way of meeting
needs that doesn't necessarily involve
the market or the state at least
directly I absolutely agree uh and it's
not only about making the comment
culturally visible it's also about
raising awareness that in each of us
there is a commoner I'm always surprised
that when I give talks in Germany and I
start using these examples at the end of
at the end of a talk people approach me
they say oh but I was thinking about it
that's basically what we are doing at
home or that's basically what we are
doing in our neighborhood or that that's
basically what we were talking about
when we started uh a refugee project or
whatever so what I would like to see
is kind to um
unlock this tcid knowledge this kind
of um still covered under AAL
understanding that there is a common in
each of us and all Commons they made
look very different ly might be in Chile
Japan or Canada but all commment have
some something in common and if we can
show this we can actually show that we
are to
99% absolutely Nicholas I think that
there's um even another level that your
ontological shift is inferring and that
our bodies already operate as the
commons that there's a certain
ecological process that is already there
that rather than us try and figure out
how to do better than we just need to
know how to Steward and so there's
there's a shift I think in our
relationship to how we Moore our own
knowledge within a kind of natural
processes of nature which is really I'm
being redundant there but really
important you prompt me to discuss a a
friend and teacher of mine Andreas vber
the he's a theoretical biologist and Eco
philosopher whose book biology of wonder
basically takes us to this new place by
reinterpreting evolutionary biology and
saying that our embod our bodies are
part of nature nature is not an other
that's separate from us and while this
is often said rhetorically he takes it
to a very deep empirical level to show
how human beings are embedded in nature
and partly I think we're rediscovering
that and learning the implications of
that uh especially in contrast to the in
Enlightenment he proposes that we move
from Enlightenment to enlivenment so
that aliveness and presence is really at
the core of the commons and lived
experience so your your comment is very
on point Thank you and not redundant at
all I would say actually I would add to
it that um if the comments this links
back to my former um um
contribution to my love contribution
if the commment would not be an embodied
experience people could not take
Consciousness about that they are in
fact already partly at least part-time
when they are not doing their jobs for
the market capitalism uh commoners um
and the same way
um what what what I experience very
often for instance I want to try to
unravel those hidden core ideas that all
the different share and one of them to
my understanding is the decoupling of
giving and
taking which is very different from the
equivalence exchange on the market
commodity where you exchange a certain
amount of money to a certain amount of
Commodities and they are supposed to
have the same value right so in the
commment you have this decoupling from
given and taking you don't suppose that
there is a certain value that it
changeable
reciprocally um with each other so when
for instance I speak theoretically about
this principle um of decoupling giving
and taking people try to say but it
doesn't work the world is like this we
are not like this and then you go for
instance to a farm where they do
community supported agriculture and you
see how people actually what they
actually do is they share the risk of
production and they cannot know how big
at the end of um the Harvest their share
will actually be if they get five kilos
of tomatoes or only three Kil kilos of
tomatoes because it has been a bad
Harvest that year too much rain or
whatever because they basically don't
rely on that idea of equivalence
exchange here is your money and give me
the commodity but they just share the
risk of production and then they go to
the farm and take their fair share and
this feels very different look at
yourself if you would do this going to a
farm and take your fair share without
calculating can I afford one kilo or can
I afford two kilo as opposed to you go
to the supermarket look at the price tax
and start calculating calculating
calculating so what the commons
commoning basically does with you it
kind of makes the calculating cells a
little bit smaller in you and makes the
commoning self a little bit bigger in
you yeah I'd like to contribute just
some thought around
indigeneity as well
in um I feel like there's almost a
remembrance uh that is happening because
indigenous peoples all over the world
have been commoning since time out of
mind and I feel like there's some
there's some deep value in helping to
link those
movements and uh and help and looking to
see where those movements can help each
other because here in Canada which has
been colonized and has uh you know a lot
of healing to do our last residential
schools closed in the 80s uh and so
there's been some uh really
profound um
uh violence that's happened and that our
indigenous peoples here in Canada are
still recovering from from and they hold
Sovereign so rights of sovereignty
within Canada and those those uh
practices of sovereignty are still
coming back as the as they're healing
from what the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission terms as cultural genocide so
while that might be a little heavy um
it's important for us to really look at
I think the practices of commoning that
have been with us for thousands of years
and see what kind of linkages that we
can make
together um I I think there's enormous
opportunities for Mutual learning and
north south solidarity through commoning
because I think indigenous people have a
lot to um share and to educate us with
about to the extent that their cultures
have remained intact and kept those
Traditions alive about what's possible
as a feasible way of life what he was
talking about or kind of implying has to
do with um a deep correction of
anthropology coming out of the western
um academic tradition and it's as if in
indigenous practices we could anything
other than the market was just primitive
that there was no Contour to those
systems um and that talking about
commoning is giving us a way to
um yeah provide some specificity I think
um and detail to the cultural practices
and social practices before before
European colonialism in these cultures
for sure well let me let me answer
perhaps with an anecdote I've been at
the world social Forum in in senal Sagal
D car um I don't know five or six years
ago
and we were giving a talk about comments
and commenting and a lot of people from
Europe have been in the room also from
the European Parliament and their
reaction was basically basically but but
it cannot work but but it didn't fit
with our institutional framework it was
a constant but and a big but right and
at the end of the session somebody in
the last in the last row stood up was a
black man he stood up and he said it is
I guess he was from Ghana and he said it
is the first time that I've been hearing
somebody talking about the concept that
basically describes what we are already
doing this was a big um gift for me
because it's precisely why I'm so in in
love with the comments because it's
deeply
rooted cross culturally in human history
and it's very it's a very empirical
approach you could not talk about
commoning if there practices weren't
there so it's basically M making sense
and connecting very different practices
which remain rooted in their culture
it's not patronizing and colonizing as
an approach and it's absolutely true it
allows us for a different um Level
Playing Field in the north south
dialogue as well
yes I I wonder with saying that while
we're trying to get David back since
Tammy opened up this conversation about
language if Sila I couldn't get you to
reflect um maybe on Law and language and
this kind of Gap in between social
practice and legality and how it is that
um tactically we might address that as
commoners because it seems that there's
a lot of problems
there I I would actually I would like to
um David to speak about this issue
because Among Us he is the expert on Law
and the commons okay but a thing I can
certainly contribute and it it's relates
back to that language question um which
by the way I have to deal with on very
different levels because I think that we
need to speak about the commment in our
own language so I'm always struggling
with translations from German to English
English to German French to German
Spanish to German and vice versa let
alone the indigenous languages right so
but there is one kind of again
conceptual note we need to to open
before even discussing the words for
instance if you speak about you were
just speaking about sovereignty from
indigenous people yes I think that we
need to re invent new words because if
you speak about
sovereignty to people with uh
Market State and nation state framework
they will understand the sovereignity of
our people that is the citizens of the
US or of
Canada right
or the sovereignty within a framework of
representative
democracy but speaking about this kind
of sovereignty based on a different
concept of the human being is something
very different from understanding
sovereignty where the subject is the
I
related with the other where your
unfolding as human being goes through
and only works through the unfolding of
the others as well where you are a kind
of nested eye instead of an isolated eye
so for me it's always I'm always
struggling with this that we come up
with Concepts like Law Without
questioning the premises these legal
concepts are based upon we have a legal
framework based on the idea that private
property individual property is a holy
cow we have a we have a problem we have
certainly a problem so it's not so much
about um um twisting the law here and
there adding a paragraph or or changing
an amendment or whatever it's about
questioning the pillars the mental
framework the mental infrastructures our
legal framework is based upon
absolutely thank
you yeah I really appreciate um that
piece because in in part we need to
create new we need to look at the
conditions that have informed where we
are now and we need to create new
conditions for
commoning so you know one of the things
that I'm really looking to explore and
I'm so grateful that you're you're here
we're here today exploring it is what is
uh you know how can we share our work
and share information and model what
commoning is through a Communications
practice so the peer-to-peer
podcast uh would be a practice of
commoning uh so that we can begin to
kind of really uncover some of those
some of those questions that we have
some of the conditions that exist and
see where our
commonalities uh are and and in an
effort to look in the same direction and
to look at what those under lying
structures are that we need to
shift well perhaps let me finish there
um it's an optimistic view because what
we're just doing is connecting with each
other in a way that hasn't been even
possible thinkable only 20 years ago so
there are new conditions in the world we
live in with all the problems of new
enclosures as well uh about the new
conditions we can build upon are f first
of all
um the market state is in crisis the
state cannot draw any more on the
resources based on that um Market driven
economy because if it does so at the
very end it will end up in extractivism
both of n natural resources and of
mental resources and social resources
this is the first thing the energy basis
will change uh we basically
um
are testimon testimonials of the end of
the fossil fuel area era whatever comes
next it won't be the spill of petrol
anymore we have experienced uh during
the last 40 50
years uh what also changes most
importantly is the way we can
communicate with each other and connect
with each other for the first time it is
possible to build networks at a global
scale on a peer-to-peer basis that is
reducing the control of an intermediary
and self-govern the way um we engage in
communication and if you take into
account that communication connection
sharing IDE is code and knowledge makes
up a Li and share and in value
production well you can basically
understand what this means it challenges
the model um uh uh things are produced
today
and the last element I'd like to
contribute is that I think that there's
also a mental shift in the Young
Generation at least in some parts of the
Western
Hemisphere where the idea of autonomy
and good life quality of life and
certainty about your time over your time
seems more important to some of the
younger
Generations uh people then I don't know
have a job for the rest of your life and
enough
money welcome back David uh and thank
thank you everyone for being patient
with the technology it's fantastic to
have it and sometimes there's glitches
so thanks for rejoining
us Nicholas reflecting on what um Sila
just said I had I had asked a bit of a
question about Commons law before and
David it seems that you might be the
person to answer it but I think I'll re
it in light of of what Sila just put
forward um we were sort of talking about
indigenous social practices and
um kind of healing or an anthropological
corrective to the way that uh Market
culture hasn't been able to actually
give Contour to the kind of practices of
the commons and just seen it as
primitivism and stuff like that from
before and so I sort of laid out these
two levels of like social practice and
law uh of things that have to concern
about with the comments and I was going
to ask you if you couldn't talk about
the the differences between the two a
bit but I also might add now because
we're talking about communication
technology if we aren't um at a moment
where there is this kind of third thing
now uh and this is coming from my own
practice and things I'm interested in
but with code um and I know not
blockchain per se but something like
that where we can begin to build
something more agile in between social
practices and law um yeah well I this is
a really important topic because I think
conventional law at least in Western
industrial modern societies uh is seen
as this quasi autonomous thing that is
disconnected and not intimately
connected with social practice and um
what's going on among Ordinary People
it's something that legislatures courts
and legal lawyers and legal Scholars
deal with and the rest of us only have
the most minimal participatory
relationship in it I think what's
happening is that Comm the commons and
commoning are starting to assert a
different type of socially Dynamic law I
call it vernacular law meaning it's
based on ordinary and formal and tacet
practices but it is every bit as
formative if not binding on people it's
just not written down in law or
administered by uh formal courts and
things like that uh and I think we're
seeing this uh greater legitimacy and
moral Authority and Effectiveness
through vernacular law especially in
online context or you certainly see it
in indigenous context uh whereas this
husk of Western law that is formalistic
and presumes to be utterly coherent
comprehensible and logical is falling
apart it doesn't have moral Authority it
can't from a centralized role administer
this vast Dynamic changing complexity of
decentralized phenomena and so I think
seeing um part of the the struggle is as
you said earlier um Tammy about
developing H legal hacks either
organizationally or legally for which
commoning can somehow
carve out a safe space for itself within
a philosophically hostile body of
Western law but ultimately I think it's
about developing our own forms of law
that have their own integrity and um
organic character and that's where
software code comes in where I think
that we can have this uh accessible
middle level that embeds our social
preferences and relationships within an
infrastructure and infrastructure that
enables those
relationships um and is more Dynamic and
changing than say the US Congress or the
Supreme Court uh and I think that so I
think there is this larger not yet
recognized struggle between vernacular
law and conventional Western law that is
playing out in any number of different
Arenas
thanks wonderful
um so where do we go
next um there's
obviously Sila says to
bed because it's definitely later in
Germany yep I might want to land on some
of the conditions um that that we need
to really bring the commons alive and
really enliven the comment and so I'd
love to hear from each you uh some of
the thoughts that you have around yeah
how do we how do we do it what are the
critical paths and what are what are the
what are what do we need to
build you start with your passions and
your talents and the sphere of
relationships and influence and local
situation that you have I mean I think
there's so many levels of answer to that
question in the sense that you start
with your with what you can do but
ultimately we need to build these middle
and higher level infrastructures of law
of finance of physical and uh social
infrastructure to make commenting work
more readily instead of it just being a
huge struggle with each one but I think
that means we have to honor that impulse
within each of us nurture it and develop
it within a a collective
context I mean that's kind of a meta
answer to your question but you know
it's going to vary from one location to
another from one individual to
another I I would say and this is what
our work um tries to contribute to very
consciously is trying to make the
comments a
meme like of this
DNA um of culture that goes from Mouse
to Mouse and brain to brain and will
sediment there so that people can start
wondering what what are they talking
about what do they mean by this I was
starting a huge huge huge social
conversation political open conversation
creating a bus so to say and and then
trying to connect it us and make sense
of this conversation strengthening that
comes because we need to start wondering
what the commment is all about think
about the comment make sense of it
because if we cannot do this we cannot
construct them
either that's sort of what makes this I
think an open-ended mystery and
adventure and human
necessity and I think it's what drives
me along because there is something very
deep that needs to be recovered here and
I think that each of us has an important
role to play in that and it is about
devel veloping this Collective awareness
the connections Among Us the new models
the new policies and so on and U I think
we're at just the very early stages of
this cultural political Legal Financial
transformation I have a little hack that
might help us along um it's called e
Prime uh you remove the verb to be from
your speaking patterns uh so I guess in
and it would be zign and in doing this
uh just to use an example even within
say a fight with your significant other
um you're not allowed to say you are so
you're removing is to be more and you
aren't assigning static ontologies to
anything actually everything is spoken
subjectively or in relationship to its
process and it doesn't hit these
psychological notes neurons in the brain
that make people defensive it actually
allows you to talk about things as a
process and it's a practice um if you
listen to me I haven't mastered yet but
I'm gonna work on it absolutely and you
you might remember there's a text in our
last book or just called um The Commons
doesn't exist or the commment don't fall
from the sky or whatever actually what I
want to say there is that the commment
is a constant process of
becoming so we
cannot use um essentialism essentialist
philosophy we need a kind of process
philosophy to really assess what we are
talking about so I'm I I very much
appreciate this little hack to uh stop
talking about exist or sign or to be and
always framing a sentences like I become
a
commoner because that's a constant it's
a way of becoming a way of becoming
a
different
person whereas the seed of this
different person is already part of my
inner
being in some ways oh go ahead go ahead
Tammy I was just saying thank
you in some ways I think this is about
how we escape from the alleged U Market
individualism that we're all imprisoned
with in some ways at least as a public
sensibility and to more publicly
collectively recognize these relational
aspects of our self which are there but
are often not recognized you know I'm
recently finished reading Sebastian
younger's book about War veterans and
how they have post-traumatic stress
syndrome not necessarily because of what
they experience but because of what they
come back to in which often the society
is is not a collectively coherent
social Society uh and so people ignore
what they experience and they can't get
reintegrated and I think this is at the
root of a lot of our problems that we
see ourselves totally as
disconnected units and not as uh
intrinsically connected to each other
and this is something we're struggling
to name identify and make more more real
than it has been Absol absolutely and so
the the offering and the idea of the
peer-to-peer podcast is I think a way
for us to be able to model what
connection is what we bring to the table
help us to articulate um what it is that
we're working on to different people
because if this was a if we had one
person who was either missing or joining
uh we would have a very different
conversation uh because everyone brings
such different things to the table and
you have the opportunity to really go
deeper and to understand uh so I would
put I would put the these kinds of
conversations these peer-to-peer
conversations as one of those practices
that I think can not only help us to
express ourselves and articulate what we
mean by The Commons and by the work that
we do but also more deeply understand
how other people frame it so we can get
a sense of the tapestry that between
us uh and so I want to put that forward
and invite if I may tell me if I may I
very much like the metaphor of a
tapestry between us uh whereas I don't
like the idea of a model or modeling the
comments because I precisely think we
should delete this kind of language um
of our vocabulary because modeling is a
kind of a mechanistic framework where
you think of like you could repeat the
thing over and over again but it will be
different in a different social context
in a different historical context so we
we can come up with patterns that need
to be adapted and appropriated to that
specific context but certainly not with
models or panaceas and yes we are
weaving together co-creatively a
tapestry a different Social Web of Life
so to say that that's a compelling uh
metaphor for what we're doing
beautiful so I would invite us to uh
wrap it up I noticed where I know that
everyone's got busy things going on and
I noticed that we're coming up for our
hour um so I would invite uh everyone to
share any the ways that you could be
helped what would be useful for you as
well as any links to your work that you
might want our viewers to
see
well I find it a great source
of support simply to have these kind of
conversations that connect with other
other active creative commenters I mean
I sort of try to keep track of my work
on my blog b.org so I invite anybody to
check that out the work of the common
strategies group can be found at the
website Commons strategies.
org um but that's those are two starting
places that I would site but sofa has
more I'm sure to add well I have those
crazy ideas in mind right like I think
that we need a huge conference or
happening or Fiesta about arts and the
comment we need to draw the creativity
of the so-called creative class the
designers the artists Etc towards the
comment I'm I always feel like I my
heart hurts when I see designers selling
their services for making more
advertisement on the market which is
something we definitely don't need um as
human beings but other other people need
it for other purposes uh so this is one
thing I would like see to happen a huge
happening uh among designers Arts
artists and to comments and a second
thing I'm always always worried about is
like David and I in all our books and
all our work and writing we try to
connect the digital the modern with the
traditional the material the water land
and forest related uh comments but in
essence I think that the hackers are the
natural allies of the farmers who do uh
Community for agriculture for instance
so I would like to see those worlds more
connected supporting each other well
once kind of enable and construct the
networks and infr
structures um the others need and vice
versa the others feed those who prefer
working on bits and bites so I think
that if you could build that Alliance
among all sorts and all types and all
tribes of commoners that would be
tremendously helpful until now
everybody's kind of working within their
own networks speaking their own language
pretty hard to understand for instance
the the the kind of language that Comm
to speak for people who work on the
land and the last thing um I would see
to happen is I would like uh to happen
is just
um doing more creative work on
describing the comments in plain
language
sometimes also and this is a kind of
self-critical reflection we're trying to
be too trying to be um too um
sophisticated perhaps sometimes we need
to learn how to convey those ideas which
are complex certainly but convey them in
plain language so that everybody can
understand speak with more metaphors
tell more stories share stories about
commoning that touches people's hearts
and minds
and and
helps them starting in newcoming
process yes absolutely I think allow the
meaning that you want your work to have
to be explicit in it um at one point
this is deeply theoretical stuff we're
talking about but there's also a kind of
cutting away of the Tactical uh and
realness and IMM mediacy and what you're
talking about as well that I I really
appreciate it's a different approach to
how to practice theory and in that way I
would encourage people to read this book
patterns of commoning there is uh a lot
of different uh
intuitions uh of mine that I saw coming
together from different angles in it and
so
I uh just want to thank you for the way
you've been able to tie all these things
together it's uh I haven't really found
it in other spots um and uh I would add
to that uh yeah keep your ear to the
ground for news about scepter and the
sourc tree Commons uh as this year
closes off and in 2017 because I think
that's going to be a tool that a lot of
commoners are really excited about hey
we are preparing for our next book
Nicolas that might be interesting for us
indeed
great
wonderful and uh I would just like to
thank you all for your time today and
invite you to really consider others who
you might want to have these kind of
generative conversations with where we
can explore each other's work find out
how we can help each other and help to
progress our work together so thank you
so much for your time and your presence
and your
work thank you until next time
byebye


## Keywords:
