---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ILsGy3Axhlg
---

# Video
Our friend is going to jail. | Hasanabi Reacts to Boy Boy
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ILsGy3Axhlg)

## Transcript:
Australia is really as corrupt as the US
it's even worse you are Prosecuting and
arresting your own veteran who did a
phenomenally Brave act specifically
because America said so it's so
bad I'm boy boy is always fun yeah I
went through this cuz I thought this was
the one I appeared in but I don't think
it's the one I appeared in
this is our mate David MCB now it might
look like he's having fun but sadly this
is our last shower together as best
friends because David here is going to
prison for life he's what you'd call a

whistleblower I like his new haircut he
looks handsome you all know what a
whistle sounds like now he's a soldier
who served in Afghanistan who realized
that Aussie soldiers were committing
some of the most heinous war crimes
imaginable and his superiors were
covering it up so he told the public
about it and thanks to David's bravery
nothing happened nothing uh all the war
criminals and Generals are free all the
politicians are free David's the one
that's gone to jail for the crime of
telling us about

it soorry how long you gone to
jail it's a good ice bre
yeah well I don't know I don't know it
could be the rest of my life so that and
that brings things into a a sharp Focus
because you kind of think this could be
the last time I go to WL Beach last time
I watch a movie last time I play
Playstation you want to come
up if I go inside I want to oh yeah I
saw this I saw Mr mold it sucks that um
pay part of their college tuition sounds
like one of the most empty statements
did he make $50 or
$20,000 I paid off my student loans with
the earnings from my Hassan the Hun
Clips Channel stay mad dude they're
literally getting mad at people making
dude dude I love when and it's not even
one guy there's like many others right
and they're so butt hurt thanks for
posting my w Mr divorc Celli um can you
give a dollar amount it's like bro I
didn't find him he found me he came up
to me and said oh I paid off my uh
tuition
with the earnings that I got that's so
funny dude that's so funny how ask how
much CH his child support you help him
pay dude I pay all of it I've personally
paid all of the child support with like
every kassan clip that he's made on his
channel I'm over here paying for two
divorces dude the fans realizing no one
wants to watch this ad nausey not
even his own fans no his own fans love
that I mean they watch me more than
they watch him probably but you know yes
you wasted your time in school to have
two pieces of paper you don't do
anything with suckle off a Mana but we
are and but we are quite upset two who's
the second one daily dose of hasanabi
well considering that divorce selli is a
prominent figure in the hassab clips
industrial complex because he posts
footage from this stream almost as much
as my fans do it's very odd for a man
whose child support I've been paying to
be confused about this process you know
what I mean he knows better than anybody
else look at grafton's bio this guy
professional Pokemon player a that's
cute I'm in a dude yesterday who asked
if I like d saying he has good points
showed him that actually it's a filia
clip and I've never seen a more gross
style
face
yep true whistleblower story okay we're
well let's keep going I try to get him I
be my cmate we got to get him to
whistleblow drug dogs you can wh the
drug dogs false
positives on purpose you could
infiltrate the drug dogs now to
understand how David got into this
position we've got to understand what
brought him to Afghanistan what brought
anyone to Afghanistan and to do that we
need to go back to the 70s when
Afghanistan was really

cool the only issue with Afghanistan was
that it was a social country aligned
with the Soviet Union so the CIA took it
upon themselves to turn the country
upside down they launched operation
Cyclone the largest coet operation in
CIA history it pretty much involved
flooding every right-wing Islamic
extremist in the country with money and
weapons literally if you were a
murderous inel in Afghanistan in the 70s
the CIA was there to make you a
millionaire like gine hear for example
now this guy's a real piece of he
failed his engineering degree so when he
saw smart women who thrived at
University he threw acid in their faces
but thanks to CIA funding and training
this guy hit the jackpot and became one
of the leaders of the mujahadin fighting
a holy war against The Afghani
government and later against the Soviets
too now I can't stress how massive the
secret operation was they were spending
$630 million a year on the madine at one
point the CIA the only thing I will add
on to this is that like to be fair the
Afghan government definitely was up okay
the Socialist USSR aligned Afghan
government was up so much that even the
USSR was like we got to get these
out of here they're out of
control with the with the it wasn't just
like regular old USSR style suppression
of religion it was Way Beyond it was
beyond the pale I mean they they
definitely were not doing a good job
they are right you are a lib come on man
get the out of here dude they were
just murking dudes and M get the
out of here they got the University of
Nebraska to print these like educational
children's books that like spr all over
Afghanistan taught you all sorts of
useful stuff like how to behead infidels
or how to count to 10 in the most yeah
they were so bad other Afghan communist
forces opposed them and even took part
in the fight against them they were not
good way possible and the CIA won for a
period the Soviets intervened to prop up
their Ally but that eventually
bankrupted them and they withdrew and a
few years later The Afghani government
fell to the mujahadin women could no
longer go to school the country
descended into a 20-year Civil War to
decide which group of CIA funded
right-wing fundamentalist would
run the country you had the hot one or
the incel guy or the or this guy with
one eye so it turns out the oneeyed guy
won yeah nice and um his Taliban took
over all of Afghanistan now the US was
happy whining and dining these guys for
decades until a bunch of Saudis flew
some planes into the World Trade Center
suddenly the US started questioning
their love for right-wing Islamic
extremists and they wanted Revenge not
against Saudi Arabia they're the US's
allies no one's touching them obviously
they went after Afghanistan because
that's where Osama Bin Laden was hiding
now the Taliban had been trying to get
rid of Bin Laden for years before
September 11 and when they heard the
Americans were going to invade y they
did um okay this is good so far very
good okay we'll give us Su Bin
Laden up to the international criminal
court just don't invade us but as you
know the Americans invaded anyway and
started the longest war we're don't
negotiate with terrorists remember in
American history 20 years and hundreds
of thousands of dead bodies so why did
they do this well maybe it's so they
could have bases bordering Iran China
and Russia or maybe it was just to
launder money for the military--
industrial complex who knows now David
suggests that the main factor is
actually this like perverse marketing
exercise where America had to you know
show that they could punish someone
anyone for September 11 and the more
kills they get the more votes they get
everything was done in order to impress
the domestic media they did focus groups
of sort of rednick and they were like
they couldn't really understand who the
Taliban were and they would they wanted
to fight a country you let's
smash it up oh you guys want to know
what a funny story this is you said
ruined our airports of security theater
funny we did that to ourselves so the
Australian government this is something
that a Australian uh Uber driver told me
so I don't know how valid this is but
apparently the Australian government in
solidarity in the aftermath of 9/11
actually implemented the same exact
security theater that the TSA was
implementing because in his words he
said in his words he in Australia he
said we want the Americans to come to
our country and we want them to feel
safe we want them to feel the same
safety that they feel in America so we
are going going to cuck
ourselves in
solidarity and implement the same
security protocols the same security
theater that's also hi Mom I'm on a hosi
stream why are you talking to a taxi
driver about 911 I forget uh where we
were where we were why we were having
that
conversation you
know they probably would have had a
better result if not true Australia
doesn't have TSA like security theater
on domestic flights you can go through
the gate as a non-passenger first of all
you're talking to someone who literally
did go through a TSA like security
Theater now but for a domestic flight
between uh between Sydney and Melbourne
not that long ago mate however however
what I'm talking about is about
international travel where they did
implement the TSA style security theater
in Australia in the aftermath of
9/11 so you're wrong on both accounts
mate I was in strier not that long ago
mate they negotiated with the Taliban
and gotama B over but that wouldn't have
won votes in you know for the red did
you have these thoughts before you
joined the Defense Force no no I didn't
I was a definitely a True Believer in
the west and democracy so David actually
thought he was sacrificing his life to
fight terrorists and this wasn't his
first time he's been a decorated soldier
for a while but this time was different
he decided to use his law degree in what
he thought was a fight for democracy he
and listed as a military lawyer for the
Australian Special Forces the SAS his
job was to make sure his soldiers were
following the rule of law when they're
dropping bombs on people you've got to
make sure that everything the boxes are
ticked and might being an in-house
lawyer in a company that kills people I
guess but
um now the Army gave David's family a
gift right and it's the gift of a brand
new dad with PTSD but aside from that
what David got from those two tours of
Afghanistan eventually radicalized him
as well and the analogy I normally used
was it's a bit like being married to a
serial killer who you really love and
when they come home the first time they
come home with blood on their shoes and
they say oh I broke my nose and well
you're like oh okay okay second or third
time and there's piles in appearing in
the garden and it's not till you have
something concrete to say they're meant
to be in Cincinnati and you knew that
they were in New York when the murderer
could that you suddenly all those other
things fit together now over time little
by little all these dodgy reports kept
piling up on David's desk and they you
know they looked like pretty heinous war
crimes but his superiors kept ignoring
them I saw a lot of suspicious reports
the military investigator signed off on
it and said said no problem nothing to
see here now there was some really
horrific things in there that David
couldn't ignore like the exploits of
Australia's most decorated soldier Ben
Robert Smith back in 2006 in Ben Robert
Smith's sort of first major medal uh
he'd shot like a 10-year-old boy unarmed
and other SAS people said what are you
doing and and were meant to be in a
hidden away in a silent um unseen
OverWatch and they he gave his position
away by killing this guy the the other
SAS s as said was just a Shepherd boy
mining his own business and then other
people came out probably villagers of
the town and they shot all them as well
and he got a medal for it and when they
when the Defense Force gave him a medal
they said um they turned the one
Shepherd boy into a Taliban militia
Force for trying to outflank the SAS
position now that Ben Robert Smith
didn't write that you know the defense
department wrote that because to to make
him the hero because they wanted to sell
the war goodlooking guy um he was good
in the press
conference now to probably understand
why these cover-ups were happening we've
got to understand what was going on on
the ground in Afghanistan when David
joined in 2012 Assan B Laden was dead
and so was their whole reason for being
in Afghanistan right the Army had no
strategic goal and everything they tried
to do seemed impossible like every
person they killed was replaced by three
more afghanis who were rightfully
Furious that this foreign Invader
murdered their family and if you weren't
joining the Taliban resistance you were
at the mercy of the local Warlords we
put in power who were pretty much
similar to the Taliban except they had
the added bonus of also being pedophiles
but they were on our side so you know
who cares right the important thing is
the military knew the war was unwinable
I knew something was when we kept on
saying we'll win the war next
year but we said that the year before
the year before and they were saying
that because that's what the politicians
wanted to hear they wanted to hear uh
and everyone got promoted and you put up
PowerPoints saying you know we're just
we're just on the cusp of Victory they
had a plan but it wasn't wasn't really
to win the war it was to win the by the
way for those of you who don't know for
those of you who don't know when there
when he's talking about a guy who ticks
off war crimes who like checks a box to
say that these war crimes are actually
good that was literally Ronda sanz's job
in the Navy that is precisely what he
did that is literally what meat B Ron
did 2004 presidential elction you know
drop bombs on people in turbin get kill
counts and make it look like this is
what how we treat America's enemies
nobody lost an election by sending more
troops I'm announcing
today additional American troop
deployments to Afghanistan it is in our
Vital National interest
to send an additional 30,000 US troops
to Afghanistan this was a driven by a
never ending string of random fabricated
victories enemy deaths that we were led
to believe would bring us closer to some
undefined goal but everyone in power
knew nothing would ever be achieved the
war was unwinable but this had effects
on the ground like once they realized
that the war was all about marketing and
every mistake no matter how horrendous
would become a victory the military
establishment realized that anything
goes we just thought the law was a joke
we had become sort of a lawless
organization where anything went any
whatever the pr people wanted for the
day was what happened now there was one
law we never broke though and it's the
law that says Uncle Sam is always right
you see to understand Australia's role
in the war in Afghanistan you have to
understand that September 11th didn't
happen in Sydney well I mean it did
happen it happened right after the 10th
but it was it was just another day here
right we were only in Afghanistan
because we like to follow the Americans
when they invade other countries the
chief of the defense was even said it we
are only in Afghanistan to make the
Americans happy anything the Americans
wanted us to do we did um with with an
almost Shameless excitement without
really thinking about whether we could
do it as you might know from our Pine
Gap video we once had a leader that
stood up to the Americans and the
Americans moved him from Power since
then every Aussie government has tried
their best to prove that they're a
trustworthy Lackey in America's Empire
and Afghanistan was our time to shine
now the Americans had a problem right
they needed higher kill counts for their
domestic audience but their special
forces already under a bit of scrutiny
for war crimes but their little Aussie
lap dogs were much less relevant no one
cares what we get up to in Afghanistan
and even if they did catch us talking
about our heinous war crimes no one
could really understand our stupid
accents anyway so the Americans
delegated their dodus killings to us
through something called jel Joint
priority effects list now this list was
full of kill capture targets but we
decided to read them just as kill
targets because it's much much easier
than capturing someone and sometimes
You' got to kill a bunch of extra people
on top of that because you know you're
bored now the Aussies got so good at
these missions that we took over the
territory given to the Dutch and the
British and the Canadian Forces who are
hesitant to do the things that needed to
be done because it would be politically
damaging if their people found out what
they were doing but we didn't give a
we just wanted to impress the
Americans so we became their most loyal

executioners but unfortunately we were a
bit too good at doing the US's Dirty
Work right that the rumors of War crime
started circulating and the military
establishment was freaking out they did
know about Roberts men but someone the
complaints finally got through and they
said this is an issue we can't have
our star player go down not only they
care so much about him but all the
people that have been shaking his hand
and the governor general pinning medals
on him and it's going to be huge
suddenly the government needed to
reverse course and start covering their
tracks a kind of warning was put out to
all the troops saying um
basically don't murder people and when I
said what's that about so the government
was suddenly like really serious about
war crimes but obviously they're not
going to go after the decorated war
criminals whose crimes they spent a
decade covering up no what they needed
was a sacrificial land a fresh brand new
soldier that could be made an example of
to show that the Australian leadership
cares about war crimes and it was
David's job to prosecute him what they
tried to do is get scapegoats in order
to make sure that no one looked too
close to the him I wasn't prepared to
let a soldier get sacrificed thrown
under a bus just because what the
minister needed was a bad guy they've
got Drone footage of all this you and if
they wanted to actually put people on
trial they'd use the Drone footage but
and they don't want to use the Drone
footage because the Drone footage a the
Americans don't want them to it but
secondly um that shows that they must
have known of the time yeah after all
this time chasing up war crimes reports
only to get constantly pushed back by
his superiors now they suddenly wanted
him to punish a man he thought was
innocent and this was the final straw
David decided to start photocopying all
the dodgy reports all the proof of war
crimes he get a hold of and all the
evidence of this big cover up and leak
it to a journalist at the prestigious
State broadcaster a guy called Dan Oaks
from the ABC now David was risking his
life leaking this and what the ABC ended
up doing with it was unfortunate right
like instead of a story of like
corruption at the highest levels of
government they turned it into like a
cultural issue a story about how a group
of bad boy soldiers had become
desensitized and hyped each other up to
murder innocent people they basically
painted as bad bad soldiers but they
don't really ever point the finger of
the leadership to say he didn't really
do this on his own in the sense that
they promoted him they never really
looked into it there were complaints if
a general either knew or should have
known um they're liable too but they
managed to forget all about that now
that's the difference between someone
who is um
fully captured by its own State and is
doing propaganda for its own State
versus
versus um someone like and I hate to
bring his name up now because he sucks
ass now Glen
Greenwald you can when you get stories
like this you either capture and kill or
capture and basically
like um shift the attention away or you
take a story like this and you do decent
journalism doing real journalism on a
story like this requires bravery and
requires you to basically give up on
potentially having dreams of of a higher
position of power in media but sometimes
that can cause a lot of resentment in
your eyes especially when you see the
way that the American Media is glazed up
as though they are doing heroic jobs uh
in the Trump uh era all the while you've
been completely uh you've become a
pariah basically and then you end up
listening to the Red Scare podcast too
much and you become this weird
right-wing delusional weirdo even though
Glenn is uh I suspect probably pretty
decent on the issue of Palestine as he
has consistently been don't ask him
about Contemporary American
politics but this does not of course
take away from all the good work that he
did do the soldiers committing these
crimes with Psychopaths right the ABC is
not wrong but they completely ignored
David's documents about all the powerful
people who enabled it and covered up
it's it's letting the leadership off the
hook right and and either way there's no
like legal or ethical way to invade and
terrorize an innocent country like what
we did to the people of Afghanistan is a
senseless crime in itself and no one was
prosecuted for it there's far too much
emphasis on war crime you know it's
200,000 Afghan dead and then giving the
place back to tell about I mean no one's
lost their job over that why why that's
not considered a war crime the biggest
crimes were committed by the leaders
yeah but unfortunately the ABC went for
the path of least resistance right they
published a war Crime Story which felt
like a victory for the anti-war left but
they they also exonerated all the
leaders which you know should have been
a victory for the government but the
government didn't care how lightly the
ABC tread right they collaborated with a
whistleblower and they needed to be
punished so the government did what any
democracy does in this
situation and there's a raid happening
right here at the ABC right now just 100
met or so that way they sent in the
federal police to raid the national
broadcaster in all these journalist's
homes and everyone was terrified once
the federal agents walked out of the
building even the news reporter who was
meant to be covering it sounded like a
12-year-old trying to make small talk
with his girlfriend's dad was long
day now David was hiding in Spain long
before the ABC published their story
he's on the run from the most powerful
people in the world he's obviously
scared but David told us that the most
painful part about being a whistleblower
is knowing you have to leave your loved
ones behind he had to watch his
daughters grow up from the other side of
the world eventually he gave up on
hiding and he did something I've only
ever seen someone do in an Arnold
swarzenegger movie he flew back to
Australia risked life imprisonment by a
corrupt government just so he could
spend one night at a daddy daughter
dance she kept saying there's a father
daughter dance later in the year and
I'll be like if I come home I'll get
arrested and if I get arrested I'll
probably be down a long
time
um and
uh just said I want you to come back for
Dad and and I could tell what I SP to I
could tell it was just silent and and I
could just tell she was silently crying
on the end of the phone and I was like
oh no father can handle it so David came
back to
Australia you never knew I didn't know
that that was the reason why he came
back that's so
sad what a gross Injustice dude now this
moment didn't last very long David was
arrested and put on trial for leaking
classified information but it wasn't a
normal trial where you know you can
defend yourself right it was the the
other kind of trial where where the
judge turns to you and says sorry mate
the Americans said the evidence you're
using for your defense isn't actually
allowed for uh national security reasons
so uh so we've decided you have to
defend yourself with zero evidence the
government was given authority to bundle
up evidence and run out the back door
with it makes it impossible for us
realistically to uh to to go to tral I'm
not giving up hope he's done the right
thing I've said that from the
beginning truth and justice will prevail
and I'm in incredibly proud of him as
are his two
girls so yeah obviously since he can't
defend himself he's going a jail which
sets an insane precedent here in
Australia like it's it's the death of
whistleblower laws right this ruling
means that if you have information that
your boss is committing a crime and you
leak that information then you're the
criminal the judge ruled to say there
are no exceptions if you're in the
military and the orders are don't
release information it doesn't matter
whether the the chief of the Defense
Forces selling secrets to our enemies
or pedophile ring or war crimes we
didn't even get to the facts he just
said there are no exceptions now all
this time the ABC was scared silent they
never once mentioned David McBride since
they got raided back in 2019 and David's
legal team started to get a bit
suspicious when they asked the ABC for
evidence to help his case they refused
to cooperate which was confusing but
suddenly it all made sense right a few
weeks before he's sentenced to you know
prison the ABC finally pipes up to
release a hit piece on it Australia's
Premier journalism program Four Corners
was faced with this bombshell story of
government coverups war crimes and the
brutal erosion of our Democratic
freedoms but instead they decided to run
this documentary suggesting that David
McBride isn't a real whistleblower and
he doesn't deserve your attention they
made absurd claims that he actually
wanted to cover up war crimes himself
and he somehow leaked all these
incriminating documents by
daxon they pointed at the fact that you
know among all the evidence of war
crimes that he gave them there was that
one soldier that he thought was
improperly prosecuted and used as a
smoke screen and David wanted to protect
this guy and and this was enough for ABC
to smear him and and turn his whole
story into like the the only
whistleblower in the world who leaked
war crimes because he really wanted to
Australia is really as corrupt as the US
it's even worse it's worse because
they're just they're corrupt because
they're cucked like think about that you
are Prosecuting and arresting your own
veteran who did a phenomenally Brave act
specifically because America said so
it's so bad it really isn't it doesn't
get worse in the US I mean yeah of
course it doesn't get worse than the US
it's just that it makes it even worse
because like it makes it even worse in
the eyes of Australians it should
because they're doing it specifically
for American
interests cover up war crimes David
McBride wanted to expose that our
soldiers were being unfairly targeted
they were being unfairly investigated
it's a much grayer and murkier and
Messier story than people appreciate
it's honestly a mind melting thing to
watch like the crazy part is they spent
6 months filming this with him they met
his family he opened up about wanting to
commit suicide for God's sake there are
times when I am really
close that that that's a lot
to to say out out loud at this now I
can't stress how cruel this was Dan Oaks
received a prestigious medal for Journal
for publishing a handful of David's
leaks and now just as the government is
deciding you know how long David should
go to prison for leaking it to him he
decides to try his best to make sure
that David goes to prison for as long as
possible they literally sacrificed David
to prove to the government that they can
be trusted they'll never publish leaks
again they made sure the big guys got
the message that journalism is dead in
Australia and our Democratic
institutions that are meant to keep the
government in check are completely at
their disposal so yeah David got but
what what happened to all the war
criminals that we now know about thanks
to David well let's go back to the start
of the video to our first war criminal
Ben Robert Smith following McBride's
leaks a couple of journalists published
some more detailed allegations about Ben
Robert Smith Ben was pierced he's a war
hero after all you know these
allegations are grossly offensive and
look he's he's got some pretty powerful
friends so these journalist decided you
know they' give up and just settle and
pay him and he said no you're going to
pay more I'm suing you for defamation so
he's isn't that the dude who drank out
of the the
leg that's the one the which ironically
the leg behind um Alexa is from his
earlier video where he makes fun of the
the war criminal who drank out of an
Afghan man's U prosthetic leg made him
shoy just think about that like not a
essentially forc these journalists to
prove these allegations in court so they
found all these Witnesses and evidence
and what they ended up proving in the
defamation case was so much worse than
the initial allegation it's the most
insane stuff you've ever heard like
stories about him tring a little Afghan
kid and blowing his brains out and then
telling his fellow soldiers this was the
most beautiful thing I ever saw or the
time he executed a disabled man and then
took his prosthetic leg and kept it as a
trophy and now he just takes it around
to parties so him and his Soldier paries
can drink beer out of it so this isn't
just a war crime this is the kind of
demonic you'd only see in like a
fantasy novel this is orc
Behavior what about their legs they
don't need
those he's showing us exactly the kind
of demons we create when we invade and
brutalize a third world country for 20
years without any accountability now the
funny part is no one had to know about
Penn's crimes like all the big guys had
his back all the politicians and the
oligarchs and the generals they were all
there vouching for him he he just had to
shut the up and live his life but
he decided to spend 40 million trying to
force a court to prove that he's the
viest piece of in Australia like
this astronomical cell phone would be
hilarious if it wasn't for the fact that
after that nothing happened there were
no consequences he wasn't punished he
guesss a normal life like whoopsie
everyone makes mistakes run along now
Ben this Psychopathic orc is free to
just roam around my city and then every
time I leave my house I risk bumping
into him in his freaky little pants no
one's threatening to put him in jail for
what he did you know the only person
who's going to jail is the one who told
us about all this our mate
David this is David's last week of
Freedom our last chance to hang out
after that the next few Decades of his
life are meant to set an examples to
anyone in the future who dares to defy
our government and our role in America's
Wars it's not so much about the last war
um it's about the next war and this is
why I think the Americans are so worried
about they need to know people in
Australia were not going to B at our
secrets like another sort of golf of
tonen incident around Taiwan where they
say oh the Chinese have shilled us we
need to all go to war over something
which never really happened that's what
I worry about unless we break that cycle
where we don't just say Yes Minister all
the time if nothing El you've got your
solders welfare to think about oh dude
Australia
100% Australia is one of the most cucked
to America Nations out there
oh any kind of anti-chinese
activity they're going to be the tip of
the spear okay who's number one if not
Australia Canada
England all of the other yeah five eyes
all the five eyes countries are like
this yeah Australia media has been um
Australia absolutely loves the
Australian media loves uh potential war
with China which is hilarious because
like it's basically like as far as
capital interest goes it is hyper
reliant
on
China which makes it really funny when
you think about it when they're like
yeah I can't wait to go to war with
China which owns our country it's like
trying to kill your mom because your dad
said
so just send them to their deaths or
just them over you don't do it just
because for some political
wants to boost their
popularity so if you care about any of
this right go to David's GoFundMe and
chip in his legal fund with your help
he'll have the money to keep appealing
his sentence and maybe we can make his
life a little less brutal also we can
show the government that people care
about this right maybe we could show a
future whistleblower that people are
going to have their back if they decide
to do the right thing and tell us when
the government's breaking the
law also also if you want to keep
supporting videos like this please go to
our patreon the Link's in the
description it's just five bucks a month
and you get a full length exclusive
video every month thanks so much guys I
hope you enjoyed it do
it phenomenal video an absolute Banger
My
Goats can you link the go on me
here oh it's already raised the
233,000
save my country I did my job now they
want to jail me for it David McBride
legal fund it's already at
$233 230
$233,000 doll dues mate the defense
department and the Commonwealth have had
unlimited resources to prosecute David
MCB for the past four years and has been
bled dry trying to defend himself XD
have been at his side for two years on a
low Bono basis battling through the Aman
field of security restraints and
multiple pre-trial issues and hearings
with the trial now inevitable we have
engaged our team of
barristers yeah XD is the I think the
name of the
legal um I don't think they're saying
like XD
raar like it's a joke




## Keywords:
