---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tmlLlNKcSjw
---

# Video
Paradigm Shifts in the Knowledge Realm | The New Scientific Revolution
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tmlLlNKcSjw)

## Transcript:
a lot of people believe we are in a
transitional moment in history and for a
lot of people that means we're heading
into a crisis or potentially already are
in a crisis of some sort and I don't
know what that crisis could look like I
don't know if it could be fast or slow
but I do believe that if we are going to
navigate to a better place on the other
side of any kind of Crisis we are going
to need paradigm shift
in all three Realms economics governance
and knowledge systems and of course
that's why I call this channel the new
Enlightenment it's an analogy with the
old Enlightenment where there were
Paradigm shifts in all three Realms in
which case one question is what is the
nature of the paradigm shift in the
knowledge realm and that's the question
I'm going to try to answer in this video
we're in a new enlightenment where we
need some extra principles that build on
top of the principles of the old
Enlightenment so we're certainly not
getting rid of the scientific method we
need all of that we need things from the
Age of Reason we need the scientific
method but in the current system with
all of its chaos we're going to need
some extra things built on top of that
that will help better see reality so in
this video I want to talk about five
areas of the Paradigm Shift where the
first relates to group think and the way
entire networks kind of develop their
own biases that are mutually reinforced
and whatnot um and then second of course
I want to talk about the relationship of
power to knowledge where all systems of
generating knowledge can be bent maybe
not perfectly but at least slightly in
the direction that favors power and and
how that can uh that can get magnified
as it uh compounds over time and then
third there's this notion that knowledge
is different where it's atomized and
isolated from its environment which of
course the scientific method is great at
doing it's sort of isolating this one
little cause um knowledge can be really
different when it's
contextualized in in an environment of
some sort and this is the sort of forest
versus the trees analogy where the
forest is not just a collection of trees
it's a whole
ecosystem um so there's that and then I
want to talk about salience and how any
one given piece of information or anyone
given fact there are ways of integrating
that fact into a worldview that is wrong
or that is completely misleading and uh
and not a good uh dep ition of
reality but when you try to ask the
question how do you integrate a bunch of
different types of knowledge that have
been validated scientifically how do you
actually integrate that into a
functional and effective
worldview that's it's not necessarily an
easy problem and then finally we have to
talk about the way the digital
environment and algorithms and
artificial
intelligence uh works with information
works with knowledge
in ways that can either distort that
knowledge or uh bring out the the
accuracies of that knowledge and how
knowledge systems that are digital in
nature could Bend reality or bend our
perception of reality off course or on
course and we need to be thinking about
how to do that and the last bit I'll
talk about for this video has to do with
the notion that the people perceiving
reality or seeking reality they have
their own hopes and desires they have
like sometimes an impetus to try to
prove one side right or prove one side
wrong and that desire to prove their
side right that that's so powerful it
can distort their perception of reality
or the way they weigh evidence one way
or another so given that both the human
brain and also the communities that that
brain are embedded with
those are the instruments through which
we perceive
reality how do we get around the the
biases and the hopes and dreams and and
um the fact the impetus and desire of
those communities and of those people uh
will shape entire group's perception of
reality how do we do that especially
when sometimes really important issues
have groups at loggerheads the first
thing we want to think about is group
group think and when you get a group of
people together to each share their
opinions it is not true that they come
to an opinion that's the average of the
members of the group in fact more often
they all move toward the extreme rather
than the average if you have some kind
of spectrum of their
perspectives so why is that and it's
because you have to acknowledge there is
a social element to the exchange of
information
and if you have people in the group who
are who have stronger opinions or who um
are looking for validation people
naturally tend to validate people they
like um they tend to sort of reinforce
views if they're looking for I think I
believe this will anyone uh tell me I'm
smart and and sort of let me feel more
okay in believing this so this social
Dynamic will deeply influence the way a
group of people move in their perception
of
reality and of course this this is
something that's true even in scientific
communities and that's why you have that
quote that scientific knowledge
progresses one funeral at a time the
reason for that is because the thought
leaders in a field are not going to
allow people to uh gain status or or
gain attention in their field if those
people go against the ideas of the
thought leader ERS so if there's genuine
knowledge that people in the community
have started to develop that opposes
thought leaders you kind of have to wait
till those thought leaders uh leave the
field or die or have a funeral or
whatever before those ideas can actually
bubble up and take hold in the
community and of course this relates to
uh the Paradigm shifts that Thomas
talks about in his book I have a video
on that which I'll link to below and
when kind of imperfect way of thinking
about the difference between the
knowledge shift of the old Enlightenment
with a Scientific Revolution and the
knowledge Paradigm Shift we have going
on right now is that the old Paradigm
Shift was a little more focused on the
individual like how do you get around
the biases of a single
individual and of course they had great
techniques for doing that like the
scientific method was a really powerful
technique that will need to continue
forward into the future like that will
need to be strengthened and validated
and all that in the new
Enlightenment but the new paradigm shift
is less individualistic and more system
based and I actually think it's
important that it's not a shift from
Individual to group think it's a shift
from an individual approach to a systems
approach and I'm actually not going to
fully explain the difference between
system and group but I I think some of
the people who are not thinking about
this correctly are using the the concept
of group in a way that's not helpful
it's it's system where systems have
different roles different relationships
and in designing a system for knowledge
spaces we actually do need to take into
account that there are social dynamics
and social realities within
communities and we need to Design
Systems that will uh counteract the
biases that are natural as part of Any
Human Social community and part of the
reason this is so important is because
knowledge is not contained inside any
individual human brain knowledge is
contained in networks of humans that
cannot possibly know everything there is
to know so what they can know is who
whose knowledge do you tap into like
what connections for knowledge do you
trust trust to tap into when you need
that knowledge and that means that how
you build your trust networks how you
decide who you trust to tap into a body
of knowledge is going to matter a lot so
Human Social communities biases in human
social communities that's a big part of
the story now the next part of the story
relates to knowledge and power and the
fact that power can bend knowledge
systems toward its own will to
accomplish its own goals and obviously
lots of people are aware of the fact
that uh funding can bend academic
communities like whoever can fund an
Institute or who whoever can fund Grant
research or whatnot those people have a
lot of power in deciding what kinds of
research is okay and not okay what kinds
of research gets status or doesn't get
status
and the same is true of course of
journalistic communities like what kinds
of Journalism will get funded will
determine where that body of knowledge
goes and even if there's only a 1%
ability to bend knowledge toward power
that compounds over
time now one thing that I think happens
in some of these dialogues is that
people will get upset because um there
there are groups of people who say
knowledge uh knowledge bends towards
power and sometimes those groups though
certainly not all of them will say
therefore it's not possible to gain
knowledge and that's not what I believe
I I definitely think there is knowledge
it is possible to figure knowledge out
and protecting sort of the processes the
scientific method all that is super
important but one of the unnecessary
loggerheads that happens in these
communities who are talking about this
is that these communities will act as if
these are contradictory like act as if
if you acknowledge that power bends
knowledge
systems then you have to be on the side
of there's no such thing as objective
reality and those two things can be true
at the same time and we need to
acknowledge they're true at the same
time to design systems that fully
acknowledge the reality of objective
truth in many realms and also fully
acknowledge the biases of power and try
to say given those two realities how do
we Design Systems that will best get at
the truth now the next part of the story
has to do with knowledge and context
this is the forest versus the trees
version of
reality and the scientific method is
fantastic at looking at trees like if
you take something completely out of
context and completely control
everything about its environment and
tweak this one little thing you can do
great
experiments um the problem here though
is that of course most things happen in
context they happen in relationship to
other parts of the system and if you if
you have to quiet all of the noise that
is related to interacting parts of a
system to to understand one thing then
the body of knowledge will accumulate in
a way that is blind to all of the
interconnections in the system and it is
important to acknowledge that the forest
is an ecosystem where it's not just a
collection of trees those trees have a
relationship with the body of water
nearby the rivers the birds the animals
the insects the chemical environment
there are so many parts of the ecosystem
of a forest and if you just study a tree
or like properties of trees you are
going to miss some of the most
fundamental truths about the
forest and yet it's really hard to use
the scientific method to study full
ecosystems and of course I got my start
with Healthcare
economics and with Medical Systems one
of the problems we have is that most of
our Medical Treatments are designed and
tested in a context where you take the
ideal patient you make sure they adhere
to the regiment and you do not consider
the full lifestyle and the way that
interacts with any given
treatment and then you deploy it broadly
to people who exist in major ecosystems
and their bodies and
ecosystem and so there's so much of
medical knowledge that you can't
actually look at given that the human
organ organism is deeply embedded inside
both social systems and interacting
biological
systems and of course one of the
problems is that people have many
different uh medical conditions and if
you have two or more chronic conditions
there could be interactions between the
drugs that you use interactions between
the treatments you use but we never
really gain information about those
interactions because there's too many
combinations and too many unique
circumstances to do control trials that
look at every possible
interaction so most of the way medicine
works in practice is actually quite
different from the way it worked in the
scientific lab and we we don't yet have
enough mechanisms for accounting for the
full ecosystem environment of much of
our scientific knowledge
and I mean many fields like social
science fields and and and ecological
Fields they they have been thinking
about this and dealing with this for a
long time but investing more in how do
we develop um methods or scientific like
methods that deal better with the whole
system rather than the isolated part
that's going to be part of what we need
to do the next part of this Paradigm
Shift has to do with salian
frames and salian frames are basically
how do we take all of the atomized
information all of the information we
encounter and weave it together into a
coherent and usable full world viiew and
the way I usually introduce salience is
I mean salience is going to be how
heavily something enters into your
Consciousness or your thinking how
heavily any given fact enters
and the fact is most real
information is going to be not things
we're aware of so the example I use is
when my friends who have children before
they were pregnant versus after they got
pregnant how much they notice daycares
in their city is completely different
like before they got pregnant they
didn't notice any dayc carees and after
they got pregnant suddenly those
daycares became uh entered into their
Consciousness like they became aware of
them they noticed them when they walked
down the street and it's not that the
daycares were invisible or non-existent
before it's just that when the human
brain constructs a
worldview it it will naturally weigh
stuff by its use or its expected use for
that person so of course that's going to
create biases that are individual to
people but one of the things I've
noticed happening in social media world
is that different examples like
different news stories or incidents will
be taken and characterized as if they
are common and as if they are
increasing and this will often be done
in a way to sort of rile people up and
make people feel something because of
course if people feel something they're
going to pay more attention to it and
social media is competing over attention
but if you take an isolated story or
incident and you um you sort of blow up
that incident so it has heavy salience
in a person's
worldview that could be wrong like it
could be false it could be like you're
taking a certain type of person and
taking an example of them being violent
in some way and kind of blowing that up
in a person's worldview such that
whenever they see people like that
they'll sort of feel fear or they'll
sort of constantly be waiting for that
person to go at them or what not if they
see someone on a street they might avoid
them or get nervous and that's a Mis
weighing of information even if it's
true that uh that violence did happen
sometimes people in that group are
violent if those stories are sort of
blown up in your salian frame it will
lead to these biases in your your woven
together will view even if there is no
false information coming in the door and
I think that's just that's just a huge
problem that we're going to have to deal
with especially with the way information
flows through the digital environment so
the last issue I want to at least
mention is this notion of Desire or
impetus behind communities of knowledge
Seekers and the fact that when a
community of people becomes really
embedded on one side where they feel
almost like threat if if the other side
of that information battle were to win
at that point it's no longer possible in
general I think for that Community to
perceive reality like anytime there's a
a piece of reality that might be in
favor of the other side the community
sort of like everything in their heart
and brain body will like look for ways
to dismiss it and this is just like how
human beings work and I I think we can
look at the environment right now and
see there's lots of places where the
people are at
loggerheads over issues where facts and
knowledge and whatnot should be playing
into which of these sides is right and
often times it's like 80% one side's
right 20% the other side's right but
even the side that's most L right
they're not capable of seeing that 20%
where they're wrong and so the question
is how do we Design Systems that get
around that
problem and I think one thing to
acknowledge is in many of these
situations where groups are at
loggerheads there are people out there
that don't follow the debate don't
include that kind of stuff in their
social media feed and so they don't
really know uh the two sides of the
argument and if you could accurately
identify the people who have not yet
thought about that particular issue and
if you could sort of bring them into a
space where one side gets to present
their argument kind of like in a court
case where you have the legal defense
and the prosecution both sides get to
construct their uh biased view on their
side if you could have groups of people
who took on the judge role and if you
could somehow verify that those groups
wouldn't get sucked into one side or
another based on Affinity to one group
or another um I think that that's going
to be something like the
solution now you might have to be
intentional about that you might have to
be like okay you're in this role where
five years down the line you're going to
actually uh look at the two sides of a
case of whatever issue is like the hot
issue five years from now and to prepare
for that role you are going to have to
avoid social media and conversations and
whatnot around these topics like your
social media algorithms will be
channeled specifically with your role in
mind and like would there be people who
would be willing to play that role I
think there would be I think that could
be a fun rle where you're developing out
your critical thinking brain but not
with the controversial topics now that
idea that idea needs to be fleshed out
and in some ways it's more of a more of
a prototype not really what it might
eventually look like in a system but I
in this video I'm just trying to give
you an overview of what I think is
needed in this new Enlightenment and the
last area Focus for the paradigm shift
in Information Systems is going to
relate to digital systems and artificial
intelligence and the way information
flows through those
environments like what does that kind of
environment favor does it favor more
emotional types of information does it
favor um reinforcing existing biases and
these these ecosystems of information
that are digital they're fast they act
on communities and cause communities to
move quickly in their perception of
things and I don't think we've yet
invested enough energy in figuring out
what's the best way of using these tools
to actually improve people's uh not just
their fact information but their their
salian worldview information to be
functional as a human
superorganism so I think thinking
carefully about the Way digital tools
impact the perception of reality either
toward helpful or toward uh distorted
that's going to be a key part of the
paradigm shift that we need to have
happen now there's some other areas like
I I have a longer list than these five
things but I think these five things
kind of get us started in thinking about
what could this Paradigm Shift look like


## Keywords:
