---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zDQjtRufr3M
---

# Video
Plutocracy: Part 1 - Divide & Rule
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zDQjtRufr3M)

## Transcript:
(Laughter)
each mining town was a feudal dimension
with the company acting as Lord and
Master there was a town marshal a law
enforcement officer paid by the company
the company store held a monopoly on
good sold to workers and their families
company officials were appointed as
election judges company teachers using
company approved textbook taught the
next generation of children company
appointed doctors and lawyers prevented
injured employees from collecting
damages
the love for the company's rules

author Denise gr Dini describes typical
working conditions they broke their
backs and died of roof fall and rib
rolls and gasps their children went to
bed hungry and died of the typhoid their
wine took the consumption they
themselves cost and spit up they stayed
in debt to the company store they had no
say at the mind or freedom of any kind
they could be let go at a moment's
notice and put out in the road or beaten
or shot black lung disease and other
work related ailments took thousands of
lives while catastrophic accidents were
a daily concern on December 6 1907 the
most deadly mine disaster in US history
occurred when an explosion killed 361
men and boys in a West Virginia coal
mine owned by the Fairmount corporation
the earth shook as far as eight miles
away knocking people and horses off
their feet
frantic women spent days searching
through the wreckage for their loved
ones and the words of one witness their
shrieks of agony were not to move the
hardest heart to surah at the time of
the disaster the American coal industry
was only half a century old yet had
already killed and crippled more men
than during any battle of the Civil War
accident reads in American mind were
doubled out of Germany three times that
of England and four times that of France
workers were fighting back and gangs
were being made in its 2003 American
labor history theme study the US
National Park Service recognized its
strike activity from the time period was
not just motivated by economic concern
it also involved freedom from industrial
feudalism freedom from the terrorism
inflicted by hired gunmen and the
struggle for liberties
promised in the Bill of Rights in 1912 :
owners in Kanawha County West Virginia
issued a list of demands including a
shorter work day the right to organize
recognition of a workers constitutional
right to free speech and assembly and
end to the blacklisting of union
organizers and alternatives to company
stores

the requested pay raise would have cost
the company 15 cents per miner per day
instead of negotiating the company hired
a private militia to break the strike



the baldwin-felts detective agency had
become notorious throughout the region
for using violence to prevent union
organizing 300 private detectives
arrived and began evicting families from
their homes forcing the miners to set up
a tent colony at Holly Grove in July the
Irish immigrant and labor activist
mother Jones arrived to show her support
Jones had been declared the most
dangerous woman in America due to her
success in organizing workers a decade
earlier she led to children's march from
Philadelphia to the hometown of
President Theodore Roosevelt demanding
an end to child labor in Kanawha County
Jones persuaded more workers to join the
strike along with Frank Keeney of the
United Mine Workers she then arranged a
march of 3,000 miners to the State
Capitol in Charleston where she read the
Declaration of Independence the miners
saw themselves as industrial slaves and
they were ready to rebel against their
masters

on July 26th strikers attacked
baldwin-felts agents in the town of
McCloud four guards and 12 strikers were
killed the state government declared
martial law attacks against minors in
Kanawha by both police and private
security forces were routine and often
deadly
in February a posse led by the local
sheriff boner Hill drove a heavily
armored train nicknamed the bull moose
special toward the tent colony at Holly
Grove then opened fire with a machine
gun
once was killed and over a dozen wounded
a few days later another police raid
killed several men mother Jones was
arrested on February 13th and charged in
military court refusing to recognize the
court's jurisdiction she was convicted
of incitement to riot and conspiracy to
commit murder
her sentence 20 years in the State
Penitentiary
as winter set in conditions in the tent
colony grew increasingly dire at least a
dozen men died from starvation in March
West Virginians elected a new governor
he took a more conciliatory approach
freeing 30 miners held under martial law
statutes and transferring Mother Jones
to Charleston for medical treatment she
was released after 85 days the strikers
were forced to accept a settlement under
threat of deportation from the state
some workers continue to fight for
another six months according to a later
study by the Senate's Committee on
education and labor about 50 violent
deaths had occurred during the paint
Cabin Creek strike mostly workers yet no
reforms resulted even as the mining of
coal drove the American economy to new
heights the men and boys who removed it
from the ground were considered
expendable
similar events would take place eight
years later when striking miners and
Maitland West Virginia were subjected to
a series of assaults by Baldwin felt
detectives employed by the Stone
Mountain coal company workers and the
families were evicted from their homes
our union organizers were blacklisted
and beaten
event came to a head when mate once
police chief Sid Hatfield made the rare
move of siding with the workers against
the company a gunfight broke out killing
seven detective and three counts

in 1921 hatsan was charged with
dynamiting a cult in an allegation most
miners considered project as he ascended
the courthouse steps with his deputy ed
chambers both men were gunned down in
cold blood

at the time the United Mine Workers were
facing setback building had successfully
organized much of West Virginia the
southern coal fields remained entirely
in the control of corporation 80% of
mines in the area and reopened due to
the importing of replacement workers
commonly called scabs while returning
strikers were required to sign so-called
yellow-dog contracts agreements in which
workers pledged not to join a union a
coal company lawyer SB avis explained to
the concerns of management it is like a
servant lives at your house if the
servant leaves your employment if you
discharge them you ask them to get out
of the servants quarters it is a
question of master and servant affected
from their homes miners set up tent
colony and began a campaign of guerrilla
warfare engaging in skirmishes up and
down the tug Fork River casualties
resulted on both sides
in May the government declared martial
law but the legislation was unequally
enforced workers with the primary target
with hundreds arrested and denied habeas
corpus rights whence it had filled with
shot the miners decided that they had
had enough men along the little Coal
River were the first to militarize
setting up guard posts and patrols
meanwhile word of the unlawful execution
was spreading in a matter of days some
12,000 coal miners took up arms and
began planning a march on Logan and
Mingo counties the goal was to free
imprisoned workers and martial law and
organize the entire region standing in
the way was Blair mountain a 2,000 foot
natural impediment occupied by the
National Guard the war was defined by
class

most lower-class workers supported the
insurrection in contrast Logan County
Sheriff Don Chafin made an appeal to
business owners Americans should do
their patriotic duty he claimed by
opposing the workers and preventing mob
rule Chaffin salary was partly
subsidized by the coal companies
the miners or red bandanas earning them
the nickname rednecks it was the largest
armed uprising in the United States
since the Civil War


Oh

coal company forces were heavily armed
with cutting-edge munitions including
machine guns and even planes which were
used to draw corn made chemical weapons
and shrapnel bombs on the redneck army
at one point bombers from Maryland were
flown in to perform aerial surveillance

yet despite their superior weaponry and
despite their superior tactical position
the National Guard was outnumbered
three-to-one equally important the
rebels had extensive knowledge of the
terrain while the guardsmen felled trees
and dug trenches the miners made use of
natural pathways rapidly ascending the
mountain according to archaeologist
Harvard Aires who made an extensive
study of Blair mountain artifacts the
redneck army would almost certainly have
won the battle but the coal companies
had a trump card on September 1st 1921
president warren g harding sent in
federal troops from Fort Thomas Kentucky
the miners many of whom had fought in
World War one refused to engage American
soldiers many even celebrated their
arrival regarding them as comrades and
arms but their trust was misplaced
surrendering 1217 indictments were laid
down including 325 for murder and 24 for
treason
many of the miners would have been
executed but the public was sympathetic
to their plight of the men convicted
most only served a few years in prison
though Blizzard who was regarded by
authorities as the general of the miners
army was first tried at the Jefferson
County Courthouse in Charleston the same
building in which John Brown had been
tried for treason in 1859 Brown had led
a failed revolt against the institution
of slavery in the United States and was
subsequently hanged blizzard though
tried several times in several different
locations was eventually acquitted
the west virginian mind wars were part
of a broader conflict between the forces
of labour and the forces of capital a
struggle that claimed the lives of
thousands of American workers in the
late 19th and early 20th centuries
thousands more were beaten named
imprisoned tortured and sent to early
grave
due to poor working conditions and
dismal safety standards according to
historian Phillip Taft the United States
during this time period with home of the
bloodiest and most violent labor history
of any industrial nation in the world

you
you
the American state is born of a
rebellion but not the one American
children are taught about in school in
1786 one year before the Constitutional
Convention farmers and Western
Massachusetts
organized a resistance movement against
the state legislature in Boston
most of the men were veterans of the
Revolutionary War heavily indebted
overtaxed and facing foreclosures of
their homes and farms they petitioned
their government for redress no help was
forthcoming wealth inequality in the
United States had been steadily
increasing over the past century in 1687
Boston the top 1% owned 25% of the
wealth by 1770 that number had risen to
44 percent during the same time period
the number of people who owned no
property increased from 14 percent to 29
percent the leader of the revolt was
Daniel Shays who had served as a captain
in the Continental Army and fought at
the Battle of Lexington
under his leadership rebels in
Massachusetts forcefully closed local
courts and liberated imprisoned debtors
from jail governor James Belden
responded by organizing a state militia
funded by wealthy merchants the
rebellion was crushed but its legacy was
profound

the United States Constitution was
written by men primarily property and
primarily men who were very concerned by
the threats to private property and to
their own wealth and income and power
that were occurring all over the
colonies in the 18th century you didn't
have a strong central government the
states were actually sovereign entities
pretty much independent of one another
and some states would do this and other
states would do that they didn't have
any power in the Articles of
Confederation to deal with Commerce
there was no executive branch there was
no central power the states were really
independent sovereignty and they pretty
much went their own way and our
particular interests and people in the
power structure in the individual state
so the problem came to a head in 1786
1787 various people were rising up in
the protesting the fact that they were
being exploited that they are not living
anything
like a decent existence they were being
they felt ripped off by courts by banks
and by the band's existing power
structure these farmers many of whom had
been members of the Revolutionary Army
having fought off England felt they
deserved a somewhat better shape and
they were getting the state militia was
called in and put it down bluntly the
problem from the point of view of the
founding fathers the framers of
Constitution was that this was not
happening just in western Massachusetts
I CRO Thailand and in Virginia as well
there was no central authority to
organize the reactions of the Klansmen
this was a clear and present danger as
perceived by George Washington James
Madison Alexander Hamilton and a lot of
other very wealthy very powerful very
elite men there was a call for meeting
in 1786 which led to another call for a
meeting in 1787 and various states sent
delegates to that meeting Philadelphia
and the first thing they did was closed
the doors they didn't want any reporters
reporting on their daily discussion so
they closed the doors and they jumped
the Articles of Confederation completely
they were only authorized to revise the
Articles confession by the state's
delegations that they represented
some of the southern states were
dependent on slavery for their essential
existence and for their workforce so
abolishing slavery does not happen in
Philadelphia in 1787 Madison of course
was a slave owner Jefferson is a plate
owner Washington was a slave owner some
people wanted to abolish slavery right
out there were lots of pressures going
on in Europe and elsewhere for it's
simply the abolishment of slavery so
what they did was they didn't abolish
slavery but they set a 20-year limit on
it and after 20 years the slave trade in
the United States would be stopped there
would be no more Commerce in slaves but
the slaves that were there but of course
reproducing the kids would still be
slaves but there wouldn't be a bogus
slave markets so that was about in the
direction of lessening the pipe hold of
the slave south on the country as a home
what happened was they allowed the
famous 3/5 compromise states which which
had large numbers of slaves and depended
on those slaves for their labor force
those states would for purposes of
representation in the House of
Representatives slaves would be counted
as three-fifths of a person so slaves
were credited politically in
establishing the population and the
membership in the southern Society but
only a three-fifths of a person one of
the key people
ratifications balance manager Hamilton
Hamilton jumped up the idea of
publishing a series of paper and he got
James Madison and he got John J Chief
Justice of the United States under the
new constitution to add their names to
his effort and they published a series
of papers which became famous as the
Federalist Papers although Hamilton did
participate in the convention he had
relatively little influence there he had
a lot of influence later in passage of
the Constitution in New York but his
muses were so to the right of everybody
else and so elitist yeah he sort of will
take represented Wall Street before
there was a Wall Street the key guy at
the convention was really James Madison
he wrote for Hamilton catalyst papers
and one of the papers that Madison
authored was Federalist number 10
Madison's Federalist 10 was a very short
essay peered in a newspaper in which he
basically outlined the philosophical
context the theoretical context within
which the Constitution was adopted and
within which the subsequent US
government would perform its
governmental activities in Federalist 10
Madison defined the problem that they
faced in Philadelphia
and how do we deal with the problem of
factions the idea of factions was that
there were all these different social
groupings in the country and you could
have in the country people with a class
interest organizing and taking power and
you wanted the structure this system
then against the possibility that they
might be able to pull that off
especially the faction that he was
worried about there was destroyed the
essence the majority faction would be a
populistic power center there's too much
power of placed in the hands of the
people in a democratic society that was
a danger if too much power was in the
hands of the rich and powerful in a less
democratic or non democratic society
that was equally the problem to be dealt
with if you want to understand the US
Constitution I think you have to put it
in the context of the class struggle
that was going on in these faiths at
this time if you read the discussions
and the notes especially Madison's it's
quite clear what they felt and what they
thought
Madison saw the new country as highly
turbulent full of conflicts and he
argued that the United States perhaps
they didn't have the extremes of wealth
in poverty for Europe but in all
civilized countries the argue and I'm
quoting here the people fall into
different classes having a real or
suppose of different interests there are
creditors he says debtors farmers
merchants and manufacturers there are he
continued in particularly the
distinction of rich and poor in the
future Madison said there will be even
greater inequality an increase of
population will necessity increased
proportion of those who will labor under
all the hardships of life and secretly
sigh for a more equal distribution of
its blessings and what clearer statement
could you have of a class conflict model
and understanding of the world in which
you lived one of the reasons Jefferson
bought the middle part of the time the
Louisiana Purchase was that White's
would have property and land to go and
establish themselves as independent
producers not people who worked for the
power of capital not people whose
livelihood depended on the powerful and
rich but who were themselves sort of
artisans so independent producers who
weren't working for someone else whose
labor was that producing profits for
someone else but profits for themselves
and their families federal government
gave them land tremendously at the
expense
of the Indian who lived there and
completely different in many ways
superior society they in the other
course did not see property as something
to exploit it on but something to work
and produce and distribute people who
needed it on the basis of their need and
then the basis of what they could to do
to increase and contribute Nasim's
knew that the agrarian american dream of
thomas jefferson was not going to be
replicated in the nineteenth century
he saw industrial capitalism come in
here as well as it had been advanced
even farther along in England European
and he basically I think didn't have any
answer to how he stopped industrial
capitalism from displacing not only
slavery which it did but the whole idea
of a democratic republic of relatively
equal people in which there is not an
hideously uneven distribution of wealth
and income in power and he talked that
in fact if that happened this republican
experiment of theirs would die


June 2nd 1865 General Edmund Kirby Smith
commander of Confederate forces west of
the Mississippi signs terms of surrender
to the Union Army the event marks the
end of the American Civil War the
bloodiest internal conflict in US
history during the previous four years
six hundred and twenty-five thousand
soldiers perished and much of the self
infrastructure lies in ruins as in all
the poor had performed the lion's
share of the fighting and dying
billionaire steel magnate Andrew
Carnegie pay the poor man to fight on
his behalf as did JP Morgan Jay Gould
and john d rockefeller their abdication
was made possible by the conscription
enrollment Act of 1863 which allowed the
rich to avoid military service for a
cash payment of $300
James Mullins father wrote to the son a
man may be a patriot without risking his
own life or sacrificing his health there
are plenty of life less valuable the
ability of the wealthy to buy their way
out of military service cost rage
amongst the poor leading to draft riots
in some city most dramatic is the New
York riot of 1863 which resulted in the
death of two thousand protesters and the
wounding of another 8,000
woman okay well government officials and
the wealthy were targeted during the
riot so too were African Americans
writers set fire to the colored orphans
asylum
burning it to the ground a nine year old
black boy was attacked and killed at the
corner of Broadway and chambers
and several black men were lynched their
bodies mutilated and set on fire
the racism was prominent amongst all
ethnicities anti-black sentiment was
especially pronounced in the Irish
American community despite or perhaps
because of parallel forms of
discrimination faced by both groups
from the beginnings of the colonial era
Irish immigrants had existed at the very
bottom of white society hundreds of
thousands of Irish people had been
forced into indentured servitude and
though this practice was eventually
eliminated the Irish continued to face
violent repression in their native land
in the mid 19th century they arrived in
the new world unskilled and desperate
for work
brutal poverty became the North one
study estimated that 80 percent of
babies born to 19th century Irish
immigrants in New York died while in
infancy Irish women mostly worked as
servants or prostitute while males were
stereotyped
as violent criminals the term paddy
wagon slang for police car derives from
the ethnic slur paddy which in turn
derives from the common Irish name
Patrick
Irish immigrants were mocked for their
absence their religion and their overall
impoverishment they were also amongst
the first ethnic groups in the United
States to form labor unions eventually
business owners began placing signs in
their windows reading Nena no Irish need
apply

in the south Irish immigrants became
known as white Negro slaves were
considered valuable property and were
prevented from engaging in dangerous
work as a result the most perilous jobs
were left to the Irish one businessman
explained Negroes are worth too much to
be risked here if the patties are
knocked overboard nobody loses anything
thousands of Irish immigrants died
during the building of the nation's
canal and railroads
the great American abolitionist
Frederick Douglass became especially
attuned to conflicts between Irish and
african-american Dublin has been able to
purchase his freedom in large part due
to donation by citizens in Ireland which
he visited during the potato famine in
1845 the Irish saw an American slave a
corollary to their own degraded
condition and were strongly supportive
of the abolitionist groups in the United
States itself it was a different story
Douglass wrote the Irish who at home
readily sympathized with the oppressed
everywhere are instantly taught when
they step upon our soil to hate and
despise the negro the cruel lies told
them that we deprived them of labour and
received the money that would otherwise
make its way into their pockets yet the
competition created by employers with
real african-americans were often forced
into conflict with low status white
immigrants for work and were sometimes
used as strike breakers only four months
before the draft riot black workers were
used to derail a strike of mostly Irish
longshoremen on the docks of New York a
major theme in the propaganda against
the abolitionist movement was that free
black men would depress the wages of
white workers in 1860 General Leslie
combs warned at a democratic meeting the
unemployed slaves will be found among
you in sufficient numbers to compete
with you at your Wharf and your docks
and in every branch of Labor in which
white people alone are now employed
following the Civil War whites of all
ethnicities were encouraged by southern
elites to unite against reconstruction
the inspiring but failed attempt by
African Americans to achieve social
economic and political equality in the
south
you
you
the Reconstruction period is
little-understood it's a moment when
something big happened that we usually
only remember for the bad things that
happened afterwards we know that it
turned out badly that black people were
defeated that there was the Klan and
lynching and their rights were taken
away and we ended up with Jim Crow
segregation and terrorism what we tend
to appreciate less in America's
classrooms is that brief moment in the
Sun when new things genuinely became
possible when the Civil War concluded
the slaves were freed by their own
effort they had shot their way to
freedom they had joined the Union Army
in enormous numbers they had run away
and lent their services to the Union
Army they had withdrawn their labor from
the southern plantations and they had
made the crucial difference to conclude
the war they turned it into a
Revolutionary War for emancipation we
could just imagine the tremendous
confidence that they gained at a moment
like that once they concluded that
struggle and were free then of course
the last thing they wanted was to return
to that same slave like condition and so
they did many many things to transform
their circumstances they tried to seize
land and the land of their foreign
masters and work it for themselves they
tried to build schools and they did
build schools in fact they built the
first public schools in the south they
with the help of northern troops who had
occupied the South totally reconstructed
social life black people not only served
on juries which was unheard of they
serve as judges and who have cases of
white people coming before a black judge
to try to get justice it took a hundred
years for as many black people to be
elected to Congress as we had elected in
Congress during Reconstruction elected
to Congress so there was something
that was going on the world was turned
upside down and this is the same period
as the Paris Commune
the time when working people in the city
of Paris try to take over the city and
run it for themselves and formed a
commune that coincidence the idea that
the people on the bottom were now
suddenly on top and that they had made
all kinds of alliances with poor white
people and were setting up public
schools public hospitals facilities for
poor people generally not just for black
people I think it sent a tremor of
Terror through the American ruling class
something's wrong here the real problem
is that the northern ruling class the
industrialist of the north were not
consistent allies for black liberation
first of all they didn't fight the civil
war in order to free slaves they fought
the civil war to save the Union
once the slave owners rebellion was put
down they lost interest in the point and
the project of black rights and social
equality they've lost interest in land
reform giving land forty acres and a
mule to freed people only to the Radical
Republicans did that seem like justice
to the northern industrialists now they
wanted to get on with the business of
making remaking the South in their own
image and that meant making money and
that meant also that the former slaves
had to get back to work and they had to
get back to work producing those very
lucrative and valuable commodities like
cotton that they were producing before
and so the struggle to get the former
freed people back to work as wage
workers the very thing they really did
not want to be they wanted to be
independent and on land is the fact that
they lost their former allies the
political alliance that they made with
poor whites and their collective
struggle and organization was not strong
enough to withstand the new ruling class
offensive once the northern troops
withdrew their forces the compromise
between the northern and southern elites
was essentially like okay you can get
back
business now we'll withdraw our troops
and let's you know let's get on with it
now that now that that struggle is over
and unfortunately that left black people
high and dry but if we skip over that
moment that window when new things were
possible new possibilities were opened
up and we miss what all the struggles
about why do you have to have the Klan
why do you have to have terrorized
people why do you have to murder people
who are trying to vote it's important to
understand how much of a threat
this new reconstructed order what Dubois
calls black reconstruction how much of a
threat that was that it threatened to
become a kind of working-class democracy

new law known as black coat were passed
throughout the south in Mississippi
blacks could be arrested if they left a
job before the end of a contract in
South Carolina a law prohibited black
people from holding any occupation other
than farmer or servant unless they paid
an annual tax some states limited the
type of property black students and
allows employers to whip them Jim Crow
laws enforced segregation and curl tails
African American voting rights
during the same time period poor white
voters were also disenfranchised when
Mississippi passed a new poll tax the
number of qualified white voters fell
from 130,000 to 68,000
an editorial in the Charlotte Observer
praised the disenfranchisement of both
black and poor white voters in North
Carolina as the struggle of the white
people to rid themselves of the dangers
of the rule of Negroes and the lower
class of white


leading the charge against
reconstruction was a coalition of elite
Democrat known as the Redeemers wealthy
businessman and landowners who attempted
to maintain the conditions of slavery
and all that needs in the words of
historian C Vann Woodward the Redeemers
frankly constituted themselves as
champions of the property owner against
the property less and allegedly untaxed
masses between the years 1882 and 1930 a
black man was lynched or legally
executed in the United States every four
days a study by Stuart Hall named and
'back demonstrated that these lynchings
tended to follow economic cycles with
blacks safer from all foxes when the
profits are high

according to historian Robert and
Grandda not infrequently the mob was
encouraged or led by people prominent in
the area's political and business
circles the racially targeted violence
of the Klan and other vigilante groups
was not limited to black in the
southwest interracial violence was a
routine occurrence between white Native
Americans Hispanics and Mexican
Americans the sheer number of European
immigrants expanding westward sealed the
fate of the land's original inhabitants
in California a genocidal campaign had
reduced the indigenous population from
150,000 in 1846 to 30,000 by 1870

a Sacramento Union newspaper reported in
1862 the baby hunter sneaked up to a
rancher read kill the Bucks pick up the
best-looking squaws ravish them and make
off with their young ones as the Indian
population was decimated and as new
boarders in the wake of the
mexican-american war nine white found
themselves labeled aliens in their own
ancestral lands

American conquest of Mexico was first
pre staged by efforts to acquire
northern regions of Mexico non-violence
first through purchase but when that
failed the architects of westward
expansion engineered a war that
ultimately allowed for the u.s. to
occupy strategic points of Mexico
including Los Angeles San Diego New
Mexico and Arizona after the cessation
of the war the United States acquired
what is today the Southwest with the
signing of the Treaty of Waterloo Bay is
a legal in 1848 which compelled Mexico
to force its northern half of the
country and with it
tens of thousands of Mexicans who now
live in a land that they had always
lived in but was now part of a foreign
country within a short period of time
the incoming Anglo American population
quickly outnumbers a Mexican population
and began to construct a legal regime to
displace the land owning Mexican
population and to reduce the rest of the
population to labor in the new
industrial firms agriculture railroads
mining etc on the heels of failure of
reconstruction and the creation of Jim
Crow these techniques of racially
segregated a population were applied
throughout the southwest and Mexicans
quickly found themselves not only
dispossessed of their lands but limited
as to where they could live where they
could work what social spaces they could
even travel through even though the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo guaranteed
that they would have a path to
citizenship and with it enjoy equality
under the law they found themselves
legislatively constructed as a foreign
people as a people with little rights as
a people in some parts of the southwest
who couldn't own land who couldn't work
in certain types of jobs who couldn't
intermarry or intermix with the European
American population and ultimately
relegated to a second class of
citizenship much in the way that African
American
were us south

(Laughter)



by the turn of the century American
corporation were largely in control of
the Mexican economy the Rockefellers
Guggenheim's Morgan's Hearst and other
wealthy families and make billions by
exploiting Mexican resources and labor
while Mexican rulers served American
corporate interests over those of their
own people Mexican troops and rural
armies over us drove farmers off their
land leading to massive impoverishment

in the wake of the Civil War a similar
pattern of dislocation occurred in the
United States itself
you
time of incredible transformation rapid
industrialization hot house economic
growth every decade in the late 19th
centuries either an acute recession or a
major depression throwing thousands if
not millions of people out of work
pushing businesses into bankruptcy all
this was an incredible challenge for
working people on the eve of the civil
war the United States was predominantly
an agricultural nation by the turn of
the 20th century it was the number one
industrial power in the world so what
this meant for working men and women and
children was as they faced
proletarianization as they faced the
rise of corporate capitalism powerful
corporations sometimes exercising a
tyrannical impact on their lives it
meant that they had very little chance
at achieving the economic independence
they had come to expect as corporations
grew so powerful in the late 19th
century inequality radically increased
Henry George said memorably the
comes along with the locomotive the
prison the almshouse comes along with
mansions
create from virtually any government
oversight corporate monopolies were
established in all of the major
industries the names remain familiar
John D Rockefellers Standard Oil cream
alias Vanderbilt Central Railroad Andrew
Carnegie's Carnegie steel JPMorgan
banking now the robber barons portrayed
themselves as virtuous high flyers in a
fair free market economy many even told
stories of previous poverty and in a few
instances we're telling the truth
yet a study of 303 textile railroad and
steel executives from the 1870s revealed
that ninety percent had come from
middle-class or upper-class families
while publicly singing the praises of
laissez-faire capitalism the robber
barons took every opportunity to bribe
politicians and crush their competitors
pay offs became so expensive that some
industrialists established bribe caps a
variant on price-fixing during the 1870s
when Jay Gould and Cornelius Vanderbilt
competed over control of the Erie
Railroad they held a meeting in New York
where they negotiated a sealing for
bribing politicians by the late 19th
century American corporations have
become so powerful that even some
members of the ruling class expressed
concern in 1888 President Rutherford B
Hayes wrote in his diary that the United
States was becoming a government of the
corporation by the corporation and for
the corporation in public discourse
Congress became known as the
Millionaire's Club








while profits accrued at the top misery
accrued at the bottom ninety percent of
American families survived on less than
$100 per month in contrast at the height
of their power
the combined fortunes of Morgan
Rockefeller and Carnegie totaled today's
equivalent of one trillion dollars
workplace death rates were shocking
records from the 1899 Interstate
Commerce Commission revealed that during
that year alone and in that industry
alone 22,000 railroad workers were
killed or injured brutal exploitation in
the workplace was mirrored by
increasingly squalid living conditions
in the home
Charles Dickens would become
internationally famous for his vivid
portrayals of the English working class
was appalled by what he witnessed during
a mid 19th century trip to New York
after visiting the notorious Sloane
known as Five Points
he wrote of figures crawling
half-awakened as if the judgement hour
were near at hand and every obscene
grave were giving up its dead where dogs
would howl to lie women and men and boys
slink off to sleep forcing the dislodged
rats to live away inquest better logic

Mark Twain referred to a new Gilded Age
in contract to the Golden Age

her native american the end of the
previous eight was signified by the
massacre at Wounded Knee in 1890 u.s.
army soldiers slaughtered 300 men women
and children on the Lakota Pine Ridge
Indian Reservation
by the same date nearly all of the
Buffalo on the North American continent
had disappeared


the Army and Navy Register reported
after the massacre at Wounded Knee that
the Red Savage is pretty well subdued
but there are white savages growing more
numerous and dangerous as our great
cities become greater ignored by the
political class poor Americans banded
together to survive American workers
were profoundly influenced by small R
Republican estoy bien
in America is the honest producer the
idea that labor creates all wealth the
idea that citizens should be equal the
idea that they should expect to achieve
some degree of economic independence
this meant in turn massive protests
rocking the United States in the late
19th century as working people and
indeed as entire community rose up in
protest against what they saw as
injustice there were no minimum wage
laws or maximum our laws economic and
security became an important part of
their lives in order to survive they
needed to rely on a family economy so
that not only was the men go out to work
but women would take in work often do
laundry take in boarders or increasingly
go out to factories looking for work it
meant that even children needed to be
economically productive increasingly
children were going into factories to
work child labor became a huge issue the
number of children under the age of 16
roughly doubled by 1900 something like
20 percent of all American workers were
under the age of 18

first started work as a breaker why was
12 years old
more water place you sat on a hard feet
you hidden there a cushion of knowing no
matter how much you what you have you
wouldn't you have to sit on that plane
plank with your feet in the chute and
bend over like this throw on the wrath
out a man since known as the suede boss
walk around with a broom stub of a broom
he'd look behind you if you live in your
rockabye you got a poker a sock across
the back well I'll tell you it was very
scary
believe me begin there standing you
didn't dare quit because it was
something to have a job if 8 cents an
hour your fingernails you had none the
actual level gentlemen be bleeding every
day you come from work so we fashioned
out amongst ourselves of boys that all
that requiring all burnt insulation off
and got a fashion a little stick twisted
round made a thing and then used to
slide them over at least two fingers on
each hand and I'm telling you it was a
living hell
for workers both adults and children
life was increasingly defined by machine
and political systems also took on a
mechanistic aspect the term political
machines was used to describe the
systems of patronage graft hierarchy and
corruption that defined local governance
elections were controlled by a new
phenomenon in the American experience
Metropolitan Police


you

beginning in the 19th century and really
going into the first modem 20th century
local government was largely just an
exercise in organized corruption and it
was really government by organized crime
the system in place was political
loyalty in exchange for material benefit
and that came almost automatically we
might say mechanic Labor's and student
political machines the idea was that the
entire resources of city government were
at the disposal of whatever political
parties happen to be in power at the
moment and so they would use those
resources to reward their supporters and
to punish their opponents the police
were very important in the operation of
these machines for a number of reasons
one being that police jobs could be used
as rewards for exporters the political
party won the election so it wasn't
unusual to see departments completely
emptied out and suffer a complete
turnover following and election milling
one way rather than the other also the
elections were largely determined by
physical control of polling places
political parties would mobilize their
supporters more or less as rival gangs
and literally fight for control of
blowing places of course the police were
instrumental in making sure that these
fights went one way rather than the
other and then also had responsibility
for regulating the polls and then in
many places for transporting the ballots
in some ways counting ballots so they
could suppress the votes of the
opposition party and inflate the votes
of the party that was a power so really
this works is kind of a protection
racket and when I talk about political
support I don't just mean support in the
sense of mobilizing votes I'm expressing
attentively
that kind of thing I also mean support
in financial works businesses prominent
citizens that sort of thing we're
expected to financially contribute to
the funds of the Machine that they
supported the ones that did would
receive police protection the ones that
didn't would receive Erasmus this was
especially important in terms of legal
businesses
illegal salons brothels that sort of
thing if they supported the particle
power could expect police protection and
in fact in many cities at least be
responsible for collecting the bribes if
they did not they could expect that the
law would be enforced never see there
was a shutdown the Selectric continued
in most American cities well into the
20th century in addition to providing
protection rackets for organized crime
and determining the outcome of elections
police were also used to discipline the
working class in Tompkins Square New
York 1874 7,000 workers protested
unemployment only to be savagely
attacked by police in the words of
Samuel Gompers who went on to lead the
American Federation of Labor Mounted
Police charged the crowd on 8th Street
riding them down and attacking men women
and children without discrimination it
was an orgy of brutality a few years
earlier common experiences between
workers at the hands of police
politicians and employers had given rise
to the first major attempt at
unionization in the United States


founded in 1869 by garment cutters in
Philadelphia the Knights of Labor
rapidly expanded to 700,000 members
the whole idea for capital was to pay as
little as possible for workers and
workers obviously ended up reacting to
that and organizing first realizing the
power of their numbers so for example in
the 1880s you have the rise of the
Knights of Labor which was the precursor
to industrial unionism in that basically
working-class people just banded
together and went on strike the head of
the union parents Powderly was opposed
to strikes but the workers went on
strike anyway and began to realize there
the power that they had to withhold
their labor and as a key weapon against
the employers the knight opposed the
wage system calling it an insult to the
divine nature of man to high and noble
capability for good
they welcomed blacks and women arguing
that failure to do so would drive down
the wages of everyone they opposed what
they termed the aristocracy of labour
the common tendency of trade unity to
exclude members according to skill level
tongues firmly in cheek they excluded
bankers lawyers liquor manufacturers and
stockholders whom they labeled
unproductive members of society despite
the Knights promotion of working-class
unity the entrenched racism of American
society they progress difficult attempts
to unionize black workers in the south
often ended in violence in 1886 the
Knights tried to organize
african-american workers in the south
and shorter field at debido Louisiana
martial law was declared to black union
organizers Henry and George Cox were
arrested and never heard from again the
next day 20 other black union members
were founded
in response to the massacre an editorial
in an african-american newspaper report
to even think that such disregard for
human life is permitted in this portion
of the United States mix one question
whether or not the civil war was a
failure though the Knights achieved some
victory they were ill-prepared for the
massive task of organizing
three-quarters of a million people
shortly after their founding they were
replaced by the more exclusionary
American Federation of Labor as well as
the diffused Network a smaller less
powerful Union when the Knights were
still gaining in influence the great
railroad strike of 1877 demonstrated the
ability of ordinary workers to coalesce
into a powerful nationwide force

in the 1870s as the United States was
still recovering from the war and
reconstruction and industrialization is
rapidly taking off the United States was
hit by a depression 1873 to 1877
businesses are going bankrupt employers
trying to survive are laying off workers
or slashing wages workers begin
protesting the wage cuts which are
happening repeatedly on the Baltimore
and Ohio Railroad for example railroad
workers had already by 1877 confronted
three different wage cuts they go on
strike in Martinsburg West Virginia
refused to let trains pass until the
wage cut is revoked and this strike
quickly spreads often it's referred to
as the insurrection of 1877 it's really
the first major uprising against the new
capitalist order the strike spreads from
Virginia to Baltimore and then West
Pennsylvania to Illinois to cerous one
of the striking things about the people
is that it's not just the railroad
workers whole communities come out to
support the striking railroad workers
families women and children they're
saying this is our community we built
this and it shouldn't be left to a few
railroad owners to dictate to us

in some cities in Chicago and st. Louis
the strike flowers into an all-out
general strike paralyzing the entire
city's per day so as this is happening
as protests is spreading as the strike
is reading the governments of the city
and state federal level are to bring out
what to do they send in in some cases
state militias in some cases the
militias refuse to restore order reduce
the fire on the strikers and Pittsburgh
militiamen bayonets and shoot strikers
killing 20 of them and protests the
strikers then destroyed several
buildings more than a hundred train cars
and locomotives so in several cases
order is not restored until the
president sends in federal troops in
fact order is restored in part because
the president takes troops this is a
signal moment in US history I think the
president orders troops out of the south
where they had been protecting the right
please men and women and orders them
north to put down working-class
insurrection and with that you can
Tennessee symbolically the shift in US
history from a moment that was about
empowering free slave shifting to a
moment to repress the right
working class and women you see it as
nearly the first great protest against
the new industrial order and also Ennis
aftermath governments across the country
take action to build urban armories and
courts so that the next time a
working-class uprising occurs the
government will be able to use troops
more easily to suppress them although
the great upheaval was defeated it
wasn't a total loss workers in many
areas received increased wages and
improved working conditions more
importantly the event crystallized the
concept of class struggle in the minds
of the poor
during the strike workers complained
that they were treated just as the
rolling stock of locomotives
in Baltimore a striker remarked on class
solidarity the working people everywhere
are with us they know what it is like to
bring up a family on 90 cents a day
barely able to survive after endless
toil workers increasingly looked at the
philosophies of socialism communism and
anarchism the socialist literature was
often banned from libraries and schools
a spirited labor press emerged in all of
the major cities
when a lawyer named Edward Bellamy
published a utopian socialist novel
titled Looking Backward it quickly sold
over a million copies unions around the
country were becoming increasingly
militant and often resorted to sabotage
to prevent strike breaking in the
tradition of the letting the monkey
wrenched and destroyed machinery
an account from HSN Kansas provides one
example at 12:45 this morning ten men on
guard at the Missouri Pacific roundhouse
were surprised by the appearance of 35
or 40 masked men
the guards were corralled in the oil
room by a detachment of the visitors who
stood guard with pistols drawn while the
rest of them thoroughly disabled 12
locomotives by the early 1880s workers
across the nation reuniting under the
demand of the 8-hour workday 4700
workers struck in Boston 7,000 in
Milwaukee million thousand in Baltimore
and 32,000 in Cincinnati in New York
25,000 union members created a
torchlight procession along Broadway the
largest campaign occurred in the
industrial at the center of Chicago were
40,000 workers went on strike in 1884
anarchists in Chicago argued for the
establishment of a free society based
upon cooperative organization of
production organization of Education on
a secular scientific and equal basis for
both sexes and equal rights for all
without distinction of sex or race other
workers joined in the Chicago cigar
makers called for the open rebellion of
the robbed cloth
in 1885 a new central labor union was
created which included metal workers
carpenters cabinet workers and butchers

in 1886 following a scuffle at a picket
line police shot and killed several
workers outside the McCormick Harvester
Factory in Chicago the single largest
factory in the country 1,300 men worked
10-hour shifts six days a week for non
subsistence wages both the mayor and the
chief of police routinely received
brought by Cyrus McCormick jr. the
factory's owner outraged by the violence
anarchists organized a rally at
Haymarket Square as police charged the
protesters an unknown assailant lobbed a
bomb in their direction Kelly were an
officer and fatally wounding another
state police I'm sorry
still don't know to this day where the
bomb came from or who threw it
policeman was killed policeman opened
fire killing several workers and several
other policemen this incident became
known as the Haymarket incident eight
labors all of them anarchists activists
acted both of the trade unions and in
the anarchist movement were arrested
anarchism plays a remarkable role in the
late 19th century us these eight power
or centralized power of any kind of
fundamentally corrupting and instead it
emphasizes participatory democracy and a
grassroots ways of organizing oneself
cooperatives collaboration at a very
grassroots level
although the anarchists who organized
the rally at Haymarket were not linked
to the bombing they were nevertheless
arrested and charged with conspiracy
seven of the men were sentenced to death
and the eight to 15 years in prison
the trial was widely recognized as a
farce prior to the arrest state's
attorney
Julius Grinnell publicly recommended to
make the raid first and look up the law
afterwards the hand-picked jury
consisted of business men their own
clerks and a relative of one of the dead
policemen and they were instructed that
anarchy is on trial make examples of
them hang them and save our institutions
our society sentenced to death
August B's delivered a speech before the
court if you think that by hanging us
you can stamp out the labor movement the
movement from which the downtrodden
millions the millions who toil and live
in want and misery the wage delays if
that is your opinion
then hang us here we will tread upon a
spark and behind you and in front of you
flames will blaze up it is a
subterranean fire the ground is on fire
upon which you stand
a year after his trial August bees was
hanged
along with Albert Parsons edifies sure
and George Engle Lois Lane
committed suicide while in prison to
deny the state its pound of flesh though
the executions were welcomed by
Chicago's Gentry international opinion
was overwhelmingly negative from London
the famous playwright George Bernard
Shaw remarked if the United States must
lose eight men it could better afford to
lose the eight members of the Illinois
Supreme Court
it was a huge incident in US history not
only for those arrested but for the
entire labor movement because it led to
a powerful backlash against workers and
against anyone perceived as being
radical and/or immigrant across the
country workers were fired if they were
suspected of being union activists or
being radicals many workers lost their
jobs many found it just politically
impossible to express radical beliefs
freely and in this environment the
Knights of Labor which had risen to some
something like 800,000 members in the
aftermath of Haymarket the Knights of
Labor membership quickly fell until by
1890 it was nearly a dead organization
at the same time that the Knights of
Labor was growing in power in the 1880s
another approach to organizing workers
was created the Federation of trade and
labor unions was founded in 1881 and in
1886 it changes its name to the American
Federation of Labor the predecessor to
what we know today as the afl-cio
founded by Samuel Gompers a cigar maker
along with several other skilled workers
the AFL emerged with a very different
approach to things than the Knights of
Labor it was a Federation of mostly
craft unions meaning that for the most
part it organized workers according to
their craft craft workers tended to be
the most highly skilled workers the
workers who were paid the most who have
the most resources so within the AFL you
would have a union of printers of steel
workers carpenters cetera all the
different kinds of crafts coming
together in this Federation in the late
19th century what you have
as workers have to find a path to
opposing the new capitalist order and
they can do it by coming together in
broad solidarity they can do it through
political action or they can assume a
more defensive posture and focus on a
unionism that will mostly just represent
the most highly-skilled workers
despite the exclusionary policies of the
AFL the flame of labor activism in the
United States continued to spread union
membership continued to grow
exponentially increasing twenty fold
between the years 1886 and 1905 and
resulting in over 35,000 seperate
strikes


at the homestead steelworks Factory in
Pittsburgh Pennsylvania workers were
being pushed to the brink one out of
eleven steel workers died will end the
job often due to lack of sleep pay
between workers and management was
grotesquely unequal and new technologies
were descaling workers and driving them
further into poverty when labor actions
resulted the owner of the factory Andrew
Carnegie fled to Scotland publicly
supporting labor unions he privately
wrote to the plants manager henry
fricked that he should reorganize the
whole affair car too many men are
required by amalgamated rules

Frick went on to hire a private militia
known as the Pinkerton Detective Agency

the goal to intimidate workers into
submission the u.s. is not so different
from Europe as some would claim but the
US ruling classes always used the most
repressive and violent means at their
disposal to crush workers when they went
out on strike the u.s. is notable
because large corporations tended to
have their own private militias or
armies and when they did it they would
hire what was then you know the most
famous company was known as the
Pinkertons but they would hire basically
private armies to come in and do battle
with workers and I mean I'm talking
about armed using whatever weapons they
could killing workers as often as they
wanted to and getting away with it there
were many different companies that
created detective agencies and their
specific goal was to have them there and
ready to serve as Watchmen as guards to
infiltrate unions and radical movements
and to break strikes and often to incite
riots to serve as agent provocateurs
Pinkertons agency became famous founded
in 1850 by the late 19th century it was
the best-known Detective Agency and was
active in many of the most important
strikes in the period from the
government investigations into their
activities and from the
you expose by men who have served as
Pinkertons we know that they used a wide
range of nefarious tactics to achieve
their ends Terrence Powderly the leader
of the Knights of Labor once said
whenever we saw that Pinkertons had been
assigned to work as Watchmen we had to
get our own guys to be Watchmen to watch
over the Watchmen and we would see them
doing things like laying dynamite on
railroad tracks or inciting them to
engage in riot so there's an entire
world of really quite shadowy
implications creation of goon squads to
go in and and bust up heads that sort of
thing it's an important part of the
history of labor in the United States a
great example of this is the homestead
strike of 1892 easily one of the most
important strikes in United States
history it was centered in the steel
industry steel workers had a strong
Union they were among the most powerful
and militant of all workers in the
United States the homestead struggle is
motivated by the skilled workers who
belong to an organization called the the
sons of Vulcan and they're fighting not
only to get better wages in shorter
hours but also to try to forestall these
organizations changes that are going on
Frick hires Pinkertons and there's this
hugely dramatic moment where the
Pinkertons come floating up the
Monongahela River because of course all
of these industrial facilities Siddall
and rivers both in order to ship their
stuff more cheaply and in order to dump
their crap into what and so here come
the Pinkertons up on a raft
on the morning of July 6 a tugboat
appeared on the Monongahela River towing
a barge 300 Pinkerton
tipped off by other workers the strikers
and Hornstein arms them with rifles and
awaited their arrival a standoff ensued
then a gunshot rang out

outnumbered and outgunned the Pinkertons
raised the white flag after a full day
of fighting the prisoners were then
marched through a gauntlet of
townspeople where they suffered verbal
and sometimes physical disease
remarkably none of the prisoners were
killed and were ultimately set free on
July 12 Governor Robert E Patterson sent
in the National Guard the truth were
used to protect strikebreaker which in
turn led to the defeat of Union the
strike right now has been pretty much
defeated this defeat became a signal one
in the history of US labor it would not
be until the 1930 but you would have a
strong Union in the steel industry again
as a result of this so by breaking the
back of the steel Union employers had
really profoundly weakened the entire
labor movement

trials from the time period reveal a
widespread knowledge of the dakotas
tactic used by private detective agency
in response to the homestead strike 160
workers were charged with treason and
murder but not a single jury would
convict the entire strike committee was
then arrested and charged again no
convictions resulted Henry Frick was not
charged for his role in the conflict
prompting London to take matters into
his own shoes on July 23rd an anarchist
named Alexander Berkman walked into
Fricks office in downtown Pittsburgh and
fired at him from point-blank range the
gun jammed after one shot Frick survived
the attack Berkman spent the next 14
years in prison

if the homestead in Pullman strikes
revealed the extraordinary capacity for
solidarity between American workers the
union movement as a whole continue to be
plagued by divisions based on race
ethnicity sex and skills



Chinese immigrants have played a major
role in the building of California's
roads railways aqueducts and orchards
yet when Chinese railroad workers went
on strike in 1867 demanding higher wages
shorter working hours a ban on whipping
and the right to quit their jobs almost
no one came to their aid in November
1885 members of the Knights of Labor
participated in a race riot in Rock
Springs Wyoming which resulted in the
death of 28 Chinese Americans
racialization of citizenship in the
context of class conflict and class
struggle produces the Chinese Exclusion
Act there were major strikes within the
rail system and Chinese workers were a
significant part of the railroad
workforce especially in the western part
of the country the movement to exclude
the Chinese developed in the context of
that labor struggle and in the context
of a great economic crisis that had
happened a few years before both
Democrat and Republican parties and even
smaller parties began to promote the
idea that a solution for the immediate
crisis is the exclusion of Chinese
workers and while there were minority
voices opposing this especially among
socialists at the time the dominant
voice one that United the whole working
class and whole sections of the middle
class and penetrated into the working
class was to exclude the Chinese to
drive the Chinese out and so the
exclusion of Chinese represents the
first comprehensive exclusionary
immigration policy primarily based on
race and it begins a shift in our
immigration policy in which now
immigration policy is going to be
defined more increasingly as a means of
excluding people based on race based on
class based on politics rather than
including people and encouraging people
to come race gender ethnicity were used
to divide workers
against one another if we think about
what employers were trying to achieve in
this period in their eyes their goal was
to reduce their labor cost and they did
that by introducing technologies that
allowed them to be skilled workers they
get it by opposing unionization and they
did it by finding workers they could
hire more cheaply and control more
easily and so increasingly for employers
the use of different kinds of workers
became really important they recruited
labour from Europe first German and
Irish and then later Southern and
Eastern Europeans Hungarians Italians
they recruited women into certain
industries they recruited as time went
by they recruited Mexicans they looked
for Chinese or Japanese when they could
all in and as part of this larger effort
to undercut the power of their workers
and to reduce their cost
they became over time very very
deliberate and careful and strategic
about this and you can find in the
written record when you especially when
you look beyond the northeast of the
United States to other parts of the
country you can see employers laying out
in their letters their concern to bring
in different workers to undercut the
power of those that are already there
think about the plantations in Hawaii
for example I've seen letters where
employers say the Japanese have too much
control too much power we have to do
something we want an OK from the United
States government to bring in Filipinos
and Puerto Ricans and so they do and so
several thousand quarter we convince the
Latinos go to work and McCain
of Hawaii and the same official ban
right it has been a splendid experiment
the Japanese now know they are not the
only worker we've been able to cut their
wages so with experiments like that
employers planners steel owners learn
that using different kinds of workers
can be one of their best weapons
scholars studying who's working in steel
mills in the early 20th century have
found that employers would bring in
people from different parts of Europe
people who spoke different languages and
having them work right next to each
other specifically so that it would be
harder for them to organize if you can't
even communicate in the same language
it's going to be bloody difficult to
form a union and protest what the
employer is demanding of you in the late
19th century an increasing number of
workers began to recognize that they
could not successfully mobilize under
the robber barons without overcoming
their own racial and cultural prejudices

one of the most remarkable strikes
occurred in New Orleans 1892 when
Teamsters Scalzi and Packers united
under what they called the Triple
Alliance their demand included a 10-hour
workday overtime pay and a union shop in
the words of one historian the New
Orleans strike represented the first
general strike American history to
enlist both skilled and unskilled labor
black and white and to paralyze the life
of a great city delivery of food ceased
streetcars remained idle electrical and
gas workers walked off the job punching
the city into darkness and revealing the
Stars

during the strike the New Orleans press
repeatedly tried to stoke the flames of
racial hatred newspapers ran fabricated
stories about mobs of black men
harassing and beating the Blaine the
Triple Alliance abandoned their fight
after the governor threatened to bring
in the National Guard but they
maintained racial solidarity throughout
the campaign there was this mass strike
in 1892 in New Orleans
uniting basically the entire black and
white working-class of New Orleans
workers for example at the docks
were organized as a bi-racial Union so
they were segregated within the same
Union local but on-the-job dock workers
Mine Workers etc the danger of the job
and the physical effort that goes into
it tended to really break down racial
divisions and those occupations first
and foremost so it was very significant
it was crushed but then within a decade
or so afterwards there was another mass
strike in New Orleans in which black and
white workers again United in the
meantime the local ruling class decided
to make Jim Crow Jim Crow was
essentially response to populism the
enforcement of separation of the races
it was legally sanctions in the south in
the north you had basically in fact of
racial segregation so it was really a
nationwide phenomenon so basically what
in the Israel class do they made it
illegal for blacks and whites to share
any public space together they made it
illegal for blacks and whites to marry
by the 1930s and Alabama it was against
the law to agitate for any kind of equal
rights that was the kind of weapon that
developed that the u.s. coordinate class
developed in response to things like the
New Orleans of strike in 1892 the New
Orleans strike was emblematic of a
growing spirit of solidarity between
workers in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries it would find political
expression in the People's Party the
Socialist Party and the progressive
movement more importantly it would lead
to the formation of the Industrial
Workers of the world the most radical
union in the history of the United
States


Oh





you


## Keywords:
