---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Elxr73IT10
---

# Video
Power of the Commons with David Bollier
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Elxr73IT10)

## Transcript:
good evening thank you for coming to
begin I would like to acknowledge that
we are residing on the ancestral and
unseeded lands of the massachusett
people whose name was appropriated by
this Commonwealth we pay respect to the
massachusett elders past present and
future the traditional custodians of the
lands on which we make our work we
acknowledge the truth of the violence
perpetrated in the name of this country
and make a commitment to uncovering that
truth through dialogue partnerships and
learning thank you for being here
happy Monday shana tova to those who are
celebrating Rosh Hashanah and may not be
here with us tonight hopefully they can
tune in later and and welcome to this
event the power of the Commons with
David Bowyer we're so happy to have you
here this event is hosted in partnership
with the center for economic democracy
the Emerson engagement lab and the
Emerson MA and media design so I would
like to really thank our partners Paul
Ariel for for your help in that and for
those who I haven't met my name is Jamie
galloon my pronouns are she her I am the
director and a co-founder of how around
Theatre Commons how Iran Theatre Commons
is based here at Emerson in the Office
of the Arts we are a free and open
platform for theatre makers worldwide we
amplify progressive and disruptive ideas
about theater and facilitate connection
between diverse practitioners I also
want to say hello to those who may be
tuning in online because we are live
streaming this event on how we're on TV
and we ask anyone as a result who is
speaking throughout the evening to use a
microphone because it will help those
who are tuning in online when we get to
the Q&A portion of tonight we'll have
mic runners and we'll try to make it as
easy as possible and we appreciate your
patience with that
you'll also notice that we are live
captioning this event as part of our
ongoing accessibility efforts so how
around Theatre Commons is a digital
knowledge Commons and all of our content
is is produced pure produced and we
license everything through the Creative
Commons and the Commons
thank you the Commons is near and dear
to our heart it's really a primary
organizing principle of all of our work
and David Boyer who were lucky to have
with us here tonight
is someone who's been deeply influential
in our thinking we have read some of his
previous books such as think like a
commoner and patterns of commenting and
been really inspired by his deep
knowledge and his belief that arts and
culture have a really important role to
play in the comments and are already
doing so we first met David in 2015 and
we have been working with him and other
arts and cultural organisations in an
arts culture and commoning working group
for the last year and a half plus and
tonight we couldn't be more delighted to
have him here to talk about his new book
free fair and alive the insurgent power
of the comments so I'm going to
introduce David now you have a short bio
in your program as well so David is an
American activist scholar and blogger
who is focused on the Commons as a new
paradigm for reimagining economics
politics and culture he pursues this
work as director of the reinventing the
Commons program that the Schumacher
Center for a new economics and as
co-founder of the common strategies
group an international advocacy project
Bowyer has co-organized pioneering
international conferences and strategy
workshops on the Commons and consults
regularly with diverse activists and
policy experts in the US and Europe his
blog bolli org is a widely read source
of news about the Commons and his book
think like a commoner a short
introduction to the life of the Commons
has been translated into six languages
Boyer is an editor and author of many
books on the Commons including patterns
of commenting and the wealth of the
Commons both with co-editor silca
Helfrich green governance co-authored
with the late professor burns Weston and
viral spiral brand named bullies and
silent theft in 2012 Bowyer received the
Bosch Berlin Prize in public policy from
the American from the American Academy
in Berlin for his work on the comments
well your lives in Amherst mess
two sets welcome David

well it's first of all it's a pleasure
Thank You Jaime thank you thank you how
rounds staff for helping pull this
together as well as the partners on this
project I'm really grateful to have this
this opportunity to have a conversation
with you about the comments
I need this book was is the result of
about three years of work with my German
activist scholar friend and colleague
silk Helfrich and we after both of us
being involved in the commons
internationally for oh I'd say 10 or 15
years at the time now it's almost 20 we
decided we needed to sort of debrief
each other on the Commons in a way that
a lot of the academic literature and
certainly the economic literature didn't
make clear so my talk is the result of
that and I hope to suggest how there's
all sorts of system change that's
possible by learning to think like a
commoner and that's why I will try to
present today we start with I think the
idea that free markets and the whole
capitalist narrative is starting to
phrase it's proving dysfunctional
especially since the 2008 financial
crisis it's stories just are not
credible anymore and this is allied with
the state not performing in the way that
it has historically purported to in
terms of meeting needs in terms of
wealth inequality in terms of dealing
with climate change which has been
documented for more than 30 years in
terms of dealing with a whole cascade of
other social problems in reactive ways
or not at all and we like to silk and I
like to call that the market state
system because well we often talk about
the state in the market as opponents in
a very deeper level they're very allied
in their vision for what kind of a
society we should have and how do it
through economic growth through
technological innovation and all the
things that the capitalist narrative
provides in conjunction with state power
but as I suggested the capitalist story
lines are starting to fall apart and
this is leaving I think a void in our
political life and cultural life that
has to the moment than filled with a lot
of right-wing authoritarians and well
what the French scholar Bruno Latour
calls epistemological delirium we don't
have some consensual ways for
understanding the world and I'd like to
suggest whoops I'd like to pose the
question can the Commons help us imagine
new pathways for growing a new world and
this is necessary particularly because
so much discourse is fixed in this rut
of well do we want capitalism or do what
socialism and the it's almost fixated on
that even though I think both arguments
are somewhat artifacts of another era
and don't speak to some of the realities
of our time it's because of this rut
we're in we often say well the state and
the market are the only two
consequential ways for governing things
or producing things we need and the idea
of the Commons is dismissed as an
archaic relic of medieval times and no
longer really relevant to our times and
that's what I'd like to suggest is
misguided and we need to revisit one
reason this is persistent so long is
because we've had this idea of the
tragedy of the Commons
which many of you it's been drilled into
most of us many of you may remember it
was a 1968 essay by biologist Garret
Hardin who said well imagine a pasture
in which anyone can put as many cattle
as they want on it it will result in the
over grazing and ruination of the common
the tragedy and this has been embraced
by property rights advocates and
conservatives and politicians and most
undergraduate undergraduate professors
as this self-evident
tail which is really kind of a parable
but there's lots of embedded political
assumptions in this as Louis hide the
scholar puts it it's the tragedy of
unmanaged lazy Fair common pool
resources with easy access for non
communicating self-interested
individuals it it it's really kind of
this libertarian fantasy or at least
these are buried within that story
because in truth hardin was not
describing a commons he was describing
an open access regime or a free-for-all
in which anybody can take whatever they
want and there's no community there's no
governance there's no rules or
punishment that those who break the
rules which is really the definition of
a commons which is why i really like to
call this the tragedy at the market
because that's more accurately that more
accurately describes what happens when
people have no peer governance to
constrain themselves and it was
professor Elinor Ostrom an Indiana
University professor who over the course
of her life through the 70's 80's 90's
and told her death in 2012 helped really
empirically rebut this story through
rather exhaustive field work and
creative theorizing this book governing
the commons was her 1990 landmark piece
which was one reason she won the Nobel
Prize in 2009 for her pioneering work
and it was interesting it was 2009
because it was the year after the 2008
financial crisis and I like to think the
Nobel Prize Committee one and somebody a
little bit different that year somebody
who thought that cooperation might
actually be consequential in economic
affairs which is what hurled her work
was chiefly about and also as the first
woman to win the Nobel Prize in
Economics I think it was significant
that she was more attuned to
relationality as being important in
economics than the standard categories
of standard economic thought but the big
takeaway from her work is that the
commons is not just a resource
it's a self-organized social system
it's a community plus the resource plus
the social norms and practices and so
you know it's it's more than just a
resource and actually it's more than
just sharing and cooperation it's kind
of a social system or institution for
getting things done which is why her
work was so really pioneering now one
reason I think enclosures have become
our Commons have become more prominent
in our consciousness in the past say
five or seven years is because
enclosures are increasing
now enclosures happen frequently when
global capital wants free and subsidised
resources and they don't want any
trouble from commoners so they often
ally themselves with a state to help
take possession of shared wealth and
this is happening really across the
board not just in the US but
internationally I'll give you a few
examples I don't want to dwell on
enclosures but it's important to realize
this is an important part of the story
there's great international land grab
going on where sovereign had sovereign
investment funds hedge funds and many
others are taking over lands in Africa
Latin America and Asia and evicting the
traditional communities or indigenous
peoples there it's really kind of a
replay of the English enclosure movement
of the 17th and 18th centuries causing
all these people to be basically
dispossessed having to move into the
cities look for work often
unsuccessfully and so forth this is
happening right now it's a major set up
for famine and all sorts of social
problems 20% of the human genome is
currently privately owned through
patents and this has all sorts of
consequences for scientists who may be
reluctant to investigate for example the
breast cancer susceptibility gene
because until a Supreme Court decision
it was pretty much locked up in a patent
the copyrighting and trademarking of
folk culture which disney is quite
famous for maybe most famous for but not
certainly not the only one who is
colonizing all sorts of
social culture and then making it
private property one of my favorites is
how in the 1990s the music collecting
society ASCAP started Dunning hundreds
of campfires or campfire girls and
summer camps for singing around the
campfire because of course singing
around the campfire is a public
performance for which you should pay a
copyright and they wanted everyone to
pay a blanket licensing fee for it they
were eventually rebuffed after the
public got wind of this through the news
but another example of how market
enclosures and property rights are
stretching extremely far it goes in many
other realms which we could talk
extensively about but this is one reason
I think a lot of people are saying we
have some shared wealth that we ought to
be controlling and people want to push
back so there's the surge of what I call
a new old system I think it's new or
newly discovered it's old in the sense
that it goes I think it's part of the
human condition of being a cooperative
species as Sam Bowles has written in a
book of that title interestingly just
two weeks ago The Economist magazine
that bastion of capitalist cheerleading
wrote an article saying whose Titan said
be it something like an alternative to
nationalization and privatization and
it's the Commons I was utterly shocked
the subtitle was more public resources
could be managed as Commons without much
loss of efficiency check it out so I was
really pleased to hear that there's some
movement going on but well let me just
give you a quick review of some Commons
so you have some reference points to
think about the Commons in fact about 2
billion people survive not just their
survival but often quite nicely through
subsistence Commons of forest fisheries
farmland irrigation water wild game and
many other things around the world and
this is not interesting to economists
however because there's no market
transactions going on there's no
- being exchanged necessarily and so
it's largely dismissed as not
significant or their survival and we've
got to do better no to be sure all these
people are not doing great but it's also
true that it is the basis of a stable
ecologically benign mode of meeting
needs that's not necessarily through
conventional or transnational markets
here in the global north there's a lot
of local food sovereignty movements
going on which are trying to mimic the
same process of gaining more local
control over the provisioning of food
through local new types of local or
regional food chains and this is of
course a very robust thing going on
right now with many manifestations from
CSA farms to permaculture to even
rethinking the whole value chain of
regional food provisioning such as the
Fresno Commons in Europe especially
especially in global cities that have
become overrun with global capital as
Airbnb hollows out neighborhoods and
speculative investment takes place by up
entire buildings there's a movement of
this to approach the city as a commons
to reclaim the city for the people who
live there this is seen in such things
as urban land trust and community
gardens
there's even efforts to get municipal
data systems the city of Lintz Austria
has a whole Open Commons Lindt to make
government information available and to
get people free server space and and
email service so there's a lot of
efforts to reclaim cities as the basis
of the Commons and I find this a very
encouraging development for developing a
different vision for cities than we're
seeing in many places one part of this
in some cities is developing alternative
currencies and the idea is that the
value that's created within that
community can be captured and
recirculated rather than being siphoned
away the absentee banks who may or may
not care very much about that community
I associated with the
schumacher Center for New Economics
which pioneered the BerkShares in
Western Massachusetts and that's been
just a very catalytic kind of way to
rebuild community identity while
reinvigorating the local economy whoops
the web is not often we associate the
web so often with Facebook or Twitter or
social media the corporate side of it
but we also need to think of it really
as a hosting infrastructure for Commons
because the barriers to using it as
Commons are very minimal as we've seen
in such famous examples as Wikipedia but
Creative Commons has helped facilitate
this by providing a kind of legal
infrastructure for the legal sharing of
things automatically which inverts the
natural presumption of copyright that
everything should be borne private
property so that it could be marketized
Creative Commons licenses allows
copyright holders to use a variety of
open public free licenses to stipulate
how their work can be shared and copied
and reused for free in advance a part of
this whole movement is the open source
movement which many of you are no doubt
familiar with which has a transformed
software and a lot of the infrastructure
of online life creating a whole whole
class of dica modified software and
functionalities that aren't dependent
upon big tech so I think this is a
significant development in the Commons
world but then now there's a whole other
generation of innovation on top of that
which a number of people refer to as
cosmo local production where knowledge
which is light and easy to share is
shared on these global communities and
then local production can occur more
cheaply in modular ways in ways that can
be modified at the local level so for
example with farm hack or a project
called open source ecology there's a lot
of agricultural equipment that is not
patented that can be reused by farmers
in lots of different contexts this is
especially important in
in a lot of poor global South context
there's actually a wikispeed car that
was designed in the similar fashion
Arduino is a lot of electronic circuit
boards and other electronic equipment
that is openly shareable they claim a
trademark on certain materials but
people can still copy and replicate the
equipment and of course fablabs and
maker spaces are really engines for a
lot of these kinds of innovations as
well but when you get right down to it
there's no inventory of Commons master
inventory they can arise anywhere look
at how around who would have thought
theater could become a Commons and
they've pioneered ways in which regional
non-commercial and various ethnically
oriented theater Latt Enix common
Commons can function through commenting
about more about that in a moment
there's a Wi-Fi system in Catalonia that
has more than 22,000 modes nodes which
is functions as a commons there's the
open source seed initiative that's
trying to deal with patented seeds by
assuring that certain scenes will not be
able to be taken private the potato park
in Peru indigenous peoples having
control over vast region to to main to
be stewards of the biodiversity of
potatoes there so there's many many
places where Commons pop up the point is
any community can do it when they decide
they want to manage something in an
inclusive fair participatory way outside
of the market and state with a sort of
note2 of the artistic world I want to
cite a couple of another are the
powerhouse productions and the
hinterlands in Detroit our areas are two
projects in which they self-consciously
see themselves as doing a lot of common
aim with their community itself their
art and the community are directly
involved just as in Providence Rhode
Island as220 they own some buildings
they basically got the sweat equity from
over decades and now they are able to
use their
equity to provide artists driven artists
centered projects from printmaking to
performance to exhibitions and so on so
it it it inverts a lot of the models of
petitioning for foundations or
corporations for money by having some
control over their artistic life but now
I want to get to the point where we get
a little more focused on how does the
inside of the Commons work after all we
know we have a lot of narratives about
economics and Homo economicus were you
know rational utility maximizing
materialist and so forth how do we see
and understand the Commons in its own
terms I think that's really an important
challenge and a major focus of my book
with silca Helfrich and one thing we
started to realize and as we did our
research was that old dated world views
are often major impediments to seeing
how things really are and we came I live
in Amherst and we came across the story
of Edward Hitchcock who was a famous
geologist in the 1840s and he came
across all these fossilized footprints
in sandstone in the region and was
trying to hypothesize well what could
they be and he thought they were giant
Birds or turkeys but in fact and this
this was because the word dinosaur had
not been invented Darwin had not
published origin of the species and he
was still in a biblical worldview that
there wasn't such thing as deep time or
or something like that so we saw a kind
of an example with him of how an old
worldview all just couldn't you couldn't
take cognizance of new evidence in new
ways and I think today we're approaching
a similar kind of inflection point where
the the market capitalist story is just
miss stating a lot of evidence or not
capturing a lot it still thinks that
value is best defined by price and money
and that progress is really about
commodifying and privatizing things and
that free trade really should be about
extraction of resources
and costs of course should be
externalized as if there is an outside
in a finite planet so I think we're
grappling right now with some limited
perspectives that we need to find a way
to get around an update and I'd like to
propose that commenting is a way to help
understand some of these phenomena in a
better way and in a more humane
civilized socially constructive way we
start by saying that commenting is
generative and value-creating
it's far from a tragedy it's just that
we're not necessarily monetizing the
values that's created and this you have
to understand that it represents a
different worldview ethos and
operational logic and that's why I think
the Commons is frequently misconstrued
because it takes a lot of work to sort
of appreciate some of these other
perspectives from from my perspective
the Commons is about bottom-up
experimentation that's very practical
it's not an ideological or totalistic
scheme it's very situated and rooted in
the local context the history the
geography the culture of that community
and the historian Peter Linebaugh has
put it nicely he says the comment there
is no Commons without commenting which
means the really the verb the activity
by which a community works together
negotiates it with each other finds ways
to sustainably manage something that's
the real focus the relational process
not the noun of the Commons the way it's
traditionally approached and in my
studies of really scores of Commons I've
seen that there's a whole different
universe of values that are being
represented by the Commons then again
standard economics it's about fairness
and it's about responsibility by people
have that's yoked to entitlements that
they receive and long-term stewardship
it's about meeting basic needs and not
simply watts or profits and a key idea
is the inalienable 'ti and
decommodification that certain things
are
for sale shouldn't be for sale and that
they're more valuable being protected to
have access and use on a non market way
it's about participation and custom and
tradition are also often kind of the
moral and practical gyroscope for
keeping a Commons ongoing and persistent
so a lot of this means learning to see
the commons commenting as about
relationality
and value as a living phenomenon which
is why the title of our book is free
fair and alive this is about something
we're constantly having to renegotiate
and live with it's about our
relationships with each other our
relationships with the earth it's about
our intergenerational relationships with
our ancestors and with our future but
getting to this perspective requires
letting go of some old concepts as we
worked as so can I worked in our book we
realized that certain words we just were
not incorrect but they somehow we're
laden with some wrong balances of
meaning for example the word resources I
kind of choked on these days because it
always implies something other apart for
me that's ready to be bought and sold
and in fact I have a lot of relations I
have a lot of memories or emotional
connections or sometimes an entire
culture has a connection with certain
quote resources so there were a lot of
words that I found we're not quite right
in talking about the Commons and so we
wanted to invent some new words for
example we talked about care wealth
which has a different category of
meaning than a resource instead of
talking about the individual as
economists talk about it we talk about
the nested I because we're nested in
these larger communities that were both
beholden to and shape us we talked about
Ubuntu rationality this is the South
African Bantu term for I am because we
are a noob unto rationality is about
aligning individual and collective needs
together
as opposed to assuming that the
individual needs are paramount and Trump
everything else and so on so these are
some of the words that we use to try to
name this there's a video here that I
could tell you about it'll be online
soon but this is my co-author Sokka we
often had little periods where we had to
come up with a word to invent to name
things that have gone unnamed or that
the conventional discourse simply
doesn't recognize and I think that this
is important it's not just for its own
sake it's about having a precision in a
collective language object to orient
ourselves around and part of this is I
think also about acknowledging our inner
life I've struggled with how to convey
how the Commons flows through us and
changes us changes me and this is how
the West looks at the great sandy desert
in Australia and this is how the
Aborigines see it and it's the same
territory and it sort of suggests a far
more deeper emotional even spiritual
connection with a quote resource and so
I just wanted to use that as a little
placeholder for how Commons have meaning
it's a meaning making process in a way
that I don't often find my economic
relationships don't don't have and when
you get when you get right down to what
a Commons is about world making which is
a term a lot of sociologists and
anthropologists are using a lot these
days it's not just for indigenous or
traditional communities I think you know
online communities are creating a world
and in many respects this world needs to
be honored I see it up being about a
politics of belonging it's about an
economics of sufficiency and it's about
a culture that dica modifies and shares
and this these are some stakes in the
ground that help you see how it's a
different perspective on the world
so in our book we talk about pad
of common name and the reason is we were
inspired by Christopher Alexander some
of you may know is this kind of
dissenting architect and urban designer
who was also a mathematician is off also
a mathematician and philosopher he's
quite old now but he developed what he
was called pattern languages which is a
methodology for looking at phenomena and
seen regularities without saying that
they're all universal and the same so he
looked at you know why are certain
design patterns in buildings and urban
spaces so recurrent across cultures and
history and his answer was because they
serve certain important human needs both
inner life as well as socially and we
used his methodology for studying actual
common so it's a practice based
methodology we're just not making stuff
up here to look at Commons and decide
and learn what patterns they might have
and we developed what we call the triad
of commoning which consists of three
major categories social life
provisioning and peer governance and
these are all of course interrelated but
they're different angles on the same
phenomena of commoning and I won't go
through all the different patterns but
for we had a we came up with about 28
patterns and I might add this is an
open-ended evolving process these are
not necessarily the be-all-end-all
patterns but they were the ones that we
identified since completing the book
we've even concluded that you know it
might be worthwhile to have a whole set
of patterns dealing with law in the
Commons and another one having to do
with the Commons in our inner life but I
mean that's the beauty of patterns it's
it doesn't purport to be universalistic
in the sense that not every Commons has
all of these but these tend to be
present in many of them and I'll just do
I've put these in bigger types so you
could see some of them to get a sense so
for example with peer governance you
want to assure commoners consent the
decision
making you want to ensure transparency
in a sphere of trust which is different
from transparency where there's not
trust because then you simply disclose
as little as possible whereas the point
is to get as much as you can
shared so that you can react more
intelligently and so on dealings with
money and markets are especially
important in the Commons because markets
tend to colonize the community and the
resource is managed by Commons and so
it's important to try to keep those
separate so we have we think it's very
important to keep Commons and commerce
distinct and we like to we've invented a
category of certain property where it's
relation alized meaning it's not simply
something that is totally excluded but
people have a social relationship with
the property that matters and this helps
maintain access and control by a large
group of people as opposed to say a
non-profit board of directors who might
decide that they want to shut it down or
liquidate the asset so we we've wanted
to get into this type of detail the same
with provisioning we use provisioning
instead of production because production
of course means you have to have a
consumer but in a Commons provisioning
is production and consumption is
integrated and we think provisioning is
a better way to describe that and then
of course the social life of comedy
matters do you cultivate shared purpose
and value how do you strengthen the nest
at I will one read one way is to
ritualizing togetherness through fund
through festivals through parties
through events and there's a practice of
gentle rasam reciprocity it's not the
kind of even-steven quid pro quo
relationship of the market it's like you
give to the Commons and you will receive
benefits in turn but it's in an indirect
reciprocity as opposed to a strict
direct reciprocity and we like to think
that these ideas of comedy start at the
micro level we can do this any
we want but that like a seed it works
out it can manifest itself at the meso
level through different types of
infrastructures and at the macro level
through new types of institutions at
very large levels including state-based
Commons public partnerships instead of
just the private public-private
partnerships which are often a an excuse
for raiding the public treasury Commons
public partnerships use the resources of
government finance technical assistance
to help people common in their own right
on their own terms and an inevitable
issue which is too complicated to go
into here is about state power because
we know how formidable state power is we
know that it is often jealous of its
authority but I take some consolation
from an encouragement from Hannah Arendt
quote power Springs up between people
when they meet and act when they act
together and vanish the moment they
disperse meaning when you get together
as a Commons it has a potential
political implication because it
provides a certain moral authority and
ability to do things that has larger
repercussions we can see this in the way
for example Linux has become very
influential the way the slow food and
local food movements have become very
influential by withdrawing from some of
the circuits of the state in capital to
develop functional alternatives with
their own moral integrity that's a kind
of power in its own right people ask me
often how do you scale the Commons and
build the Commons verse well instead of
talking about scale which implies
centralization and hierarchy I prefer to
talk about emulating and federating we
can keep the appropriate scale and it's
rootedness but then we Confederate among
them and coal earn from each other and
coordinate and still have a significant
impact and either by ourselves or with
the state we can develop infrastructures
which are designed to encourage
commoning as opposed to simply market
exchange and we can develop these sorts
of state-based partnerships which I
think are especially productive at the
municipal level perhaps more problematic
for the for the moment at national or
international levels but who knows I'm
always being surprised I think one
takeaway from all this for me is the
next big thing will be a lot of small
things and David Fleming this British
political thinker said that really large
problems don't need large-scale
solutions they need their they require
small solutions with big pic large
frameworks for action and I'd like to
see that the Commons provides a large
framework for coordinating a huge number
of diverse types of small-scale actions
and showing that they have a kinship and
that they're aligned towards a similar
goal while retaining their integrity and
appropriate scale action and fortunately
there are today many champions of
small-scale solutions working within
their own traditions and geographies
which I think have a lot of potential
for adding up to a significant impact in
ways that the centralized leviathans of
states often have trouble particularly
trouble doing particularly since they
have their own legitimacy and Trust
issues they're grappling with today so I
see small-scale bottom-up people driven
solutions of having a huge amount of
promise if we can align them properly
and get them pulling in the right
direction the same direction so with
that I'd like to have a larger
conversation facilitated by our
moderator Paul thank you

hi everyone thanks for coming this
evening and David thank you for that
talk so what I'd like to do is maybe
offer a few insights and then we will
turn it to the audience to have
questions and hopefully some discussion
into the reception so and just for
context my name is Paul me Haley this
and I'm I'm here professor at Emerson
College and my work aligns a lot with
what you said and this was a really
inspiring talk and I think a lot of a
lot to chew on so I have a few things
that I thought might help frame the
conversation for us
you mentioned the markets and the state
a lot of times we look at those and
maybe this could be one place to start a
conversation mention the market and
state as as oftentimes seen as in
opposition to one another or regulating
each other but if you look down into it
oftentimes when put together they they
almost constrain the Commons and I
wonder if you could just talk a little
bit about how that how they're actually
working in concert more to either
interfere constrain if I'm not using the
right word how you see their impact on
the ability for Commons to to exist in
to flourish well I think and you could
say there are at a more superficial
level there are conflicts over certain
political or policy agendas and to that
extent of course there is opposition but
I think in terms of the deeper worldview
of the type of society they want to
build the faith in economic growth the
faith in consumerism as being satisfying
human welfare those types of things
they're very deeply allied and we know
of course politically that they're very
tightly aligned as well
and as you can see this when left-wing
governments have taken over Bolivia for
example or Chile or Greece and
immediately international capital closes
ranks to prevent any alternative for me
developed so there is a very tight
linkage right and then I'd also love to
I mean it is I think we see it and we
see it but we often it's it's really
interesting to me to frame it in in
terms of impacts to a commons as you've
understood it the other note that I'd
love to start off with before we we open
it up is you talked a lot about and I'm
really interested in this and I'm
actually going to kind of ask what your
thought ah so you talked a lot about
relation and we think a lot about
transaction versus relation and I feel
like I feel this personally and also
professionally but probably more
personally that our culture has become
one that's embedded in transaction and
so ever since you know and I think you
know technology has has prioritized this
in terms of our interface with it I want
to be more critical about technology and
it's its values versus the values of
Commons but I also think everything from
our public systems to our social systems
they really prioritize transaction it's
really hard to find that out so I was
wondering if you could talk about what
what you see is some of the ways that
relation I mean you mentioned it briefly
but how much you think a culture that
has become so transactional and again
speaking in generalizations and what
what way can the Commons really push
back against that well that that's a big
question but it's precisely the question
in the sense that I think many people
especially the younger generation are
choking on the transactional culture
which has no intrinsic commitments
because everything's exchange value in
price and so there's a deep cynicism or
alienation that results from that kind
of a culture and I think I do a lot of
work in Europe where I think the Commons
has greater resonance and deeper
tradition with a lot of other collective
action or the welfare state there and
there there's a greater sense of looking
to the Commons as a way to have new
conversations about post-capitalist
society because they've been they've had
a socialist president in France
cereza the left-wing coalition one in
Greece and they're seeing that a lot of
the traditional party politics and
left-wing approaches are simply not
getting us to where we need to go and I
guess the chaser and this is climate
change so I think there's a lot of open
discussion about well how can we have
for example Commons based finance that's
embedded in the community and zero
percent interest and it opens up a whole
different set of dynamics then how do we
repay capital no it's it is fascinating
and not that I don't love my institution
but working in higher education you feel
this you feel this tension you know
every day as you come into the
university about its priority what it
prioritizes vers what what they the
narrative of what should happen at a
point and I think it's because there's a
apparent certainty we're almost a
fundamentalism towards these
quantitative metrics or money whereas
there's a greater uncertainty or
ambiguity about relationships and how
they evolve even though I think as we've
seen in many context there farm I don't
want to say well I would say far more
creative and generative because they go
to places that market often doesn't go
because there might not be a short-term
business plan for that so I'd love to
open it up if folks have questions I
know we've got a microphone right there
and please that we'd love to know your
name and and pronouns and and you know
we'd love to hear questions about any or
all of David's talk so we can open it up
now and kind of go around if anyone has
one to start
and we got a couple thank you for taking
the plunge thanks for the talk this was
really really inspiring so I recently
left a role where I've worked for an
international NGO that was responsible
for defining the greenhouse gas
emissions accounting protocols for
cities and it was always to sort of
bottom-up like this is the boom in Two
Cities is how we account figure your
greenhouse gases I came to realize that
a lot of what we were doing it borrowed
a lot or mimicked kind of the state and
market ways of accounting that I I
started to find in practice was or in
effect was exclusionary to really
empowering local institutions
individuals from being involved in
creating the solutions so and I started
to thinking about this as well community
emissions are really more of a a common
bad that we do and I wonder if there's
anything that you can comment on the
framework of Commons for rather than
sort of optimizing common goods but
minimizing common Bad's well there's a
phrase in Silicon Valley that you should
eat your own dog food meaning what you
produce you should eat and when you are
responsible for that and you cannot
externalize cost you tend to produce a
more holistic answer so I think you know
judge as a general response to your your
question I think that helps take account
of things that markets often elsewhere
and then expect the regulatory system to
ineffectually post-hoc deal with you
know not very well in terms of specific
greenhouse gas emissions I mean we could
talk in many number of arenas about that
but I think having greater local and
neighborhood control over renewables
having even stakeholder trusts for
energy the way Alaska does for a portion
of its oil
the Alaska Permanent Fund and other
types of institutions like that that
help mutual eyes the gain minimize the
externalities localize in a place-based
way the control and thereby minimize the
consolidation and abuse of power would
all be positive steps and I think the
Commons can help actualize some of those
there are some rudimentary examples but
in energy but we have a lot of weight a
long way to go there
Thanks question behind I my name is Mary
he/him/his I hesitated because I'm
confused and I don't know how to ask
because I don't know how to understand
so a short version and maybe can use how
round as an example is how literally
this works a Commons so how our own is a
theater Commons and so I I assume people
make money by working at how around and
needs to make more money like to stay
offering these monitors and water
bottles which sounds to I think it might
be a non-profit I don't know if that's
true and if that's true there's some
speaking about nonprofit boards and your
talk and so I'm there's a hybrid so I am
like how does these worlds interact in a
quite like literal way if I wanted to
leave here and start a comment or be a
part of one well I would start by saying
there's no pure Commons to the extent
that after all capitalist economy is
ubiquitous and we all need to put food
on the table so to that extent I don't
think we should aspire to being monks in
the monastery and I don't think that's a
requirement of the Commons either I do
think the Commons is more like a dimmer
switch where
some will be brighter than others and I
think that people are constantly trying
to find workarounds to prevent governing
through money whether it's transactional
or simply the board that holds all the
cards and can take their game if they
want to go away
so it's a matter of different increments
by which one regains greater bottom-up
participatory control and yes in the
instance of how around are a lot of
other nonprofits there's a value to that
coordinating function which I suppose
that's transactional in the sense that I
take this job or not but much of it of
course is I think more mission and
social driven so the point is to I think
try to move as far as one can in that
direction and certainly in terms of its
engagement with the theatre in arts and
culture world it has been deliberately
empowering up the bottom-up expression
and on its own terms setting the terms
of engagement with each other as opposed
to we the experts from on high deciding
this is how it should be so as to stark
comparisons I would suggest how around
is a rather different type of Commons
albeit as officially legally a nonprofit
I might add that the legal forms for
empowering Commons are non-existent the
hostel and most of them are workarounds
the Creative Commons licenses were a
private contract license workaround to
copyright law which has no provisions
for it and you don't expect Congress to
come up with something like that the
same with the general public license for
software the same with Community Land
Trust law you know so well workarounds
is the norm for legally empowering
Commons and we have a long way to go for
in that front so I hope I'm speaking a
little bit to your your concerns thank
you daddy
we have question up in the oh we have
one here and then we'll go to the back
sorry
so actually my name is Abigail Norman
and my question is really another form
of yours
in fact she her hers I'm the director of
an art center in Boston the Elliott
Schoolcraft school and I struggle I
think a way that I might phrase my
question to you is when we are working
in a commitment as self created
community so we have a hundred teachers
and a thousand students and a strong
sense of community and yet I'm devoted
to the I'm determined to pay the artists
for every second that they work
including things that the organization
used to take for granted as volunteer
hours and I struggle with how do we
create a sense of community that is
somehow not at the same time poisoned by
you know the transaction of money you
know unrelated note and interestingly
you also brought this up we in order to
behave in the marketplace in a way
that's sustainable we're we're faced
with peers who all are funded through
philanthropic dollars and the the only
way that we can charge people fees and
our school partners and libraries and so
on fees that make sense is with those
fellow out back dollars those
philanthropic dollars come from the
wealthy and we are obliged to court the
wealthy to sit on our boards which after
all are our decision-making bodies how
do you live in a world without just
saying well there's a workarounds how do
you conceptualize and philosophize a
future in which we navigate these
contradictions especially in a well
really in any field it doesn't have to
be the arts that could be agriculture or
really anything thank you that's that's
a good and perennial question about
markets and art which you know I guess
my first introduction to a lot of that
was Lewis Hines book on the gift which
does I think
a wonderful expression of how art is
this well he later wrote some books
about the Commons as well the book
common is air is a fantastic follow
through about how this free meaning
freedom to share and collaborate is an
essential part of the creative act and
creative communities and yes finding
ways for the market culture to an artist
to have a livelihood remains a perennial
challenge I would just say that our
markets and there are markets there's a
lot of artists collectives that have
been able to empower artists have more
control than say a gallery system which
might be preying upon individual artists
and there are ways to have different
types of relationships with the market
but I think the alternative is simply to
allow the ultra marketization of
everything through expansive copyright
control which shuts down the creativity
you know when two seconds of sound or
illegal sampling and so forth I don't
have an omnibus answer for you but I do
think there are vehicles for empowering
artists to take greater control both of
their artistic life as well as how they
interact with markets could I just
follow up on that for a second I think
it's I think these questions are
interesting and I'm wondering if if
there's anything we can learn for I know
you mentioned this in your talk and
again in an answer about post but about
pushing a post-capitalist approach to
Commons and I'm wondering if there's
anything we can learn from Europe
understanding that the comparin are not
necessarily you know there's a lot of
different ideological and issues of
ethnicity and diversity and political
and socio-economic structures but I
wonder if you can talk a little bit
about what post capitalism isn't maybe
there are other systems that we could
learn for because the questions here
seem to me like they have a very
particular grounding in and what the you
to our capitalistic and our commodified
realities my
market-based realities are well I guess
two things that jump to mind are are
your needs met only to market exchange
and do we require economic growth the
way the system of capital and in lending
so debt and equity require so for
example in a number of transition
there's a transition town movement which
is basically argues that because we're
at a point of peak oil and arguably peak
growth they want to relocate ooh be
self-sufficient and more stable and
resilient as possible so this entails in
some of those circles trying to devise
different ways of financing the system
there's a group called local capital in
Sweden for example that has devised some
zero interest lending basically micro
lending to within the community that
tries to escape the imperatives for
growth that that inequity tend to
require and they try d commodifying and
meeting relationships I hesitate to use
the word barter because that is such a
stigmatic stigmatized word and economics
but through all sorts of social
relationships the way we see in
everything from open source to
traditional communities you can meet
needs without having those money
relationships I know the double-edged
Theatre near I live in Western
Massachusetts has a very robust
relationship with its local community
which helps D commodified having to
raise tens of thousands of dollars more
to buy what it needs so it's these types
of things that open the door for both a
more deeply embedded social community
but not having the financial burdens hi
my name is sue me day I'm actually one
of the media design students and
a question I've been thinking about a
lot as I anxiously think about my own
thesis project so thinking about the
system of government governance in an
American context where our societies are
unfortunately very fragmented how do we
create mutual care and concern for
common spaces because we all hold
different spaces near and dear to our
hearts and even in the example that you
provided we see the way that Aboriginal
communities inject meaning differently
into certain spaces much differently
than a Western community by it so say
let's take your question again please
I'm so basically thinking about the
system of governance in an American
context which is very fragmented how do
we create mutual care and concern for so
many different common spaces considering
we have we all hold different spaces
near into your heart well in some ways I
could turn your question around and say
that's an advantage the people who want
to take care of the river those who want
to young farmers who want to take care
of the land in more responsible ways
those who want to take care of public
spaces I think all of them could and
should have a role I mean we see the
state chartering corporations to do
their work ostensibly because chartering
Corporation serves the public good by
promoting market activity I don't see
why we couldn't charter certain
self-organized Commons to take care of
certain resources that have public value
as well in some ways that kind of
stewardship is needed as opposed to just
quarantine it as though as a wilderness
so I think any number of people who care
about a resource we see a lot of people
who care about wildlife and preserving
certain types of landscapes the
Appalachian Trail Club who are
functioning in that capacity I think
they could be empowered and basically
serve a public function in a way that
the regulatory state often has trouble
doing because it doesn't have the
resources where it approaches it through
this bureaucratic legalistic system as
opposed to through care and care has to
take place at the appropriate
scale it can't just take place in this
universalistic way even though I want to
accent it's important to have these
larger structures and infrastructures to
facilitate care and a smaller scale but
by all means let's take feminist
economics seriously and give enabling
structures for care to occur and I think
that we'll have all sorts of benign and
constructive ramifications that are
otherwise lost and market externalities
question right here hi my name is Liran
I take his I guess my questions similar
to a couple of ones that are even asked
but I'm wondering how can individuals
contribute to this movement and like
more specifically me as a college
student I don't think I'm directly
involved in any comments movement so I'm
just wondering like how I like what my
role is in your theater challenge well I
I think there's two levels one is I
think there's common in happening all
over the place it's just not culturally
legible we don't name it and therefore
it has no value it's a thousand points
of light and forget it
not that that not a thousand points of
light is necessarily accommodating but
my point is we don't name it and that's
one reason I had that little discussion
about vocabulary but then second I think
many of us have talents and passions
that for which there is a group that has
engaged in some of this that's I guess
the best advice I have at least at at
this stage of a lot of people thinking
about Commons because there are not the
clearing houses or the on ramps for a
lot of Commons right now but I do think
there are many groups that are doing
serious work in that regard
whether named or unnamed and part of the
necessity that I see is to start to name
this so that it can be have more
consequence in public discussion and in
culture and people seem oh there's an
opportunity that I could play to this
larger enterprise
thank you we have a question over here
hi my name is Sir Eva she's series my
question is in your opinion is there a
way to bring this idea of commenting
into systems of higher education which
are typically transactionally based
where students expect to pay an amount
of money and be trained to go into the
world and be able to earn money and
where there are levels of power and
people that are hired as experts to pass
along information is there a way of real
looking at that well I mean you point to
a deep structural problem and you know
it's I think the best that one could
hope is to identify strategic openings
for making headway I mean just this is
top of mind for me but just last week I
met with 20 or 25 PhD students grad
students in Amsterdam who many of whom
are studying the Commons and they were
frustrated that they didn't have more
means both within their university as
well as to reach into the genuine
communities to have impact and their
their answer is to start an
international network of grad students
and PhD candidates and their advisors a
network to start to get that
conversation going so a lot of these
things I think then unfold and
unpredictable ways that oh this
opportunity of that opportunity but in
terms of your your question I think
there's there's a lot of different
openings that could and should be
exploited more open access scholarly
communications and publishing I mean I
think it's scandalous that
administrators have not opened that door
wider and funded it properly and how
librarians are often the caboose on that
or you know still talking about strict
copyright instead of how we can share
the resources that we taxpayers have
already paid for etc so that's one arena
there's a number of others but I don't
they may or may not speak to your larger
structural concern which
you know that's a big conversation yeah
yes thank you for that question
hi I was hoping you'd talk a bit about I
guess copyright and how commenting can
kind of improve that because on the one
hand I definitely am disheartened by
Disney's push to renew the or extend the
length of copyright renewal processes
and all those sorts of things but I'm
I'm an artist and I I make things that
are I want to say easy to steal but easy
to reproduce and how do we make sure
people are being supported can have a
livelihood in some capacity without
copywriting you know folk songs and you
know traditions well the short perhaps
unsatisfactory answers I think we need
alternative ways to finance artists to
pay artists because to the extent that
they're roped in to copyright and their
market transactions it's a cheap way to
do it they're always going to be
eclipsed by the superstars who
constitute one percent of their field
and so I think that and moreover they're
gonna be artistically constrained
because they won't have access to the
things they want to emulate or borrow
from you know this is a perennial issue
of how artists get paid but I don't
think through the market in the straight
up ways that favor the big corporations
is going to help the individual artist
accept those brilliant superstars
so I think artists collectives I think
you know ways to assure greater control
over the resource and I suppose
copyright has historically been the
means to do that but increasingly that's
a dead letter unless you have a you know
an army of lawyers to help you anyway
so I'm sorry I don't really have a truly
satisfying answer to me as well because
there are so many socially vital
function
that the market won't support and so we
need to find other ways we look at
academia you know they're not paid
through the market as such they're paid
through their institutions I think we
could have institutions that could
support artists people have talked about
you know copyright is a government
monopoly that why shouldn't there be
some slice of that that's taken off and
put into a trust fund to support artists
I think it makes you know on the merits
perfectly legitimate sense politically
it's not likely to go very fast but you
know help me help you to find some new
ways to fund artists yeah you know it
does seem like listening to this and and
between artists and higher education yes
it often seems not that cynical but we
know we it often seems like the the
structures that be are so powerful I
mean no higher education it's almost
like we say administrators and I don't
think I'm gonna get there's no I hope
there's no administrators in here
tonight but it does like that the
narrative of the market is actually it's
taken such a hold that that like see
that's why it's important to carve out
these spaces as existence proofs of an
alternative way of doing things yes and
that has unforeseen complications down
the road the way open-source software
has grown and grown and alright and
that's right and those spaces cannot be
kind of counter-revolutionary because
the the Institute of Education gets it
and so they'll carve out spaces that
they call common they like they label it
Commons and they talk about coming but
it's really all within the this kind of
marketized
mechanism to keep so they really have to
be kind of they have you have to kind of
go around the institution itself
sometimes there there are some worthy
experiments in institutional innovation
for education and co-learning that are
Commons oriented there's a if you go to
the my book patterns of common name dot
org online there's an essay on a variety
of different experiments but you know
there's a lot of capital in bigoted
higher education but it doesn't mean the
notion what you mentioned that kind of
generative bottom of experimentation and
different values that's though those
don't lose their value they just need to
be prioritized at a real at a real basic
level and at a certain way they become
the battering ram because when when you
have the moral integrity and authority
the way certain artistic troops do you
know and if that can't be bought and
they play on their own terms
I mean that's that's an important
beachhead for advancing something how we
yeah you have a question okay I thought
that I didn't know what side this was
their secret sign well maybe this should
be the last move to the reception
my question is you spoke a little bit in
your presentation about how you feel
artists and folks who work in arts and
culture are uniquely positioned to
contribute to Commons and a common aim
can you elaborate on that a little bit
more based on your experience I think
people don't appreciate that Commons
commenting is an embodied situated
process and it's not just about
cognitive knowledge and it's about the
human condition I started getting
involved in the Commons as a Washington
person I worked for Nader and I was into
it at the policy in the economic level
but over the past 20 years increasingly
I've seen this is a deep human mystery
about our relation ality our
relationship to the earth and I think
artists have a special voice in speaking
to that in a way that's not just right
side of the brain and in some ways
express things that everybody's feeling
but hasn't been expressed except through
art so that's why I think the role of
artists and cultural organizations is so
important and by framing it as a commons
enterprise as opposed to a
to be market enterprise you have a
greater integrity of vision in pursuing
that not the last question all right
this is your fault my name is Rhon
malice I run a nonprofit on the arts art
in public places when I got going in
this I went to a presentation by the
woman who at the time was head of art
place America Carol Coletta and she
talked about the key criteria that our
place uses to evaluate grant
applications the primary criterion was
how the applicant deals with the
question what is it we can do together
that we can't do separately and that has
informed pretty much everything that
I've been doing since then including
developing a concept called the Arts
Commons which physically is essentially
a repurposed shipping container serving
as a black box for performances
installations whatever and you know it's
gradually getting to where we wanted to
go and I have to say too that the notion
of the Arts Commons was because of this
person here and the theatre Commons and
I said well why not an Arts Commons but
this business about what is it we can do
together that we can't do separately I
mean granted it's getting it down to a
micro level but that's I think where you
got to go otherwise this becomes
absolutely theoretical and rhetorical
and whatever so imposing that question
in connection with the notion overall of
what you're talking about a fair free
and alive Commons start with that the
other subsidy sort of the subsequent
question of course is who is we well
it's a fair enough question who is we
because I think well let me just say
when silk and I were thinking about
Commons a lot of people spent oh what's
the boundary around it and we came to
the realization that there's not a
boundary in a property sense there's a
semipermeable membrane as a living
tissue like the blood-brain barrier so
the bad stuff gets screened out and the
good stuff can get in and to that extent
you have a more living breathing
relationship with other
people and it's not like you're out I'm
in and I think you can be more flexible
the way most traditional Commons are a
little more flexible and situational
about such questions so I mean that's
not an entirely an answer but I think
you see where I'm driving it what I'm
driving at that people who contribute to
the Commons should have preferential
entitlement to the benefits because that
matters as a moral and ethical issue but
it shouldn't be so hermetically sealed
like a club good as economists would
talk about it my definition open-ended
yes an open-ended aspect is what life's
all about
yes hi somewhere I am struggling to make
a great deal of sense out of what you
have given us which to me is at the
abstract level and I'm dying to get you
to talk about a few examples of Commons
and tell us what makes them a common and
how they differ from each other and
they're all Commons so just to be very
concrete well we could talk about the
the seek we of water irrigation ditches
in New Mexico which the indigenous
people native born people there have
managed and it's an area of great
aridity not much water and in contrast
to the local developers who suck as much
water as way as they can these
communities all have to participate in
digging and cleaning the ditches in
which the water they use to irrigate is
used they a lot it based on how much
land or other needs of that family and
they make sure they don't go over the
carrying capacity and how much water
there is and this is a way that in a
very arid way they've used a very finite
resource
to meet people's needs without more and
more and more more
now that's maybe a prototypical Commons
in the sense that there's a shared
resource that is stewarded sustainably
managed through very specific localized
rules that are perceived by all its
participants as fair and meet their
needs so that that's I'm just spinning
out an example for you but you can see
that kind of stewardship occur the
resource might differ like in software
code where it's not finite and the issue
is not as people are people taking too
much the issue is our people adding bad
code or being mischievous and therefore
we need to curate the code in a way that
makes sense for the evolution of the
project and some people will disagree
and say no I'm gonna fork the code and
go my own way
I'll take whatever code is there which
can be taken I'm just gonna move it in a
different direction so that's there's a
whole culture in the software world for
managing shareable code which is very
different from the way Microsoft or you
know Oracle or the big tech companies do
it
where you are get given this little bit
of code to program and you give it to
someone else and it's all proprietary
and nobody can share it or reuse it
let's add so it'll those are very
different examples is the terms of how
they're similar we use this patterns
methodology which is based on recurrent
problems that a Commons will face
recurrent problems just decision-making
who's in and who's out sharing of
knowledge punishing people who break the
rules and we looked at many different
Commons and saw these regularities of
the way people tended to deal with it
now of course this is going to be
different in New Zealand from Canada in
terms of certain specifics but there are
certain levels of generality that one
can make without saying this is the
universal rule so that was our
methodology for trying to identify
commonalities of Commons as a social
system which is very different from the
way
the economists approach it as the
unknown resource ocean space the
internet right so so I think that's
we're gonna transition Jamie so I'd like
to just thank you I mean it and that you
know it's really not a question but you
really make me think as we pulled it
forward as in digital culture can
Commons exist in completely media
environments maybe not something too may
be something that we can discuss over
the reception so I'm going to turn it
back to Jamie who's eager to transition
us and just give them Paul and David a
round of applause thank you so much and
thanks to all of you for coming in for
having such a vibrant discussion we are
now going to transition for those who
care to stick around we'll be selling
some books we have some snacks and
drinks you're welcome to stick around
and keep the conversation going and if
if you have to head up that's fine too
but thank you so much we really
appreciate it thanks again to Center for
economic democracy for helping us put
this together and the Emerson engagement
lab and the MA and media design program
thank you thank you



## Keywords:
