---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YLd9yOMs8QE
---

# Video
Pro-Israel Caller: There Is No Palestinian Peace Plan
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YLd9yOMs8QE)

## Transcript:
all right we'll go to the final call
you're calling from 7:00 to 7:30 to area
code either hello yeah I can hear you
what's up hey Alexander - oh thanks
I would like to debate Israel but if
that's if you don't want to do that I'll
settle for some attractions uh
I mean what I as if it's really limited
we could do a little Israel debating but
I I mean you I would prefer to say or I
could say that it's an apartheid state
sorry it's just the way it is and I know
all of the technical arguments against
it being in the part I'd state but being
long pedantic fool it is in the potlatch
state in some ways even worse I think we
can agree with this how is your health
how is your mother
if you are against Israel preserve their
an apartheid state fund but then you
have to be against every other country
between Libya and like Malaysia well I
love Italy I'm a very big fan of
Mohammed maja tear in Malaysia obviously
I'm a huge proponent of his dictatorship
yeah I mean no dude I I guess I hope he
comes back to power in his 90s you know
I hear I guess I feel like that line of
argumentation when somebody like me just
really doesn't fly I like there's no
other country that you're talking about
certainly not in that loop that anybody
like anybody here is a defender of so
that just doesn't work
the only other distinctions I'd say is
that it is unique and and the specific
there Morocco isn't a specific is in a
similar situation in some how in some
ways in the Sahel and Israel in the West
Bank in Gaza that is a very
specific historically unique and indeed
South African like situation and the
third thing that I would say is it's not
just the thing that happens in the
United States discourse and there's
other people I I've called out people
who are specifically focused on Israel
in a way that a times some for some
people certainly is anti-semitic but the
reality is in the United States if I
criticize you know Saudi Arabia which
actually probably spent more time
criticizing than Israel recently
nobody's gonna come to me they might say
well look Saudi cooperates with us on
certain important intelligence areas
whatever you know it might have um sign
of realist arguments for Saudi Arabia no
one is gonna come to me and say you have
it all wrong Saudi Arabia's the most
moral monarchy in the world how dare you
you're anti-arab and all of this
 so when you have a country
we're literally in front of your face
nonviolent protesters all right it
maybe even slightly provocative
protesters but people who are not anyway
threats to the well-being of soldiers
are getting shot point-blank range uh
I'm people are still gonna defend that
you have something profoundly wrong and
sick going on so I don't have any
specific yeah I don't have a specific
brief for Israel I look the last thing
I'll say is look man I mean I I'm I
believe in democracy
I believe in social delivery for
everybody and I don't like ethno States
and I don't like any form of ethnic
discrimination so how can I be gung-ho
about Israel it's impossible read off
Romberg that's kind of my rap leave it
yeah there is no Palestinian peace plan
other than complete capitulation by
Israel that's you're wrong in actually
several really significant ways so one
is that first of all let's make the
distinction here
the Palestinians that actually run Pat
like the PA Palestinian Authority is not
only the only upholders of a two-state
67 process and have given into Israel on
many many many invite vital policy
issues they are literally like a local
Israeli government in the West Bank so
as far as that faction the governing
leadership of Palestinians are the only
moderate faction in the whole sort of
process and their security
subcontractors for Israel so that's
crazy
Hamas first of all they're very I mean
you can't it's a complete asymmetry of
power but even Hamas has actually talked
about essentially like decades-long
cease fires and and you know incredibly
extended quote-unquote temporary
agreements which would enshrine a
two-state process but in fact you know
liberate Gaza then and and that of
course doesn't you know Hamas is
committed great crimes no doubt about
that we don't need to whitewash anybody
as of course is Israel and then the
third faction are people like Marwan
Barghouti who are engaged in nonviolent
civil disobedience and BDS campaigns
because they say if you're gonna control
my life and I'm gonna live under you and
I'm gonna you know follow your laws
you're gonna control my freedom of
movement then I should have the right to
vote and have an assembly and any person
in 2018 that doesn't agree with that
premise whether they be Palestinian or
American or Israeli or Sudanese on is my
political enemy period and we're at a
point now where the two states has
become logistically impossible because
Israel's never stopped constructing
settlements and so the real question is
now just as a who Dahl Mert said in 2003
it would be apartheid or a one state
democracy and a who'd Barack has said
the same thing and any person who has
progressive politics has to support that
and work towards the security and the
well-being
the Democratic representation of every
single person in that landmass period
and that's where we're at I appreciate
the call definitely calling again soon
and I'll do impressions for you all
right thank you


## Keywords:
