---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kcTqDz2DQlI
---

# Video
Prof. Gabriel Rockhill on Zizek-Foucault, postmodernism, socialism, & identity politics,
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kcTqDz2DQlI)

## Transcript:
second thing that I think is really
important is that French theory is a
product of U.S cultural Imperials that
Foundation tends to be at least within
the intellectuals who are promoted
globally who emanate out of France in
opposition to actually existing
socialism
and a willingness or ability to
accommodate capitalism and imperialism
thank you
hello and welcome to another episode of
India and Global Life today we have with
us a very special guest Professor
Gabriel Rock Hill Professor Rockhill is
a franco-american philosopher cultural
critic and activist he is the founding
director of the critical theory workshop
and professor of philosophy at Villanova
University his books include Contour
history of the present untimely
interrogations into globalization
technology democracy in addition to his
scholarly work he has been actively
engaged in extra academic activities in
the art and activist world as well as a
regular contributor to public
intellectual debate professor of Hill
welcome to Indian Global work thanks for
having me on it's a pleasure
all right so um before we jump into uh
more hardcore politics give us a little
bit of background a kind of family you
come from who were you in school leading
up to perhaps college and there to set
up the sort of intellectual background
uh for what we are going to discuss
today what you are calling as the
culture uh Theory industry
yeah I I grew up in a farm on a farm in
uh rural Kansas in the center of the U.S
and ended up doing uh wanting to get off
the farm and so I went to college in the
Midwest and then eventually studied
abroad in Europe I went to Belgium for a
year and was kind of back and forth
between the U.S and Europe because I was
able to obtain some scholarships and
things like that
um
give us the timeline like 60s 70s oh I'm
not quite that old uh I was born in the
early 70s and I was going to school I
went to school in the early 1990s okay
and so I that's when I went to college
and then I ended up going to do my
graduate work because I was able to
obtain a grant after my undergraduate I
believe it was around 95 96 and I spent
uh well over a decade in Paris where I
did graduate work in philosophy
sociology other field herbs and
um and then ended up getting a PhD in
philosophy at the University of Paris 8
under the direction of el ambaju and
then I also did a PhD in the United
States at Emory University and have been
teaching at Villanova I guess since 2007
so moved back to the United States but
still do a number of things in Paris
notably a summer program uh through the
critical theory Workshop that you
mentioned in your in your introduction
so the theory industry that we'll be
talking now was in many ways almost
developed by the time you went to grad
school
yeah it was definitely emerging at you
know the theory industry if you talk
about it most generally has been a
product of the capital system and a kind
of industrialized centralized way of
producing and distributing Theory and so
the roots of the kind of theory industry
in general go back quite far but in my
own scholarship I've focused on the kind
of role that the theory industry has
played in the era of globalized capital
and the kind of phase of accumulation
that most people refer to as
neoliberalism so from about the 1970s to
the present and more specifically the
figures that I focus on did largely
become predominant within the academy in
the 19 began in the 1980s for someone
like derida Michelle Lamont was an
interesting French sociologist has done
some kind of quantitative studies
regarding the presence of deconstruction
in Dairy dog within journals in the
anglophone world kind of beginning in
the 80s and then it really skyrockets in
the 90s and so as you have actually
existing socialism in the Soviet sphere
being dismantled you have simultaneously
the kind of skyrocketing of a form of
French Theory you know led by the group
of figures referred to as
post-structuralists and so when I went
to college in the early 1990s I was
immediately exposed to the work in
particular people like derida christeva
Luca rigora and others who were
considered to be the kind of Vanguard of
radical Theory at that point in time
Zizek also uh immediately was kind of on
the scene at least within the
intellectual circles that I was in in
the early 1990s uh laclau and move and
Judith Butler would soon come into the
mix as well there was a kind of General
Euphoria around post-structuralist
Theory and it was uh definitely
predominant within the intellectual
circles within which I I operated at
that point in time and given that I grew
up on a farm doing farm work and I also
work construction for decades of my life
in my studies I was always drawn to uh
work that addressed the problems of real
working people and hopefully had some
use of value for the struggle of the
oppressed of the world and so I was I
think quite unfortunately looking back
on it but I probably share this a lot
with other people as well I thought that
if this theory was really radical and
Cutting Edge then there must be some
type of real political payoff to it and
it must address some of these
fundamental issues like exploitation
oppression imperialism and things like
this and needless to say it took a
little bit of time working through
learning all the necessary languages
doing the background reading Etc but it
became clear to me quite quickly that
there was a lack of like rigorous
materialist analysis of some of the
fundamental aspects of the Contemporary
world and so although I was drawn a bit
like I'm off to the flame to some of the
post-structuralist French Theory and
then of course this expanded out into
German critical theory and other
Traditions as well I uh quite quickly
pivoted towards more materialist
analyzes if they be borgiosian
sociological critiques of
philosophy or uh various Marxist
critiques or historical critiques for
that matter
so let's stay
perhaps 60s because 60s was uh this is
the decade where a lot was going on and
I mean you you know in this discussion
you were starting from the 80s but I
mean one would say that people like
Foucault was began to rise
since the 60s I mean I have read his
Madness and civilization that came about
somewhere in 1963 I guess so there was a
rise with him but also in the 60s there
is a lot going on there was the new lab
so Marxism wasn't defeated in that sense
I mean there was a lot of rethinking
within Marxism friends decolonization
was going on the Vietnam was still yet
to come in 1968 was this radical
movement a lot was going on in China the
Soviet Union but yet
there were people like Foucault who was
sort of emerging out of that I mean it's
a sort of uh zigzag so take us through
that story what was going on because
there was a lot of I mean we are we may
not have a lot of clarity about that
yeah in within France there was a real
kind of spike in the visibility and
prominence of certain intellectual
figures who were non-marxists who
position themselves quite firmly and
squarely against
the most well-known French intellectuals
of the post-war period who were
Jean-Paul South and Simone de Beauvoir
and some other figures kind of in those
circles who were Marxist you know fellow
Travelers you know they were never card
carrying members of the uh of the
Communist party but they were you know
somewhat supportive of different
socialist projects of course Sergeant
but War famously went to Cuba their
opinions kind of varied Through Time on
on also went to China addiction yeah yes
yeah and so there was a clear
sensibility in the wake of World War II
among at least a large segment of the
French Intelligentsia that Marxism had
proven itself right by history because
these were the people who had fought and
won against the fascist and the Liberals
and the conservatives and reactionaries
of course had lined up and either aided
and abetted or directly contributed to
the fascist rise of power so it makes
sense within that context and so the
rise of figures particularly like
Michelle Foucault and jacques.com both
of whom published books in 1966 that
were best sellers in France really needs
to be understood in terms of a kind of
intellectual counter-revolution that was
pitted very explicitly particularly in
the case of Foucault against sart and
against Marxism and so for codes 1966
book which really catapulted him into
the Limelight which was the order of
things was amongst other things an
attack on Marxism in the Marxist
tradition and the series of interviews
that he did in the wake of the
publicification of that book really
reveal what his center of gravity was it
was known and I would invite your
viewers and listeners to read his uh
biographies if they're not familiar with
them it was very well known that
Foucault was a violent anti-communist
that's a quote from his most well-known
French biographer her and that he was a
kind of technocrat and an Institutional
operator and even supported gallism and
kind of looked uh away from the entire
Colonial question which raises very
serious questions about his political
center of gravity and he attacked SARP
for being a so-called man of the 19th
century because he defended Marxism and
said that you know Marxism was the the
philosophy of the times and claimed that
uh in the 20th century Marxism was like
a fish out of water meaning it was
stillborn right and this is this is a
myth 1966 this is uh you know amidst
ongoing anti-colonial revolutions around
the world and the expansion of the
actually existing socialist world so
it's a blanket condemnation not only of
the Soviet Union and of China but also
Vietnam Korea of Cuba all of the other
places that one could add to that list
and he would later double down even more
on these quite reactionary political
positions claiming that everything in
socialism everything that's his word is
to be condemned right there's nothing to
be salvaged whatsoever and So within
that context of the 1960s what you
basically have is an anti-marxist
anti-communist kind of intellectual
counter-revolution that is driven by a
group of opportunist intellectuals who
want the spotlight and want to take the
spotlight away from people like certain
Beauvoir who I don't agree 100 with all
their political positions but at least
they were uh you know engaged in some
forms of materialist analysis and were
somewhat supportive of certain socialist
practices and so in that regard the
Bourgeois press and the Bourgeois
cultural apparatus meaning the entire
system of production distribution and
consumption of ideas these are the
universities the publishing houses the
newspapers and magazines the conference
circuit they immediately jumped on these
counter-revolutionary intellectuals has
an enormous opportunity to promote
anti-marxist work and to use it for
their purposes and so there was a kind
of Confluence of interest if you will on
the one hand you have opportunist Petty
Bourgeois intellectuals who want to
become you know the next intellectual
stars and take the spotlight away from
sartin beauvar and on the other hand you
have the Bourgeois cultural apparatus
which is aggressively looking for
opportunists of their ilk so that they
can be used in order to leverage power
away from the Marxist camp and in many
ways that's precisely what happened and
we could factor into this because it's a
large part of my research that they were
also into International operators who
played a significant role insofar as the
governmental agencies of the U.S
national security state had a vested
interest in trying to discredit Marxism
and replace it by the compatible left as
they refer to it or forms of vague
Progressive leftism that are fine with
and accommodate capitalism and U.S
driven imperialism and so in that regard
there's you know a quite famous now at
this point in time a 1985 uh CIA paper a
research paper on that deals with the
defection of the French Intelligentsia
that highlights the very important
contribution made by structuralism in
particular they pinpoint Foucault and
the annal school of historiography to
the demolition of Marxism as a kind of
recognizable and uh kind of cherished
um form of intellectual analysis and of
course practical transformation and so
it's within that larger context I think
that you have to see these figures and
in relationship to this one other
element that's very important is the way
that they were marketed in the
anglophone world is that these were 68
thinkers right there's a vague
affiliation between Foucault Lacon
derida or Duo christeva and other
figures like this and the uprisings of
68 and I have a long research paper that
I've been working on actually for seems
like five years now that will soon come
out that details all of this so what I
say is surprising I can assure you that
it's backed up by uh an ample amount of
evidence these thinkers were all opposed
to the workers movement and this is the
Beating Heart of the uprising of 68 the
largest worker strike According to some
accounts in the history of Europe at
that point in time and it did lead to
some significant gains for the working
class another element though in 68 was
the student and youth Uprising which
trafficked in various forms of anarchism
and trotskyism and a kind of
anti-communist radical liberalism or
what Michelle pruskov calls libertarian
liberalism so a liberalism that then
focuses on kind of cultural issues of
individual Liberation and things like
this without necessarily uh raising
larger questions around you know an
analysis of the social totality
political economy and things like this
and so it's interesting is that these
thinkers were also generally opposed to
skeptical of and sometimes hostile to
the student movement in fact Foucault
himself sat on the governmental
commission that signed or that that um
established the reform the university
reform that was one of the principal
Sparks for the student movement meaning
that in 1968 Buco was clearly on one
side of the barricades he was on the
state gawless side of the barricades he
did not speak out in solidarity with the
movement expressed himself he went to
one uh very large uh uh protester rally
that was organized
um but did not take a public stance uh
for the 68 movement uh but in the wake
of 68 what is very important is
opportunists like Foucault knew which
way the wind was blowing and he
reinvented himself as a temporary kind
of maoist of sorts and for a few years
then trafficked in kind of maoist and
and these have to be understood as the
kind of cultural maoism that was very
present in France I'm not talking about
Mao and what he was doing in China I'm
talking about a kind of
um Petty Bourgeois version of cultural
Marxism that was very prevalent in
France at the time and really saturated
a lot of the student movement and so he
presented himself in the wake of 68 he
kind of caught the wave of radicalism
but was interested like the other
so-called 68 thinkers in the consumer
model of radicalism meaning being able
to sell his discourse and his theory as
radical in order to profit off of the
recent social movement and position
himself as somehow the the Vanguard when
in fact he was widely identified as
being a counter-revolutionary
intellectual from very early on and
that's the same with a lot of the other
intellectuals you have to go through
Case by case but for the most part they
were anti-68 thinkers were at a minimum
thinkers who are highly highly skeptical
of the 68 Uprising definitely the
workers Uprising but also even elements
of the student uprising
wow that there's a lot there I'm it just
I'll uh pick up one Fred out of that
um and I'm staying with the six days
um for now
um I'm just trying to understand how a
sort of seemingly broad traditions of
intellectual uh you know different
schools I mean you mentioned animal
school but I mean animal school is not
the same as uh Foucault and you know
every this whole body that deals with
discourse and you know has nothing with
materialism and Analysis I mean
brodell's work is not Marxist but it's
not just dealing with discourse and then
there is someone like all those are
who's you know who's for long been
considered as one of the leading
marxists intellectual and he's writing
on Marx he's having this discussion with
people like IP Thompson so there's a lot
going on there and now schools also can
continues and there are you know
independent thinkers or you call them
marxists um
so how do we then end up let's say in
the 70s and the 80s which is sort of
narrowing down how did fuku and David uh
deconstruction and all sort of became
the you know the Front Runners as
Marxism and even announced to a great
extent and all of them receded to the
background just if you can spell out
that
yeah I mean I think I would say two
things one is that I do think it's
really important that the way in which
Bourgeois historiography tends to
approach the issue of intellectual
production is always Downstream from the
material forces that drive intellectual
production meaning that there's a
tendency to think in terms of
intellectuals their ideas and different
movements and schools but not to mine
down into the material and institutional
forces that are driving the production
of these intellectuals and their schools
and and what they're doing
um as you know can be seen in the kind
of nature of their theoretical practice
and so I agree fully of course you know
the analysis school and what people call
structuralism or post-structuralism you
could look at other uh movements within
France that there are some significant
differences many major debates within
them you know Foucault is connected to
the kind of third generation of the
announce school to a certain extent and
you'd have to kind of map all of that
out in a delicate manner as I've done in
some of my research but what is really
important is to be able to mine down
into
the uh material forces that are driving
these different movements in various
ways and often will support movements
that appear intellectually to be doing
slightly different things in order to
foster a framework of debate in which
there are there's a basic and
fundamental Foundation that is respected
and that Foundation tends to be at least
within the intellectuals who are
promoted globally who emanate out of
France in opposition to actually
existing socialism
and a willingness or ability to
accommodate capitalism and imperialism
and in that regard there's a remarkable
amount of consistency on the part of
those French intellectuals who became
the most famous once French theory was
kind of internationalized and so the
second thing that I think is really
important is that French theory is a
product of U.S cultural Imperials
these figures did rise to prominence
within France as we were just talking
about but what really catapulted them
internationally was the interest on the
part of the uh U.S
uh and in particular the capitalist
ruling class and their foundations on
the one hand and the U.S state and the
propaganda agencies on the other I'll
just point to one really key example in
this regard and that is that in
1966 there's a very famous conference
that was organized at
um Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore
and that brought together for the first
time some of the leading luminaries of
French Theory right Lacon and darieda
met for the first time at that
conference Duluth was invited couldn't
make it sent in a paper roll on bat was
there to the road was there Renee Girard
was there Paul Damon was there from
Belgium so it was a moment that
catapulted
French Theory and in particular
structuralism was kind of referred to as
structuralism at that point in time into
the Limelight where did this conference
come from well it was funded to the tune
of thirty six thousand dollars which is
the equivalent of a quarter of a million
dollars today by the Ford Foundation and
the Ford Foundation has a long and deep
history of working on cultural
imperialist projects of precisely this
nature the Ford Foundation had worked
hand in glove with the Central
Intelligence Agency in one of its major
propaganda projects which was the
Congress for cultural Freedom a an
organization that had offices in 35
countries ran Prestige magazines around
the world had hired between you know
hundreds of full-time propagandists that
were working for them this was funded by
the CIA and by the Ford foundation and
when it was the they had their cover
blown which happened to be the same year
in 1966 the Ford Foundation tried to run
cover for the Central Intelligence
Agency by taking over their the funding
of the Congress for cultural freedom in
its entirety right so the Ford
Foundation we have to understand is
simply a you know an extension of the
Ford Corporation and of the capitalist
ruling class and the fact that they
would fund and support this type of a
conference and it wasn't only the
conference that brought together all
those luminaries it was also a series of
follow-up seminars International
exchanges and then also Hopkins began
inviting regular visiting professors to
Hopkins and became the first kind of
Center for French Theory within the
United States all of that was was done
within this kind of larger oversight by
the corporatocracy the Ford Foundation
had the representative Sigmund cook who
attended the conference and the Carnegie
Foundation also had Peter Claus who
attended the conference and so uh and
the conference itself also had coverage
by time Newsweek Le Monde the partisan
review uh all of these Outlets have very
well established and deep ties to the
Central Intelligence Agency into
propaganda platforms within the U.S
national security state so in that
regard we can see that French theory is
you know this is just one example and I
could point to many more it has to be
understood as a product of U.S driven
cultural imperialism and the people who
are invited to the Hopkins conference
didn't happen to include the gentleman
that you mentioned a moment ago Louis
altuser if you're organizing an
International Conference on
structuralism in 1966 a moment at which
aldouser was globally one of the most
famous structuralists and he'd just done
a series of important Publications with
a group of you know students who would
emerge as the kind of altusarian crowd
you would think that he would be on the
list but he was a member of the
Communist party and was therefore a
persona non grata in the United States
and it was very clear that the agenda
was to promote within the United States
the version of French theory that was
non-marxist and more explicitly
anti-marxas and of course this would
lead then to later collaborations and
international promotion of the
anti-marxist French theorists by the
work being done you know Paul Demond
would then later go on to Yale and
invite deridot regularly to Yale and
there were these other hubs Within
United States that were set up in order
to continue promoting this type of
anti-marxist uh Theory at the expense of
course of all of the other important
intellectual work that's going on in
France at that point in time so
everybody or most people in the
anglophone world would be aware of who
Jean-Paul Sac is most people don't know
who Michelle is
or many other figures
who I could point to and say well these
are important French theorists who don't
happen to abide by the fundamental
foundational principle for promotion on
the part of U.S cultural imperialism and
that is anti-communism combined with
accommodation to capitalism and to
imperialism
so this was like the
sort of this Theory industry was rooted
in actual industry like industry of
capitalism where you know this was sort
of the what some would call the
hegemonic element of global capitalism
that was competing at that time with the
Soviet Union but also since that were
going on in China exactly
um this is some sort of a very um I I
would like a quick response uh uh in
this
um
it is often said that uh
with I don't remember whether it was the
10th Congress after Stalin some of the
archives that came up
um came out about the Soviet Union the
gulags some of the French theorists uh
actually found uh
China and maoism as their sort of
alternative to the Soviet Union and they
stayed with that flirted but then
eventually sort of went in their own
direction is this a sort of right
understanding of what was going on at
the time there was a segment of the
French intelligencia that followed
precisely that pattern which in and of
itself I think is a misdirected because
the idea that there would be some
perfect model out there in the world
instead of socialist projects that emit
emerge in fits and starts with enormous
difficulties with setbacks with
imperialist incursions Etc should be
much more realistic and much more
dialectical when you look for examples
in the world than some of these French
theorists were and so there was a famous
trip that
I know christiva was on it and I believe
Philip soles and Roland bath uh were as
well but don't quote me on that because
I'm not certain I'd have to you know
check my notes on it when they went to
China in the 60s in order to you know
see whether or not their presuppositions
about China being a better model than
the Soviet Union could be confirmed but
that quickly dissipated and so many of
them moved from kind of flirting with
actually existing socialism to being you
know questioning it and then being
openly hostile to it and most of them
actually you can short out their career
Arc the more critical they were of
actually existing socialism the more
famous they tended to become within the
global Theory industry and within the
cultural Imperials projects of the US of
course there should be nothing
surprising about that
tell us a little bit about uh the
relationship I mean you have said a
little bit already but I just I wanted
to place this discount in in the context
because uh the plans the decolonization
movement was going on and in Vietnam it
was extending up to 1970s I mean of
course the Americans took over the
France but who were some of these
um intellectuals who sort of uh I mean
who are some of them who never spoke
against the Indian beer list movements
that were going on in their colonies and
if you'd like to also tell us where
the friends intellectuals who actually
fought for decolonization in the
economies 60s 70s
yeah in general when you look at the
major French theorists who are known
internationally
the majority of them either turned a
blind eye to the Colonial question uh or
they kind of disingenuously presented
themselves after the fact is somehow
being supportive in various ways like
literally lies about his own biography
if you track out the interviews which I
have done uh in order to present himself
as somehow like on the side of the
oppressed when he obviously wasn't and
he wrote went abroad where did it go he
was in well he was in a few different
places in Sweden he was in Poland then
he was in Tunisia and it is true that
when he was in Tunisia there was a
significant student Uprising and he
provided some mild support to that
student Uprising apparently hid a
typewriter in his garden for some of the
student activists is on record as saying
that he was impressed by some of the
Marxism of the students and later
pointed back to I believe this was in
66-67
pointed back to it as a moment that
began to radicalize him
um and then after 68 happened in France
that kind of pushed him further uh
there's a little bit of yeah anyway
there's there's more that could be
um said about that but the position that
people like sart and Beauvoir and in
general the Marxist Intelligentsia you
know people like Michelle
prisca or some of the other figures that
I mentioned before being a Marxist man
being an anti-imperiodist right and so
being on the side of the globally
oppressed and uh lining up against the
the imperialist war machine in whatever
manifestation it might uh take and so
there's a clear demarcation between the
I wouldn't say all of the Marxist I
would say those you know marxists who
are also anti-imperialists and who are
internationalists importantly
um because there were others who were
you know Marxism comes in many different
forms and so there were those who could
be kind of social Democratic marxists
who would abide by or accept certain
forms of imperialism certain trotskyists
um but the French Intelligentsia of you
know people like Bordeaux or dareda or
lacan or others these were people who
you know might very well and did in
certain cases tell stories about growing
up or living in colonies or neo-colonies
and turn these kind of stories into Auto
fiction or reflection on being
dissentered as a subject and things like
this but we're not Resolute supporters
of anti-colonial movements and uh and of
people like fennel of course because
there's the famous connections between
sart and bobar on the one hand and
poncefeno and his uh militant support of
Algerian Independence and so there's a
clear kind of demarcation I think
between the anti-imperialists and those
who some of them you know are basically
amount to being pro-imperialists but for
the most part they tended to just either
turn a blind AI or be accommodating to
imperialism and instead focus on other
things like Heidegger's ontology or the
history of Western metaphysics or uh you
know what they perceived as the kind of
um
uh you know various developments in the
history of European civilization
Foucault of course later famously uh
wrote on the Iranian Revolution and took
some rather problematic positions in
that regard but was he never pointed out
in any of his writings on Iran uh that
there had been a CIA orchestrated coup
d'etat and so clearly didn't have a very
robust understanding of geopolitics and
of imperialism and did not he wrote
about the 79 Revolution yeah yeah yeah
exactly but he wrote extensively not
about the 53 uh exactly the overthrow of
uh mosa deck in the installation of the
Shaw and but he wrote extensively on you
know Iran its recent history and just I
guess happened to miss a really
fundamental point and that is that the
Shah was a CIA public government
um and so there there's also just I mean
there's there's a lot of social
chauvinism in the French intelligencia
meaning
a kind of cultural arrogance and the
assumption that they can just focus on
all things French and French history and
Western European history and just ignore
the colonies and it saturates a lot of
their work unfortunately
absolutely I think this is something
which has a much longer history in
France you know the kind of chauvinism I
mean one of the things I've read I I
don't remember exactly it was popular
one but someone said that one of the
problems of fighting the Napoleonic
um Empire was that it came with this
whole sort of uh flag of modernity and
you know progress and so on so any
princely states the German states or
Spain or you know Russia if they would
resist they would be called as the sort
of old regime so they came with the flag
of new regime and it becomes difficult
to resist anti-end time period and this
is something which is still going on I
mean what's going on with the Muslims in
France I mean it's appalling and that is
often justified in the name of you know
progress and you know separation of
state and religion and so on absolutely
this is this is very very deeply rooted
in French culture this is not even
something which is very peculiar to
these keys well it's imperialist culture
right and so racism and social
chauvinism really deeply saturated and
of course that is Amplified by the
Bourgeois cultural apparatus within
France and so racism is just completely
normalized and particularly racism of
course that targets the subjects of
imperialism
um and that's uh incredibly palpable uh
for anyone who knows French culture or
spent time
we'd come to the U.S and the more recent
electron of the century but if it could
just tell us a little bit about what was
going on uh at the ground in France in
the 70s and if it is I mean
France had a longer history with
socialist experiments I mean at least up
until the middle of the 90s and
um so and the Communist Party came out
very strong of the second world war
because of their resistance
so and I don't know if I'm exactly right
on this but beginning with the 70s the
government started to sort of lose out
to the Socialist but the Socialists did
try a lot of experiment and they failed
of course because on the other side of
the Atlantic
radium tabs right already and pets are
on this side they had already come and
it was very difficult and Soviet Union
itself was becoming very very weak but
give us a background about what was
going on at the level of the politics
and if at all they engaged I mean it's
already mentioned a lot about the 60s
but in general did they engage with the
friends radical
um
politics at that point in time did they
meaning the uh the the the the
intellectuals that we are discussing but
give us a background about what was
going on in larger governance in the
realm of governance and popular politics
yeah it's true that in the wake of World
War II the the Communist party was the
leader of the internal resistance
against the fascist occupation and so
needless to say they emerged in the wake
of World War II as being one of the
leading forces uh and it was looking
like they might be able to gain power
you know even through the The Ballot Box
and when you look at the kind of
evolution from the post-world War II era
to the 1970s of course there's a lot
that goes on right there's in the
international sphere you have you move
from the Stalin era to Khrushchev and
the there's a whole series of kind of
criticisms that come out regarding uh
the style and error actually existing
socialism
the revisionist sort of the revision is
criticism
exactly exactly and that of course had a
big impact on certain segments of the
Intelligentsia you had the fact that the
Intelligentsia as well was being driven
by this kind of cultural imperialism so
the people who are becoming the most
famous and being invited to the United
States and to all these junkets and
showered with praise and money these
were the people who were anti-marxists
um but actually I should probably deal
with the first half of the question
first because it's about the history of
the political organizing the one of the
complications with the relationship
between the Socialist Party and the
Communist party and this is a larger
it's not just in France right it's also
you see similar patterns within the
Imperial core you see it within the
United States and you see it within uh
Western Europe in general and that is
that the CP uh moved in the direction of
becoming much less of a revolutionary
socialist platform or party and much
more of a kind of Social Democratic
reformist party and there's a few really
key dates in 1976 the Communist Party of
France abandoned the reference to the
dictatorship of the proletariat which
dictatorship might be a scary word to
some people but it basically means that
the state right of course but the state
would be in the hand of the workers not
in the hand of the capitalist class is
what it means in 1979 the Communist
Party actually removed all references in
their statutes to Marxism millennialism
and to proletarian internationalism and
by the 1990s they just abandoned
Democratic centralism right so like many
of the other communist parties in the
Imperial core there's a kind of
evolution in the direction of reformism
and a kind of capitalist accommodation
at the end of the day which led to very
complicated situations at the level of
organizing many of the intellectuals who
were revolutionary intellectuals and
dedicated to socialist transformation
supported critically granted but
supported actually existing socialism
many of them worked through the CP and
tried to push it in a direction that was
more revolutionary and less reformist
and that ended up I think ultimately you
know it kept the CP on course to a
certain extent but ultimately a lot of
them later you know it could be in the
80s or the 90s ended up leaving the CP
splitting off and founding other
organizations and eventually other
parties the life story of George gasto
is quite interesting in that regard I
believe he's about 70 years old now but
he was a major intellectual within the
CP for years broke with the CP and now
is one of the leading intellectuals of
the the prcf
um so in that regard there's a kind of
the overall evolution of the Communist
party and then also they worked they had
um delegates within two of the Socialist
governments but the Socialist Party of
course in France not unlike other kind
of socialist parties that you'd see if
it'd be like the labor party in the U.S
or experiments I'm sorry in the UK or
experiments here in the U.S these were
parties that really did accommodate uh
capitalism and quite significant ways
and the Socialist Party of the 1970s had
a lot more teeth than the Socialist
Party of today within France but it was
still very very compromised and so all
of that led to a kind of uh highly
problematic Evolution that of course
then also also had an enormous impact on
the Intelligentsia so a lot of the
Intelligentsia in the post-war era they
were either party members or fellow
Travelers a lot of the figures that
we're talking about are free agent
intellectuals who are usually in fact
almost systematically anti-party and
anti-state meaning they're against
actually existing social Estates and
they're against the party form
um and party organizing in general and
so in that regard there's quite a
significant transformation in that
regard if they are involved or were
involved in uh forms of organizing like
Foucault or derida you know derida was
involved in very explicit anti-communist
organizing and did illegal activities in
Czechoslovakia and was arrested there
um he was one of the he was the
co-founder of the Yan Huss Foundation
which received funding from the Margaret
Thatcher Foundation from U.S
governmental agent agencies in order to
basically do anti-communist subversion
so he did engage in activism which was
anti-communist activism quite uh not
only explicitly but quite practically
and it's probably his most significant
practical engagement in the case of
Foucault particularly in the wake of the
1968 uprisings he was involved in
various maoist organizations some prison
organizing and things like that very
explicitly anti-marxist
um and he had said as much uh in in that
regard and so there was more of a kind
of
you know Anarchist or liberal
orientation that meant that you could
maybe your politics would amount to
going and voting for one of the
capitalist candidates once every four or
five years or you'd get involved in some
type of like Community or like uh
Anarchist driven kind of model of
organizing or set of organizations like
in the case of Foucault or de los kind
of did that as well
um so yeah that's a kind of at least
quick we're talking about a lot of
different years so there's a lot going
on there but at least a quick overview
of some of the important elements
all right yeah this is very helpful I
mean some of this uh complicated
relationship with the Communist party is
becoming sort of Social Democratic party
was also like it played out very uh
strikingly in India one sections of the
Communist party going the direction of
what is called as the maxillites I mean
it's a complex story but then you know
this sort of internal tensions between
the Communist parties and then there
were socialists and so on
you wanted to say something no I was
just agreeing that I mean it's an
international problem uh the history of
the relationship between the you know
Social Democratic version of socialism
and a more you know revolutionary
version of socialism but of course there
are lots of nuances and other Shades of
Gray that one could add in but there are
complex histories that continue to write
themselves right because they're they're
ongoing issues today as well
and the fall of the Soviet Union in many
ways sort of sealed these sort of you
know very
they were still struggling but they were
still there I mean particularly not
noticeable is the decline of the French
Communist party and the Italian
Communist party and you know one of my
friends recently went to France and he
said that he went to the uh friends
Communist Party office and he said that
it is visible how Grand they were I mean
you don't even have to look at the
numbers the one sort of majestic friends
in Italian and I think I guess that has
a huge sort of
um setback in terms of popular politics
in Europe you know kind of politics into
which it has degenerated the defeat of
data in the French communist parties
a hundred percent I mean one of the most
difficult things about organizing in the
Imperial core is precisely the legacy of
certain party projects that were very
powerful that brought in a lot of people
educated a lot of people had a lot of
potential did do some very good things
along the way
but that has left us in a situation in
which we're in and we have been for a
while now in a phase of reconstruction
and that phase of reconstruction is
extraordinarily difficult
um given the consequences of you know
these movements and these parties and
the need to rebuild them and it's also
in a very different context and we have
very limited time right because of the
increasing threats of World War III and
nuclear Annihilation ecological
degradation that is at a unprecedented
pace and so we're faced with well like
Humanity in general doing something that
seems you know very difficult uh to say
the least but it is one of the most
important things is to if we want to
save Humanity the planet and reduce
oppression and exploitation and
imperialism then we need to have
powerful organizations that can do that
and right now we we're still in a
process in many countries around the
world of building
and so hopefully your viewers and
listeners are already plugged into some
of those important projects otherwise
I'd encourage them to do so because it's
one of the most important things in our
era
absolutely I think the decline of our
political organizations uh is the one
single largest defeat and victory of
capitalism that we see today and I mean
even some of the radical
um political options that emerged
the moment they extinguish show the
reason they extinguish so quickly tend
to extinguish I mean I'm not saying that
the underlying organizations extinguish
that this overalliance occultic figure
um you know that leads to so the the
options are between Jeremy corbyn or you
know tessarma or Bernie Sanders or the
establishment Democrats or you don't
know
um
you know in in
France melanchol but less Focus has been
on actual organizations building
organizations and some of the green
parties and all our like that they do
have in my view
um
elements of popular politics but they
also tend to be co-opted into the solo
sort of corporation like structure yeah
yeah and if I could just say really
quickly one of the pernicious
consequences of a lot of the theorists
that we've been talking about and this
also goes not just for the French
theorists that we were talking about but
also a lot of German style critical
theory coming out of the Frankfurt
School and for that matter the other
kind of leading luminaries of uh
European Theory people like Zizek people
like a gambin uh laclau right even
though the clouds from Latin America
he's kind of within that camp Judith
Butler and others like this is that
there is with a few Exceptions there is
a resounding hostility to party
organizing
as it somehow parties in and of
themselves just reproduce hierarchies
and domination and so there is a
knee-jerk very uninformed very
uneducated very unhistorical Anarchist
driven rejection of people getting
organized in such a way that they could
fight and win right and that's also it's
funny that also marks us with hostility
towards the state itself I mean the
welfare state everything is stalinism
stalinism becomes this Boogeyman so the
like reaction towards party and reaction
towards the developmental State goal
hand in hand and then all we are left to
it is you know different ngos and
different voluntary organizations I mean
it's a joke to think of voluntary
organizations to take on massive
corporations I mean I'm not saying we
don't need that but I mean
yeah and many of them are just cut outs
anyway of major corporations security
States and other such things I mean the
NGO application there's been many very
very good critiques of of ngos even
though of course in certain instances
they can do certain things that are good
etc etc but I couldn't agree more that
the anti-party anti-state ideology which
is the dominant ideology within the
purported left Intelligentsia is an
enormous enormous bulwark against the
type of work that actually has to be
done because if we want to move away
from capitalism and from environmental
degradation imperialism Etc then we need
to get organized in order to do it and
we actually have to leverage land and
regions away from imperialism and so the
problem with a lot of the kind of
anarchist-driven style that you or you
know
at best it's it's anarchist because at
times it's just liberal or conservative
or reactionary but it that kind of
overall orientation is that it leaves
the people bereft of the fundamental
tools that are necessary for struggling
for Liberation and actually winning and
so of course it has to be situated
within a larger project of cultural
imperialism in which the leading
intellectual luminaries in the
capitalist world would be those who
broadcast to the masses a message that
the most important tools
that have been historically proven to
work
by which people can organize fight and
win should be off the table entirely for
some type of insipid moral judgment that
they're bad because there might be
leadership or they might be organized or
there might be discipline or all of
these other Horrors and so there's also
a very deeply baked in kind of
libertarian ideology of the freedom of
the individual to just think and do
whatever they want and we go kind of
whistling down the lane of La La Land
while people aren't getting organized
and so I really think that we need to
overcome that and fortunately at least
within the circles that I operate in
people are overcoming that uh
particularly young people who are sick
and tired of hearing a whole series of
lies about things that they can't do or
shouldn't do or that are bad even though
uh the people who usually accuse them of
being bad haven't even been in parties
so they don't even know
so anyway I could say more about that
but I'll leave it at that
yeah no it just uh you know you're
shifting from here uh that's the word on
anarchism itself I mean it does have a
long history and you are talking about a
particular strand of most of the
democratic tendency I mean the the
revolutionaries of Paris coming or
mostly at least they call themselves
anarchists and in mocks writing he
spends time that oh they call themselves
anarchists but they are mostly marxists
writing about that sort of uh historic
document about the Paris commune and
then we have the whole Spanish Civil War
the American anarchists who operated
more like Marxist but so the then the
syndicalists were there so just to sort
of uh oh I agree 100 no I'm referring to
more the kind of dominant anti-party
anti-state logic of a certain segment of
University kind of anarchist
University kind of anarchist yeah
they're kind of libertarian
right yeah exactly which is different
than the iww and different right than a
lot of other uh examples that we could
point to for sure right yeah
um I'll quickly I have two questions so
just manage your time one on uh Fascism
and it's uh you know how do you since
you have written on that so very quickly
I wanted to you know comment uh hear
your comments on the far right and
faster them
um and also I wanted to uh hear you on
how you look at the whole identity
politics and if you have any sort of
take on that with the sort of this
whatever we are discussing in the
intellectual domain so
um why not take up both of them together
or as you like
um tell us how you are looking at the
identity politics because it becomes
some somewhat of complicated because
there is the identity politics of the
far right and then there is the liberal
establishments identity politics and the
kind of feed each other and justifying
each other and there are issues within
you know issues on genders sexualities
which are really important sometimes
they attack on identity politics
degenerates into a very sexism and kind
of you know all that stuff so just tell
us how the how are you looking at this
current state of order to use the most
we done
well I think identity politics is an
ideology that emerges in the neoliberal
phase of capitalist accumulation in
which you have in the Imperial Center
many of those or not many a certain
class segment from the kind of comprador
bourgeoisie of the periphery
that moves up in its class standing so
you have a more diverse
kind of petty bourgeoisie or middle
strata within the Imperial core
and that identity politics
uh historically has functioned in such a
way that class can be more or less
erased or just made into a question of
identity
and it's replaced then by these you know
uh identities that can be used within
the Imperial core as a central focal
point for what's referred to as politics
but it really amounts to an Adolf re
Junior's work on this is excellent It's
a class politics
so that the diverse Petty bourgeoisie
can leverage their identity categories
in order to get promotions more jobs
open up jobs for their people be the
spokesman for their people their
spokespeople for their people and other
such things so I do think that identity
politics if it'd be liberal or
conservative is largely a product of the
kind of neoliberal phase of of of
capitalism and that
it should not be surprising that there
would be a kind of essentialist white
and right-wing version of identity
politics because they basically traffic
in the exact same logic right they the
content might be different meaning it's
like white Bros as opposed to people of
color or trans people or things like
this but the basic fundamental form is
the same that we are a minority and that
we need representation we need greater
visibility Etc the final political
consequences of course can be different
right uh in the case of more fascist or
authoritarian versions of right-wing
identity politics but the other thing
that is really important to understand
about identity politics is that it has
also been a historical project
of casting the longest Shadow possible
over actually existing history and the
history of racialized groups the history
of women the history of sexually uh
um oppressed minorities has been the
history in which marxists have been at
the Vanguard of the struggle against
both oppression and what many marxists
call Super exploitation so not just
exploitation of a wageworker but
exploitation of like proletarians from
the global south or from immigrant labor
or from prison labor or other things
like this and so if you look back and
you actually know the history of
actually existing socialism you would
know that Valentin mogadam who as far as
I know is not a Marxist or even a
defender of the Soviet Union has written
very poignantly on the fact that the
Bolshevik Revolution uh
instituted the most significant
emancipation of women in the history of
the world
that's an amazing amazing accomplishment
and most of the identity politics
feminists that I know are not pointing
to the Bolsheviks as the Vanguard
leaders of feminist emancipation
um granted we could talk about what
later happened under Stalin certain
setbacks why that happened and kind of
contextualized that more broadly and we
have to always be nuanced about this but
the same is absolutely true for racial
questions who was the global leader in
the fight against National oppression it
was Lenin who declared repeatedly that
the fundamental principle was the
self-determination of Nations and what
are nations they are groups that share a
common culture and language and history
and often ethnic and racial traits and
so in that regard the founding of the
Soviet Union was a founding of a
multinational and multi-ethnic state in
which all of the states had the right to
decide whether or not they would hear to
the Soviet Union it's not by chance that
in a case in the United states in the
interwar period who were the leading
anti-segregationists what was the
Communist Party of course right years
and years decades before all of the
liberal identitarians said oh this is
this new thing that now we're thinking
about we're thinking about racial
oppression we're thinking about the
oppression of women and the oppression
of sexuality it's just based on a
combination of historical myopia and
historical ignorance and so identity
politics is also a counter-revolutionary
politics against the actual politics of
the oppression of these groups which
needs to constantly be understood as
both oppression and exploitation right
because it has to be rooted within the
ways in which the oppression of women
historically has been linked to their
exploitation as laborers within the
domestic sphere just as the oppression
of racialized groups has been linked to
their super exploitation as Imperial
subjects right
right in in the 1920s and 1930s
um you know when NAACP was uh you know
turned its back against working class
back working class or at best they were
doing legal cases due to the Communists
who were working and this was the time
of the new deal when the sea you know
civil right section was at best under
pressure from the black activism were
taking of some cases but you go to
Alabama and look at you know how uh the
radical working class was organized
Blackboard and it was very difficult
because it was not the organization in
the industry or not it was mainly
communist leaders working with relative
black working-class Union organizers in
the 1930s and 1940s right
yeah exactly which gives a really
interesting and detailed history of
black communist organizing in the South
right yeah from 1953 we end up in brown
and it sort of becomes a more formal
kind of and then there was a spike in
the 1960s but anyway
um this has been an uh exciting one hour
I appreciate there was so much to
discuss and I'm sure we'll have you
again and yeah but thank you so much for
your time and I I hope this is just the
beginning of the long Association

thank you



## Keywords:
