---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=viddh5Dft1A
---

# Video
Professor Stephanie Kelton | Finding The Money |
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=viddh5Dft1A)

## Transcript:
good morning everybody and thanks for
joining us or good evening if you're in
uh the us or anywhere else in the world
good day good evening good night glad to
see you joining us um it's fantastic to
have such a big group of people my
name's Gabby um I'm uh the CEO of modern
money lab I'm here with Steven hail and
Stephanie Kelton for this talk in our
economics of sustainability 2024 lecture
series and we'd love to thank thank
thank Stephanie for giving us her time
to to um talk to us today about finding
the money um which is a really important
um thing that we um that we all need to
know about and also the title of a new
movie which is coming up a documentary
featuring Stephanie which we'll get into
a bit later um just before we start the
the session I'd like to acknowledge that
um in Adelaide we are living and working
on the land of the Garner people of the
Adelaide Plains I'd like to acknowledge
that this land was never seated and we
pay our respects to Elders past and
present and I'm going to hand over to
Steven
now a very warm welcome to everyone um
especially if you're joining us live
from somewhere where it's very late at
night or early um in the morning it's a
great pleasure to see um so many people
in on the list of names I can see a lot
of names that are familiar to me and a
lot of names that aren't so um thank you
all for coming before welcoming our
guests I I'd like to say that this
series of interviews and talks has been
organized by modern money lab modern
money lab is a registered charity
headquartered in Adelaide South
Australia and we where Gabby and I are
sitting which we set up for about three
years ago now mainly to answer the
question where can I study modern
monetary Theory and ecological economics
we wrote a graduate certificate graduate
diploma and master's degree so that for
the first time Wherever You Are in the
world there's an answer to this question
and we were lucky enough to find a
university that was prepared to partner
with us to offer these courses we'll be
starting our fifth trimester in February
and we'd love it if you could join us on
The Graduate certificate to empower
yourself to debate economic issues with
anyone or on the full Masters to train
as a professional
Economist Stephanie needs no
introduction really she's a professor of
public policy at Stony Brook University
author of the best-selling book the
deficit myth a former Chief Economist on
the US Senate committee on the budget
and I mustn't forget to add also an
honorary or Adjunct professor at our
partner torren University Australia
among many other things and so I just
like to say welcome
Stephanie very nice to be with all of
you um let's start with the movie since
Gabby just mentioned it finding the
money
which I hope wherever people are in the
world they'll get to see at some point
this year and which we're touring with
the director Mar and pess around
Southeastern Australia in in March how
did the movie come
about well this is uh Marin's uh idea
you know she she sort of took an
interest and she she can give you uh
obviously a better answer than I can
because she will know you know what
inspired her to seek us out and to find
the connections that she found between
the work that many of us were doing as
economists uh specifically within the
mmt uh macro framework and her own
interest in the environment and
sustainability and so you know we were
doing work and I think it it goes all
the way back to really the the very
earliest stages of mmt with people like
Matthew forat who was a colleague of
mine at the University of Missouri in
Kansas City where I taught for 17 years
and uh Matt was always doing work in
this space I mean environmental I think
he used to teach and probably still does
courses like environmental economics so
there were at least some mmt economists
from the very beginning who whose Work
Incorporated uh these sorts of questions
around climate and
sustainability um I don't remember to be
honest when I first had a conversation
with muren I know that she a long time
ago though isn't it it was years ago
this this film is is many many years in
the making and I think that uh and again
she could correct me if I if I get this
wrong but I as I remember it her
original idea was to to do a film that
was a bit different from what she ended
up doing I I think uh I was giving a
talk many of us were at uh Harvard
University and there's a group here of
activists and they call themselves the
sunrise movement and someone organized a
conference up at Harvard and brought
many scholars and and activists legal
Scholars economists historians and
others together I remember her being
there and
filming uh and after a period of time I
guess the movie started to take shape
the story started to take shape in her
mind and it became one that sort of
centered my intellectual Journey as one
of a number of economists who um had
contributed to the scholarly literature
around
mmt and she said look I think this is
sort of the missing ingredient in in the
climate um fight I mean it is a fight of
for our lives and a fight of our lives
and she saw the work we were doing as
integral and as useful to that movement
and I think the film is her uh effort to
bring the story together so that when we
you know hear people talk about how much
money is going to cost to tackle the
imminent you know challenge that we're
facing with respect to
climate breakdown uh how will you pay
for it and Marin wanted to use that as I
think an entry point to say this is the
wrong question and you know I I laid
this out at Harvard that in fact finding
the money is the easiest part of the
whole challenge it's everything else
that's really hard uh that's going to
require a lot of thoughtful uh hard work
on our part but finding the money is the
easy part and I think that's the the
story she wanted to
present that's a great answer someone
asked me yesterday in a meeting actually
somebody who's who's here the to to
summarize the movie in 60 seconds and I
had to go but I didn't do it that well
um it's very difficult to do so because
it covers so much
ground actually I think I started and
still talking five minutes
late and but it's a great movie but just
before moving on from the movie if you
are in South Australia and you haven't
booked to come and see it yet then um
please do I I was I knew it was going to
be good before I saw it for the first
time but it was much better than I
expected it to be it's a great
achievement of mar and putting the movie
you know Stephen she put it together so
beautifully and one of the things that
that the film really does is it is an
indictment of modern mainstream
economics I mean that that is a a very
big part of what it is that she's
attempted to do in this film is to
reveal uh how much they get wrong and
what the costs are for all of us if we
continue down this path of asking the
wrong questions and then answering them
incorrectly on top of that and uh and
the price that we'll pay collectively uh
as a civilization I think it um it
really does a beautiful job of breaking
it down and presenting it in a way
that's really accessible to people
because these are lofty fights that
economists have about you know
macroeconomic Theory and all this kind
of stuff and she really uh makes it I
think um very accessible to laay
audience you know just what the issues
are what's at stake and why the role of
economists has been both so important in
bringing us to the place that we are in
in the current debate and why it's been
so
problematic yeah and uh I don't know whe
this has been factious but if if anybody
enjoys seeing famous economist making a
complete full of themselves then this is
the movie for you um yes I won't I won't
name them you're
concerned uh I heard no spoilers pardon
no I'm not gonna spoil no spoilers no
uh I heard you the other day being
interviewed on NPR about the US national
debt going over 34
trillion dollars I mean for to most
people $34 trillion may as well be $24
trillion or it's just a huge number um
people maybe even more in the US than
here uh seem to be
scared about the national debt they've
always been scared about the national
debt um what is the national debt what
are people scared
of what are they getting
wrong well let's talk let's talk about
what people are scared of um what people
are scared of are the the things that
they have been told about the national
debt that are supposed to personally
jeopardize their Futures that's that's
what it's about you know if you just
thought oh well it's a big number but it
doesn't connect to me in any way you
probably wouldn't worry very much but
when they say things like because of
this very large number because we have
this national debt hanging over our
heads it is going to mean a bleak future
for our children and grandchildren it is
going to force us to make tough choices
uh with respect to the federal budget
because so many dollars have to be
diverted to to repaying the debt that
money won't be available for Education
Health Care uh other priorities that are
important to people and so people hear
those kinds of you know like every day
in the newspaper on the radio on
television you know uh somebody is is
spinning a tail of Woe about the
so-called national debt and making it
very personal and you know we've got a
big billboard
in New York City it used to be situated
right there in Times Square and they've
moved it to sort of a side street but
it's still there and you can walk by and
this thing Towers over you and the
numbers change in real time so you just
look up and you see click click click
click and the number is getting bigger
and bigger and then down below that big
headline number it says your share and
then it's you know the per capita so you
take the total debt and divide by the
size of the population and then you're
told this is how much you're personally
on the hook for well of course people
get worried you know they'll say that
it's going to mean a a future of
crushing a crushing burden of taxes in
the future that you know they're going
to come for your wallet and and you're
going to have to Pony up the funds to
pay this all back so you said what do
they get wrong everything I just said is
wrong everything they say is wrong so
what you know what I think creates so
much anxiety
both the fact that it's going to hit you
personally but also just the word debt
right just the fact that we are so
conditioned to have a a sort of visceral
reaction to the word debt I mean we
probably all have a com a credit card
you use your credit card but you know
you have to be careful the last thing
you want is to go to the mailbox every
month and find a statement with a number
that's growing and you feel like there's
no end you know how am I ever going to
pay this off um we're careful with you
know other sorts of debt borrowing and
that sort of stuff we know people can
end up in trouble you can go broke we've
seen businesses and companies you know
have trouble with debt and file
bankruptcy so we understand that debt
can become a
problem and then when we hear that the
federal government is deeply inde dead
the only way we know to sort of make
sense of it is to liken it to our own
personal finances so then people take
advantage of that you know the fact that
we don't have a better understanding and
they say well just like you right the
government's going to end up running out
of money or going broke or all of this
sort of stuff okay so what do we get
wrong well the federal government is not
like the rest of us okay and the the
main way that we like to try to explain
the difference in pretty simple terms is
to say the federal government issues the
currency in Australia your government
issues the Australian dollar here in the
US the government is the issuer of the
US dollar the Japanese government issues
the Yen and and the British government
issues the pound and so forth right so
if you were the issuer of the currency
would you ever worry about running out
of money no I wish I could do it right I
can't it's illegal it's called
counterfeiting if I try to create the US
dollar um so I can't run out of money I
can't face bills coming due in dollars
that I can't afford to pay if I'm the
federal government of the United States
or if you're the Australian government
so you're not going to run out of money
you're not going to go
broke why do you have to borrow why do
governments go into debt okay and that
gets into a whole deeper conversation
but let me just say the the simple thing
that people need to understand is that
the thing that we call the national debt
is nothing more than our after tax
savings that's what it is so one simple
example and then I'll
stop the deficit is the difference
between two numbers that's all it is
right the first number is called outlays
how many Australian dollars the
government puts into somebody's hands
every year the other number is called
receipts how many do they subtract away
from people mostly through taxation so
so this thing we call a deficit is the
difference between those two numbers
right if the government spends more than
it collects back mostly in taxes we say
the government has run a
deficit when the government matches its
deficit by selling
securities in our case us
treasuries uh those
treasuries become Financial assets to
their holder but we call call it adding
to the national debt and so when the
government
chooses to allow us to trade in some of
our dollars for these interest bearing
dollars we call it borrowing and we say
the government is going into debt but
what's really happening is that the
government is just facilitating our
savings when it adds more than it
subtracts it's making a financial
contribution the rest of us somebody
gets to hold those as part of their
wealth part of their
savings yeah so in Australia they're
part of our superannuation funds and
people often make a fuss about uh
foreign investors owning part of the
government's debt but that all that is
is that we don't ban foreign investors
from
buying uh buying the government's Bonds
on the secondary market and if they want
to hold Australian dollars then rather
than holding them in in Australian bank
accounts if they want something even
safer than those they they can buy
government bonds that's how they end up
holding them we don't depend on the rest
of the world to buy our government's
debt either do we in the US doesn't
depend on China to provide it with US
Dollars you say that it's basically like
the the government can issue two
different instruments and one could call
currency and the other we call you know
Securities they're both dollars it's
just that you know one of them comes
with an interest payment in the case of
bonds uh so it will throw off some
additional dollars over time and the
other one is u a non-interest bearing uh
account so you have like the choice to
hold your dollars in a checking account
or savings account the government is
giving us that option to hold some of
our dollars in the form of a savings
account as opposed to a checking account
that's really all it amounts to but
because we use this word debt to
describe the savings account and not the
checking account it leads to lots of I
think unnecessary
anxiety yeah you've reminded me about uh
well a couple of really good parts of
the movie again not giving it away U but
there is one mainstream Economist who in
the middle of the movie is asked why
does the government issue debt in the
first place and he realizes half way
through his answer that he doesn't know
the answer that question and he can't
think of an answer that makes sense
that's that's one of the one of my
favorite parts of the movie and the
other thing you just reminded me of is
how minin uses symmetry so nicely in the
movie and to promote the movie as well
and and of course you've just been
talking about a symmetry there which is
that when the government runs a deficit
they are giving us more dollars than
they're taking away from us so we're
running the Surplus when the government
runs the deficit and and I mean that
word is really important right symmetry
because it is it is matched to the penny
right the the government deficit is
mirrored by a financial Surplus on the
other side of the ledger so I you know I
like to say they're readed in I don't
know if you use that term uh we use it
from you
I their red in their red ink is our
black in their deficits are our
financial surpluses which makes it kind
of crazy when you think about you know
politicians running around pledging that
if you vote for me I promise you I will
shrink the size of your financial
Surplus now they don't say it like that
but when they tell you that by voting
for them you're going to get smaller
government deficits what they are by
definition promising you are smaller
finan Cal surpluses in the
non-government part of the economy if
they said it like that I have to believe
most voters would say I'm not voting for
that guy right well they don't most of
them don't understand and more than once
they don't more than once I've seen on
the front page of the Australian
financial review an article about the
government's deficit falling and next to
an article about household savings
falling yeah at the same time and they
don't make the connection they don't
think there is a connection between
exactly right yep so should we get rid
the debt of the so-called debt the
national
debt or should we stop issuing treasury
bonds and do something else you know we
we have
to it's this word Stephen because if if
the government just ran a deficit and
let the dollars accumulate as savings
which they they are right and and we
would all say oh that's fine you know we
have dollars and they would show up as
liab abilities on the central bank
balance sheet but that balance sheet
doesn't carry the word debt the Federal
Reserve does not write the word debt on
The Ledger and so we just call it
reserves and nobody has a real you know
panic attack over it but when those
reserves are swapped out for
Securities the liability goes on the
treasury's books right it's it's a
ledger for the US Treasury instead of
the Federal Reserve and it's referred to
as part of the public publicly held debt
and it's the it's like six one a half a
dozen of the other right how do you who
do you want to pay the interest the fed
or the treasury and when the FED pays
the interest uh on assets known as
reserves we just say interest on reserve
balances and that's how we describe it
when the treasury pays the interest we
say the interest burden on the national
debt or something like that so it's it's
the way we talk about it and because
it's so problematic and because you know
I've been at this for like 25 years or
more at this point trying to educate the
public and uh it's just very hard to
break through on a scale that is you
know large enough to change the
conversation and so if only for that
reason you know I you could convince me
to say just stop issuing the bonds
either issue nothing longer than a
three-month T Bill set the interest rate
the overnight interest rate put it back
to zero or something very close to zero
and then the conversation would largely
go away about interest burden and
interest expenditure and all that the
other option is you could let central
banks issue the Securities and that
would just make the whole thing much
more transparent that it's about
interest rates it's it's about in it's
about maintaining interest rates above
zero um the treasury doesn't have to be
the one to issue the Securities the FED
could do it would be a lot more
transparent so I think one or a
combination of things could help us like
move Beyond this um
NeverEnding battle and conversation
about debt default and debt ceilings and
burdens and all the rest of it
yeah uh well I noticed that the the debt
ceiling in the US at the moment is
suspended
temporarily what did they
do uh I think it they they yeah because
the language of the last one is sort of
if I I I might not remember this
correctly but there was a deal reached
where they either voted to raise it
sufficiently high that it won't become
an issue before the next X date yeah I
think it's the beginning of next year it
might be the year after this year isn't
it yeah but I know there was a price to
pay that everything right after the
election y
yeah anyway perhaps we're going off down
down a path we don't need to go down
there H we're not saying that government
should never necessarily be in Surplus
and we're certainly not saying that
governments should be spending without
limit or shouldn't be budgeting
carefully so what are we saying about
how governments should go about doing
their
budgeting well all right you're let me
reinforce what you just said which is
that mmt takes no
position um in the abstract on whether
budgets should be in deficit small
deficit mediumsized deficit large
deficit Surplus balance right the goal
of policy is not to achieve any
particular budgetary outcome the goal of
macroeconomic policy is to achieve real
outcomes now you know what those are is
a matter of um of public policy right
the this is what elected officials do
and budgets are uh a constraining device
and they commit um Financial Resources
to healthcare education infrastructure
and all the rest of it and they're
important both because you know you
can't have it all there are limits and a
budget is a a necessary and important
way to try to structure the commitments
and the the the stress that you're going
to place on the economy's productive
capacity in any given year or series of
years so you look at a budget and you
say I'm going to put X number of dollars
additional into infrastructure structure
this year next year and the following
year I have a three-year Bill well okay
that's a three-year commitment and it's
becomes part of the budget um what are
you trying to achieve with that are you
trying to deal with child poverty do you
have a goal in mind are you trying to
reduce the rate of childhood poverty uh
cut it in half every two years until
it's as close to zero as you know one
can hope to to uh achieve so real goals
real objectives I mean people like
Mariana matato who many of these uh
people who are here with us now have
probably heard she'll describe Mission
oriented right public policy being
Mission oriented what is the mission
what is it you want to deliver through
the budgeting process and committing the
financial resources is an important and
necessary step but it's not a sufficient
step because you've also got to be able
ble to manage the spending that you are
proposing to do in a way that respects
the productive capacity the limits the
real resource limits uh of the domestic
and any outside uh capacity you're
hoping to use and also the planetary
constraints the ecological limits
so the real outcomes are what you target
not the budgetary
outcomes which kind of feeds on to
inflation really um and what people have
sometimes called the cost of living
prices inflation the inflation rate in
both the US and Australia peaked at
nearly 8% in the US uh I think the um
one of the measures of inflation the PC
one is below 3% now it's Fallen much
more quickly than a lot of people
expected without uh unemployment having
to rise significantly to to bring it
down there's been a lot of talk about
team transitory versus Team permanent as
far as inflation is concerned and you
were always on team
transitory why
was well for a number of reasons you
know to be to have inflation become
entrenched in the system and essentially
you know feed on itself which is one of
the concerns that was raised by uh
economy Like Larry Summers U he wasn't
alone but he was probably the most vocal
here in the US uh and he was worried of
a situation where you know wages in
particular would begin to rise and then
as wages increase companies would raise
prices because their costs are going up
and labor is a huge cost of production
and then workers would you know say I'm
not going to work for that because I
need more money and then you get the the
old wage price spiral uh it was very
hard to imagine how you were going to
have a scenario like that take hold in
the US uh where you know the labor
movement has been substantially weakened
over the last 40 years people like Larry
Summers sometimes sound as though
they're still living in the
1970s yeah uh that was the reference
back to either the 60s or the 70s that
we were we were going to end up in that
sort of a a he would talk about
stagflation as well where you'd end up
with very little growth high
unemployment and high inflation
alongside and of course none of that is
what ended up happening so you know what
what I was saying from the early stages
was that this is this is a supply shock
this is a negative Supply shock and uh
you know we in the US in March of 2020
when covid really hit
you know we basically told every worker
in this country if you're not essential
to the economy stay home we didn't have
vaccines we didn't know if we would ever
have vaccines we had you know our most
famous white house um sort of scientists
saying it could be four or five years
before we develop an effective vaccine
we didn't know businesses were told
don't open your doors workers were told
stay home uh it was a negative Supply
shock and it obviously caused people to
spend money very differently we couldn't
go to bars and restaurants and gyms and
theaters and nail salons and all of
those kind of service oriented um
outlets and we're a service economy 80%
of the US economy is service and we
mostly couldn't do any of those things
so what did we do our kids were home
from school we were told to work from
home if we could so you turn your spare
bedroom into a home office uh you buy
new furniture and um you know desk
chairs and tablets and all that kind of
stuff well all those things have to be
manufactured somewhere and we've got
Global Supply chains and so uh we all
remember the fragility of Supply chains
right you you had shipping containers
that weren't available and shipping
costs going up and ships that were
backed up at the ports and we didn't
have people to unload them and Trucking
and it all fed into in various ways it
increases in prices early on in Goods
production we weren't getting um you
know factories that manufacture those
little chips the little semiconductors
that go into just about everything now
from washing machines and microwave
ovens to uh PCS and Automobiles and all
that we couldn't get those things and so
used car prices went crazy for a while
and anyway the point is that we changed
our patterns of of consumption we
couldn't buy a lot of services and we
tried to cram a lot of dollars into a
very narrow and fragile supply chain for
goods and we got inflationary pressures
and so you had to sort of game out
whether you thought the increases in
inflation that really started April of
2021 um you really started to see
inflation kind of 4% is and he said okay
this is twice what the FED uh targets so
um how should we respond and the debate
about transitory was really among
economists saying does this Merit a
response by the Central Bank does the
Central Bank need to respond to the
increasing inflationary pressures the
way it would typically fight inflation
which is by raising interest rates and I
I never not once not I think in any
interview you ever did I take the
position that interest rate hikes were
the right way to respond to that uh kind
of inflationary pressure that I saw I
don't think any mmt Economist did to be
fair we didn't think it we didn't think
it was the right
medicine and we are skeptical of the
transmission mechanism even before Co we
weren't um you know as confident as many
of our peers in the the transmission
mechanism like how do rate hikes
actually work do they work to dampen
aggregate demand in a reliable way and
that brings down inflation or is it more
complicated than that and can rate hikes
actually under certain
circumstances exacerbate inflationary
pressure so we didn't want to turn to
the interest rate tool as a policy
response we said there are a whole bunch
of other things that we could do
to try to work on the kinds of problems
that were creating the inflationary
pressure and President Biden did a lot
of that you know he said if we have
problems at the ports and this is part
of what's creating some inflationary
pressure let's deal with the problems at
the ports so he ordered you know you got
to run
247 uh and we're going to help with
Trucking and Licensing and we're going
to get more drivers out there and if we
don't have enough workers in the labor
force and it's getting hard for
employers to find the people they need
maybe part of the reason is that
millions of workers especially women are
sitting on the sidelines because they
can't find affordable child care and so
let's deal with that and we'll try to
bring some workers back in what about
immigration what about you know you go
down the list and there uh are a whole
lot of things that this Administration
did later using the Strategic petroleum
Reserve to try to deal with some of the
um increase in you know gas prices that
were um becoming a hardship for millions
of families here
so and that in a bit to Isabella vber
and strategic price controls which lots
of prominent economists initially um not
to name anyone uh were very skeptical
even
mocky about the idea they were I mean
they were and it wasn't just that they
were skeptical
of the suggestion you know she didn't
even there was this little I don't know
if everybody here is familiar but
there's an economist uh a young academic
uh at the University of Massachusetts at
Amherst is Isabella vber is her name um
she published a fairly short oped in the
Guardian newspaper I don't remember what
month that appeared but inflation was
clearly a problem uh by that time and
she sort of floated the idea that at
least some of the uh higher prices that
consumers were facing was perhaps the
result of companies taking advantage of
the inflationary moment and saying well
kind of consumers expect to face higher
prices when they go into the store when
they you know purchase things so maybe
we can get away with pushing prices up
even faster than the costs that we're
facing because you know we're going to
raise prices because our own costs are
going up but maybe we could squeeze out
a little bit extra because the consumer
is going to be like well this is that
inflation everyone's talking about they
won't really balk at it they'll pay
those higher prices so she said you know
that that could be happening and to the
extent that that sort of stuff is taking
place maybe one might wish to consider
the Strategic use of some price controls
so it was a very soft you know if this
is happening maybe this she didn't just
go in and say this is what's happening
and we need and the uh a lot of people
just had a a very negative reaction to
even the suggestion that one might look
to see whether firms were taking
advantage price gouging whatever you
want to call it uh and that price
controls could be part of a uh a policy
response so you're quite right um they
we had a similar sort of controversy in
in Australia there's a body called the
Australia Institute that uh um published
uh uh well Drew on Isabella's ideas I
think and published some research to
support that and uh for the RBA at the
time it was almost
heresy sure but then you had then you
had central banks like the European
Central Bank actually start producing
studies to say how much of the call it
excess inflation that we're experiencing
at the moment can we Trace to you know
having done too much fiscal uh stimulus
how much is due to just the pandemic and
the supply chains and that sort of stuff
how much is due to what the kind of
thing that Isabella pointed to where
they were just quite explicit about it
they give you a bar graph and tell you
how much of the inflation of the
inflationary pressure
they themselves the ECB could point to
you know uh what's been called sellers
inflation or profit L inflation or
whatever and it's not
zero yeah where the RBA published
research like that they tended to ignore
it in the uh the leading officials when
they were discussing these issues in
public but anyway maybe uh we better
open up to questions soon but before we
do uh you've recently announced you'd
successfully auction another book book
can you tell us anything about
that or not you you said it I didn't
announce you said well I don't know I'm
not gonna be in a position to say too
much I've got an
interview um coming out in the Ft I
think they're going to run it this week
they've been sitting on it for four
weeks I think uh they wanted to be able
to publish the working title of the book
but I don't think we're going to do that
because it's not it's not certain um but
let's just say that a lot of the things
that we've been talking about here are
going to be dealt with in that next book
and I'm excited uh to have it you know
um to have it in my mind more or less uh
the idea of what it what it is that I
think is important to say for audiences
and to be publishing it with um a new
editor and with uh penguin Random House
Crown is going to publish it in the
US uh John Murray will publish the UK
Edition and they did a wonderful job
with the deficit myth and I was really
happy to be able to to stay with them
for the textbook um but broadly think
think about
inflation deep okay well we look forward
to that we'll be definitely pushing that
book around Australia when it comes out
Gabby how are we doing with questions uh
there's a lot of great questions
actually um you want to pick one sure
okay so the first one I've got is uh
from
Michelle um does national debt affect
our credit
rating well
our does it's it's almost the other way
well does national debt affect our
credit rating I think she's talking from
an Australian perspective should well
it's just from Australian should I ever
go that yeah well sure because graduate
student you wouldn't have a credit
rating presumably if you didn't have the
debt to rate uh and so the rating
agencies are advising
investors about well Stephen what do you
want to say I wanted to say that we had
a graduate student is now a PhD student
somewhere in Melbourne uh Adela Union
when I was there called Matthew ER whose
thesis I supervise who looked
empirically at the impact of uh
downgrading or Warnings on the credit
ratings of monetary Sovereign
governments like Australia uh that's a a
government that b issues its own
currency has no foreign currency
denominated debt at all um significantly
in a floating exchange rate and he
proved that there is no impact at all on
Australian interest rates
of uh changes uh in the uh credit
ratings of governments like Australia so
as far as the credit rating agencies are
concerned uh although you wouldn't
believe this to listen to our
politicians but uh uh Federal
politicians in countries like Australia
should just ignore them we're not in
1975 now we don't have a US dollar debt
uh we don't have a fix exchange rate the
world is a very different place the
credit rating agencies have no power
over the Australian Commonwealth
government whatsoever if only the
government realized that and there's
empirical evidence that that's the case
well okay so let me just jump on that
because um the question is is clear when
you ask does do the rating agencies
impact the ability of the government to
issue debt like that that's a no could
it uh does it impact the interest that
you have to pay on the debt so no could
it could a
downgrade have real impacts in terms of
public policy if the policy makers
themselves view the downgrade as a
legitimate warning about the
sustainability of a nation's finances
and might that cause them to um you know
adjust the budg in ways that make it
more austerity right uh driven because
they're fearful of uh continuing to
allow uh the deficit or whatever yeah
that can happen I mean we see that here
we get the downgrade of you know us
treasuries and all of a sudden uh at
least a handful of politicians start
calling it a warning sign and then using
it to
justify um you know cuts to programs
like Social Security and Medicare or
other sorts of things so there's an
irony there that isn't it's almost a
warning that the that the politicians
might do something stupid because the
only risk in the US really is that they
don't raise the debt
SE yeah I mean we should probably
mention Japan uh in this context right
because one of the examples that we've
pointed to for a lot of years um is that
Japanese government bonds uh the rating
agencies downgrade
Japanese government uh bonds to a level
that was below that of
Botswana I say oh my right this must be
really bad for the government of Japan
they're gonna have a terrible time
trying to borrow and they're gonna have
to pay exorbitant interest rates and so
forth and of course all of that is wrong
uh I think the debt to GDP ratio gross
uh Japanese government debt is like 262
per at the moment the Bank of Japan
holds some 60% of all the jgbs on its
own balance sheet um the central bank
has been um the overnight interest rate
right the policy rate has been negative
for a period of years they've been doing
yield curve control with the 10year
pinned roughly at zero uh for much of
the last several years so you don't lose
control of interest rates you don't lose
the ability to issue Securities or any
of those sort of things even if you're
um so-called dead is downgraded you know
to sort of Third World um developing
economy uh with that borrows heavily in
foreign currencies and all the rest of
it some of the confusion came over in
the NPR interview when she mentioned
Grace
to I thought this is an intelligent
German it's it's 2023 nearly
2024 and she's saying can the US
government maybe she was just ask it to
provide you to answer but exactly the us
into Greece she she's great and they're
great and let me just say because I did
see a lot of people on Twitter um you
know saying not very nice things about
NPR and about the host of that program
and I was you know kind of bothered by
that because um I know what really
happened and so if I if this is a moment
where I could say a couple of words
about that I think you know I'd like to
do that so they came to me and they said
you know there's all this hysteria about
the national debt you have a very
different view we want to have you come
on and share your view so that's what
they wanted and then they have you do a
pre-interview so that you talk to the
producer who can then help shape the the
program right but it was a four and a
half minute segment that's what I was
given four and a half minutes and I knew
that up front and so I spent you know an
hour on the phone with the producer
going through all of this and then they
come up with four questions and my job
is to respond to those four questions in
the four and a half minutes that I've
been offered and I didn't get out that
last response quickly enough and so she
had to sort of interrupt and rap and a
lot of people thought that she didn't
want to allow me to give an answer it
wasn't that at all uh it was just you
know you run out of time it's a tightly
scripted show uh and she asked the
question not because she thinks the US
is like Greece but because she wanted me
to have a chance to explain to the
audience why the US is not like
Greece which mainly is of course because
Grace doesn't issue its own
currency yeah or as I put it I think to
the producer because we did not make the
colossally stupid decision to abandon
our Sovereign currency and start
borrowing in a currency that isn't our
own right that we can't issue Greece and
and by the way uh Spain and Portugal and
Germany and France and all the rest of
them uh they abandon their Sovereign
currencies and effectively turned
themselves into currency using
governments not all that different from
California New York the state of Georgia
Illinois uh Pennsylvania and so forth
right right so it's a big difference and
countries like Argentina Sri Lanka
turkey where there's a a lot of foreign
currency usually US dollar de they're
also in a different position to the us a
lot of foreign currency lot of yeah
foreign denominated debt uh a lot of the
budget that is indexed to inflation lot
more than what we have here so that when
prices start increasing payments start
increasing so prices increase again so
pay increase again it's much easier to
get that sort of entrenched
inflation uh in countries that have you
know a lot of
indexing well thanks very much for that
question we we went on about it for
quite a long time so um I I think I've
managed to find the link to the NPR
radio and popped it in the chat there um
hopefully that link works would you
toest um sure I let's go with the second
one that I I picked out there's so many
so many great questions and I'd like to
also acknowledge the students in our
program are jumping in and answering
quite a lot of people's questions there
too thank you so much for doing that I
think so yes um so this question is from
Anne um and it's about messaging which
I'm also interested in as an activist um
so what are your thoughts on the
slightly inaccurate shorthand she puts
slightly inaccurate in Brackets and with
a question mark to say deficits don't
matter and also to say taxes don't fund
spending because it is more complicated
than
that well I don't say either of those
things so I I don't that's not part of
my no I think she's talking about like
um people communicating about Bond
monetary Theory online right but I guess
then what I'm trying to say is well I
don't communicate about mmt using either
of those shorthands if I thought it
would be helpful to do so I guess I
would be doing it but I think I purpose
I probably try to avoid saying either of
those things because I don't think it's
helpful
um I get the I get it I know why people
want to say deficits don't matter and
what they leave unsaid is the way we've
been taught to believe right but to say
they don't matter is almost like well
then we don't need them you know if they
don't matter then it doesn't matter if
we eliminate them they do I mean very
much don't they they do matter they do
matter so that's why to the extent that
I'll say deficits don't matter I would
always bookend it with the way you've
been taught to believe
yeah and taxes don't fun spend I mean
that's
almost it's
almost for me
I don't think it helps me advance the
larger points that I'm trying to make so
I don't say it and then and if you do
say it then of course you're just going
to have to fight with deeply held
convictions uh about you know why people
think they pay their taxes and how this
is part of what allows the government to
provide you know benefits and uh public
services and all the rest of it but you
can challenge that it just depends who
your audience is and how much time you
have and which fight you want to pick
yeah um there's actually a great
question from Rigo um which I'm I'm not
taking them in order now but this one
came up which I I thought a lot of
people might be interested in um could
you give your take on what uh the new
Argentinian uh president I not sure if
I'm pronouncing his name mili um
correctly um to what he is trying to do
in Argentina to fix the 150% inflation
um eliminating the central bank or what
what else should Argentina what what
other options are there for Argentina if
they didn't have a person such as him in
charge
yeah yeah that's a big question um
look th this is not a new problem in
Argentina and to think that we're going
to do in three minutes uh any kind of
Justice to this question it's just
impossible um he's obviously comes from
a a very different perspective from the
one that I come from I think um clearly
you know he's a a sort of Chicago School
Milton Freedman on steroids kind of guy
he believes I think uh deeply that you
know the problems that Argentina faces
are somehow uh related to the the notion
of a fiat currency itself this talk
about you know folding up the central
bank and all that kind of stuff I think
he's backed away from that I don't think
that's uh a pledge that he intends to
try to keep privatizing lots of public
um assets and and pursuing austerity and
uh you know not first time is it it's
not the first time they've done it's not
the first time they've done something
like this the 199 similar yeah I mean I
I it would take so much more time to
talk about you know the Argentinian
economy and I'm not an expert on the
Argentinian economy um I could say much
more but in the time that we have I
don't uh we're not we're not even going
to scratch the surface let's just leave
it at I think his macroeconomic
framework is
uh could not be more different from the
framework that I operate
within uh and you know while bits and
pieces of things that he has said are
consistent with uh you know what one
might do if one was trying to reduce
inflationary pressures it's not
completely detached from you know
reality
um I think people could
the problem what's that I think people
could uh look up on Wikipedia or
somewhere Argentina's history and just
look at the last 150 years in Argentina
there has never been a successful
democracy at any stage in 150 years in
Argentina apart from maybe for about
five years after the last time an
experiment experiment like this
collapsed in the early 2000s it's been
basically two uh it
Elite
groups uh uh uh fighting and neglecting
uh people in rural communities and and
there's never been a functioning
democracy I don't think MNT is is a
magic wand and if if if if the if you
don't have decent
institutions if you don't have a working
democracy then uh macroeconomic policy
whatever it is is not going to solve all
your problems for yeah this happens in a
lot of countries where the exporters are
really kind of running the country there
is a very good podcast uh David
McWilliams if you know who that is he's
an Irish Economist he has a great
podcast and not so many weeks ago he had
the leader of the opposition party on
his podcast to talk about Argentina and
you can get a lot out of that
conversation in terms of you know how
deeply entrenched these problems are and
U hear it from Martin who uh I think
lays out really nicely you know what
what the challenges are and some
alternative ways that you could think
about you know trying to address the
problems yeah there is a talk not that I
go along with absolutely everything in
it but there is a talk by someone we uh
certainly deeply respect Warren Mosin on
his view of what would be the best thing
to do in Argentina on M economics.com
but somewhere at the end he said says
something along the lines of well I've
got an idea what I do in Argentina but
uh there's no way that any political
group would be interested in actually
trying to do
this
yeah perhaps just to round it out then
um if we come back to the idea of
framing um and uh I've I've got a
question here in a direct message um but
the I think the the g g of it is um is
there anything that we could or should
be doing in the public domain that would
be most helpful to this cause of um
teaching people that finding the money
is not the the
problem yeah show up uh when your
elected officials have um you know
campaign events or meet with their
constituents write letters to the editor
make your voice heard call into radio
programs um you know if if you feel
confident that you have a a decent grasp
of you know where the conventional um
messaging and narrative is going off the
rails and you think you can offer some
you know helpful way to reframe and and
get people to think differently the
comments section I mean I remember early
on uh a lot of the early kind of boost
to mmt came from people who were
following our work going out and you
know putting comments in the section in
the comment section on the New York
Times after a high-profile Economist
let's call him Paul Krugman would write
a piece and all of a sudden it would
sort of get flooded with comments and
links to work that you know mmt
economists had done it's irritating to
the person who's written the piece but
but it's also really helpful because uh
you know there's so many people reading
that stuff that if they go down and look
at the comments and they see somebody
saying this isn't right what you should
read is is this other thing it turns out
that that can help propagate um you know
the ideas so invite people to come to
the movie if it's showing anywhere come
to the mov take coures if you yeah um
but right call in communicate use your
voice to be optimistic the only reason
really that I know Stephanie is that
when I first got interested in mmt there
were so few
people who were interested in mmt that
it it didn't really matter who you were
you knew
everyone because there were many people
to me and it's very very different now
very different very very different yeah
and thanks to the efforts of people like
you Stephen I mean well people like
you no no
no takes all of
us um I don't think we'll get time for
more questions um because we are about
to well we we're over the hour but um I
wanted to just tell people that I've
posted in the chat a link to the modern
money Lab website which has lots of
information for people who might be
thinking about studying with
and there's various ways that people can
get involved with that um and we have a
Q&A plan for uh new students and
potential students coming up in about
well the same time as this started in
eight days is one of them and then we
have another one a little after that so
we we'd love to have you along to those
if you're thinking about it and want to
just meet us and and ask us about it we
also have the next lecture in this
series with um Professor Josh Farley
Joshua aali from University of Vermont
um who is going to be talking to us
about ecological economics and that is
in 3 days time at the same
time um yes there will be a recording of
This emailed out to all the participants
and everyone who's registered and I
wanted to just acknowledge um that
there's been so much interest in this
January series I'm really overwhelmed
with um the number of people who've
who've booked online to be part of this
um
uh you know we made this free U so you
can join um you can join in these six
wonderful talks without paying anything
and actually people have donated you not
going to believe this but nearly
$35,000 has been donated just to support
this series which is amazing wonder the
movie tour is quite expensive to
organize so thank you we are so grateful
thank you we are the next lecture is in
three days time not two let's add the
other speak speakers as well we we have
uh we have uh another one of the
founders of modern monetary Theory who's
Rand Ray who's gonna uh who's doing a
talk for us soon uh on the history of
money uh which is uh I heard him give
that talk many times it's always
fascinating uh we are going to hear from
our great friend fatel kaboo also who's
going to talk about um decolonization
and
decarbonization and
and we're going to hear from our lecture
on our courses durken who's going to
talk to us about the Eurozone and we
have actually two ecological economists
talking to us uh one of whom is at the
top of my screen at the moment actually
looking at me Mark diendorf it would be
great to hear from as well the co-author
of the book The Path to a sustainable
civilization I'm really looking forward
to that one as well yeah and just to
absolutely clear up the confusion um the
next talk in our series is Friday
morning for Australians and Thursday
evening if you're in the US just because
um uh I can see some dates and times
coming in there and I just wanted to
make that clear um we we're kind of
quite far apart in terms of time zones
so um uh but I'll try and do reminders
for everybody so that you know exactly
when it is and uh
of course um we a huge thank you to
Stephanie and thank you not only just
for this talk but for being so
supportive of what we're doing with our
with our postgraduate qualifications and
for taking the time to come out to
Australia and tour around with us I'm
just so looking forward to this it's
going to be an absolute Joy um it's
wonderful to go around Australia and
meet people and um we're going to have
an amazing time and thank you so much
for doing it yeah it's obviously we're a
long way apart so we very rarely get to
meet Steph but we're really looking
forward to me too I'm excited to be
coming
back fantastic yes I can stop the
recording now thank you very much and
thanks again everybody so much for
coming


## Keywords:
