---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SXvlFPA7zlQ
---

# Video
Prof. Richard Wolff on The Phony Fiscal Crisis
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SXvlFPA7zlQ)

## Transcript:

and we are back on the Zero Hour I'm
your host Richard RJ Haskell and I
always look forward to speaking with
Professor Richard Wolff as you know
Richard Wolff is an economist and
economic historian uh a professor I
believe Emeritus at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst as well as a
visiting professor at New York
University uh he's a host of economic
update on Free Speech TV which is also a
podcast you should check out and radio
show
um and uh I always appreciate our
discussions uh it's been a little while
since I've been ill so first of all
Richard Wolff welcome back to the
program welcome back it's good to see
that you are back from the the ranks of
the ill and and back in good form
yeah it's good to be here as the saying
goes It's good to be anywhere but
um
so uh the world moved on while I did not
and
um the latest news here in Washington DC
the headlines
uh are those bizarre this bizarre crisis
or we're told it's a crisis but then
we're told maybe it's not a crisis uh
this debt ceiling business
um and there were Republicans who hold
one Chamber of Commerce excuse me
Freudian slipped there uh the
Republicans who hold one a chamber of
Congress uh have
um have laid out a set of Demands
um everybody's reading about it I I
don't think the media particularly does
a good job of explaining what it is and
how we got to this point so I thought
maybe we could talk about that a little
bit because I feel like underlying
tectonic forces are work here so what
about this debt ceiling crisis yeah I
mean you're being very kind to RJ that
the Press media have not done a good job
that is certainly the nicest conceivable
choice of language with which to
describe it uh systematically misleading
would have been my choice but I'm not as
delicate or diplomatic as you are uh and
I'm probably wrong in in being blunter
let me explain and just start off to
make sure everybody's on the same page
it is the job of the federal government
to raise taxes
in order to spend that money on things
the society needs and that includes
maintaining roads and highways providing
a defense of the country militarily
providing the pensions that the social
security system guarantees to working
people uh subsidizing hospitals and
universities in various ways conducting
research a space program and all the
other things
and the Congress is basically with the
president but it's really the job of the
Congress
to make a determination about how much
taxes to raise in order to undertake the
spending that the government provides
both to corporations and businesses on
the one hand and to people wage earners
salary earners on the other
it is the at the discretion of the
government
to raise taxes less than the spending it
does or to spend more than the taxes it
raises
if and when the Congress decides either
of those things to do that it has to
make up the difference by borrowing the
money in other words if it spends more
than it raises in taxes it borrows the
difference and if it uh taxes less than
whatever it's spending again it borrows
the difference so it's all the
responsibility of the government
here comes then the problem
politicians
in this capitalist system
stays absurd contradictory demands
corporations and businesses on the one
hand and people want the government to
spend on them corporations want the
government to protect foreign trade so
they can make a profit from it
corporations want the government to
subsidize research in universities and
elsewhere to help them develop new
techniques new products they want the
government to maintain the road system
the railroad system the airports so that
Commerce can function and individuals
want
a proper retirement to let them live out
there later years in dignity and a whole
lot of the public school support and all
the other things that the government
does so they all have demands and yet
the corporations and the individuals do
not want to pay taxes because that's
money out of their pocket the poor
politician and I say poor in quotation
marks is caught in the middle
uh what's the politician going to do
there's not tax corporations because
they will then
bring in a different group of
politicians in a hurry by moving their
donations and all from Canada a to
candidate B and they're afraid of doing
it to the public too because then
they'll lose the votes which they need
to stay politicians
and by the same token they dare not cut
the spending on either of those two
groups because that will upset those
groups so here's what the politicians do
they spend to keep those people happy
and they avoid taxing to keep those
people happy with the result that they
borrow more and more money in recent
years in the trillions with a t amount
of borrowing and the problem is that's
not a good Solution that's a that's a
sign of a system that's very badly
organized because if you keep borrowing
you put the government in a difficult
situation for example today out of every
dollar we are taxed a good portion of it
goes to pay interest to all those who
went to the government when the
politicians taxed inadequately to cover
the spending Etc and that's a burden on
future Generations that's a burden on
our society now and because of that and
because the public said hey stop it the
Congress decided to put here we go a
ceiling on the amount of borrowing
that's the amount of what's called this
the debt ceiling it's an artificial cap
decided by Congress so that they limit
themselves okay
periodically because they didn't solve
the underlying problem which is so
typical of Congress they kept spending
and not taxing with the result they kept
on bumping up against the ceilings they
had said many times over the last 30
years the ceiling has been bumped up and
the Congress has decided to raise the
ceiling so they could borrow more this
is stupid this is a virtually case study
of kicking the can down the road rather
than solving the problem the can
presents and here we are yet again at
that same moment when the government
is being pressed to spend at the same
time not to tax so it therefore has to
borrow but it can't because that ceiling
is there all right solution every other
time raise the ceiling the Republicans
today are threatening
to not raise the ceiling to block the
raising of the ceiling well if they
carry through with that it means the
government will either have to raise
taxes or cut spending because they're
blocked from borrowing they can't do
what they've been doing every year for
the last 40 or 50.
that's the issue and the Republicans
have now said we will allow the ceiling
to go up but only if you do the kinds of
things will be in the Republican party
like you have to cut spending on poor
people you have to cut spending on
working people you have to cut all this
spending because that's the issue either
you cut this spending or the ceiling
won't be raised and if that happens wow
then the government will not be able to
function it'll have to start cutting off
its activity because it will it won't be
able to borrow so it won't be able to
fund the spending and then the question
becomes what spending will the
government not do well they might not
give checks to people on social security
or they might not give the government
the money needed to fight the war in
Ukraine or they might not fill in the
blank we don't know the government just
can't spend and therefore who knows
what's going to happen so lurage stories
can be told about how the world will
collapse the American economy will be
seen to be chaotic the dollar will
become even more uh avoided around the
world because nobody wants to be
involved in a country that's unable to
function like this the Democrats come
back and say
we want to raise the ceiling we don't
want there to be cut offs of social
security or anything else you have to do
it and if you don't all of the bad
consequences we the Democrats will blame
on you the Republicans so that's the
theater going on now very quickly I'm
sorry to take so long very quickly
here's the reality
it is possible to make the whole debt
ceiling issue go away there's no need to
borrow more the putting of ceilings was
intended to stop or at least slow the
borrowing and here's how we can do it
raise taxes if you raise the taxes
needed to fund the spending that the
government is doing there'd be no need
to borrow more and therefore the ceiling
would be irrelevant
the real reason the theater is set up in
this way is to avoid
confronting the fact that we need tax
increases in this country to have the
spending on the one hand we need without
the bad borrowing on the other hand
which we want to avoid the solution
raised taxes the fear of Corporations
and the rich in America is if we have an
honest discussion of raising taxes the
overwhelming majority of us will want to
tax corporations and the rich because
they can afford it the best and the rest
of us are overburdened with our wages
and taxes as it is they don't even want
that conversation to be begun and so we
are told it's either raised the ceiling
or cut spending notice what's left out
of the theatrical debate raising the
taxes and if you want RJ I can give you
quickly three four five tax increases we
ought to have in America that would
solve this problem in 10 min minutes so
let before we get into that Richard wolf
let's just stop for a sec one of the
Democrats arguments counter arguments to
the Republicans is that Congress has
already spent this money so in effect
they're saying you already ran up the
credit card bill now you don't want to
write the check to American Express or
whomever so you're defaulting on a
commitment you made uh and they point
out that I think only one or two other
countries in the world have anything
similar mechanism where you uh the
legislature spends money and then uh
retroactively decides if it's going to
pay it or not and that does seem like a
bizarre
Arrangement doesn't it if that's correct
well it's only half correct it's mostly
a talking point because it appeals to
people's notion gee if you've already
spent the money and the bill is
outstanding it's only proper that you
pay the bill for whatever it is you
purchased yeah it's half true some of
the things have been committed to so in
some sense the bill is coming for stuff
that has been either delivered or the
contract for it to be delivered is in
effect but there are other things where
that is not the case we could cut back
on our defense spending in all kinds of
ways we could cut back on our so we can
tell the people in Social Security look
uh all we have with you is a moral
obligation you've been putting this
money aside we've been taking it out of
your check for all your working life and
we kind of told you all along that this
would be the funding to give you a
pension after your age 65 or 66 and so
on uh we're terribly sorry if you read
the fine print it always said somewhere
buried in the lat in the language that
nobody ever read that this is all
subject to the available funds that the
government has well it doesn't have the
available funds yeah but that's because
you cut taxes is under Mr Trump in
December of 19 of 2017 that were the
greatest tax cut for business in the
rich we've ever seen uh and that that's
the reason yeah but we did it so we
don't have the money so we're really
sorry you'll have to switch from a
hamburger to dog food uh to get by
that's that's our sad thing the
government is a has discretion
technically by the way the government
has already run out of money it did that
two months ago and it has been taking
those steps it can take at this point in
the Judgment of secretary Janet Yellen
of the treasury for example the
government is supposed to put money into
the Pension funds of federal employees
it hasn't done so it has quote unquote
delayed making it those are legally
required but they are able to delay them
and that way they can tell this story of
theater let me give you if you don't
online some of the taxes which Not only
would make the whole debt ceiling
problem go away but would also have very
good side effects that are very
important to the American people okay
let's start with Social Security Social
Security is only applied to the first
hundred and sixty thousand dollars a
year that a person earns every dollar
over a hundred and sixty thousand you do
not pay your Social Security tax you
don't and the employer doesn't
why in the world is that the case why
are we telling millionaires that most
people who earn a million dollars or
more the vast majority of what they earn
is not taxed for the pensions we offer
to our fellow elderly citizens if we
applied the Social Security tax to all
incomes not just to those 160 or less
we would earn a huge extra amount of
money for the federal government and who
would it come from the richest people
amongst us
and if that isn't moving closer to what
most Americans think is fair then I
don't know what is let me give you
another example Social Security which
maintains our elderly it's a basic
program to maintain people who have
given a lifetime of work to this Society
it is only applied to wages and salary
income it is not applied to your
dividends that you get from owning stock
it's not applied to the capital gains
you earn from buying and selling stock
it's not levied on interest you earn if
you have bonds that pay you interest and
so on
the kind of income gotten by the richest
people in America the richest people
don't get their wealth from wages and
salaries most of the time they get it
from dividends capital gains and their
portfolio of stocks and bonds to apply
social security only to wages and
salaries is to apply it to the bottom
three quarters of the American income
distribution and give our tax holiday to
those at the top since every poll I've
seen indicates that Americans want less
inequality not more a proper tax on all
sources of income to fund the payments
to people on Social Security would have
the following benefits it would make
this country less unequal it would
immediately take care of the finances of
the social security system so we don't
hear scary stories about that system
running out of money 5 10 or 15 years
from now so it has really good side
effects but I'm only getting started
here's another one up until a few
decades ago the corporate income tax the
tax on corporate profits was in the
neighborhood of 50 percent and it was
that for many years in America
now it's 37 percent
what's that about why are we doing that
if we return the tax to where it was for
a long time a period of time footnote
where the economic growth rate of the
United States was greater than it is now
that would generate an enormous increase
in government revenue and here's the
final one I could keep going but I know
we're Limited in time we have what's
called an inheritance or an estate tax
it means that if you leave wealth to
your children or to anybody when you die
the government gets a piece of that up
until not that many years ago when I was
already an adult so it's not ancient
history the amount of money that you
could leave to your relatives when you
die without it being taxed was six
hundred thousand dollars
okay what that basically meant was that
all middle and lower income people were
not affected by this tax because they
didn't have that much wealth to leave to
anybody at the end of their lives okay
so there was no reason to raise the
amount that didn't have to pay tax
because you were already only hitting
people wealthy enough to leave their
progeny 600
000 or more okay what did the United
States Congress do it kept raising the
amount you could inherit without paying
tax for a couple today a married couple
the amount of money they can leave to
their children is over 25
million dollars from 600 000 to all that
does is take all those people who are
leaving wealth to their children in the
millions of dollars and give them a tax
cut a big fat tax cut it makes a mockery
of the idea that we are all equal in
America when we're all born and then our
future our well-being the jobs we get
the educations we get on a Level Playing
Field we all use our capabilities to do
the best we can oh no that was what an
inheritance tax was passed for to give
us a roughly equal chance lifting the
limit so that you can leave 25 million
dollars right now if you die to your
children gives your children an
advantage that that not one half of one
percent of your fellow citizens enjoy
these if I walk for a living yes uh
which I do uh I pay taxes on my income
above a certain amount uh but if I
inherit 25 million dollars from Mommy
and Daddy uh never gonna happen but if I
did uh no taxes no taxes at all my 25
million so let me give you
uh a counter argument that we hear from
the right this time we hear from the
right uh I mean the typical Wall Street
Journal editorial or whatever that
um there's if you taxed all the
billionaires and all the corporations
however much he wanted it still wouldn't
be enough to cover uh the federal
spending deficit to which you know I
haven't done the math but a that sounds
like a good idea anyway whether it
covers it or not but B you know but but
that's the counter argument they didn't
know there's not enough money there to
do what you want to do and I guess
what's your response to that well my my
response is to remind everyone
Not only was the corporate tax 50
percent more or less for many decades
I want to remind people what the
individual income tax the highest rate
was say in 1950s and into the 60s
uh
it was about 90 it oscillated between 70
and 90 percent
and we didn't have to borrow anything
like the quantities of money we're
borrowing now in other words it turned
out that by having higher corporate
taxes and higher personal income taxes
we were able to fund a very good program
of government spending without borrowing
therefore without having to put a
ceiling on the bar none of those
Shenanigans were a problem and I'm
convinced we would be in the same place
now
look it is possible I'm not going to
argue otherwise it is possible that if
we did a proper job in taxing
corporations and the rich the way we
used to
we would then even then be short on the
money we're spending for people
and I would be willing if that were the
case to sit down and talk about what how
we solve that problem the problem that
even if we tax in a fair way there may
still be some cutting of spending or
let's face that if it's true let's
discuss it and let's come up with a fair
reduction of spending so that we can
match it to the taxes we raise without
borrowing more which almost everybody
agrees is not a good idea that would be
a reasonable way to proceed the
Republicans are not doing that they
don't want to they talk about a ceiling
versus spending cuts notice the game
they have removed
one option as if it weren't there that's
you know there are Lies by commission
and there are Lies by Omission that's a
lie by Omission because they're afraid
of any kind of honest talk about raising
taxes is going to come down on the
richest people which is after all where
it should come down and especially in a
country where poll after poll shows the
overwhelming majority of Americans
believe that wealth and income are on
too unequally distributed so we can meet
what those people want we can salvage
the social security system and we can
finally have a budget that doesn't
require Mammoth increase in borrowing
let me let me appeal to one more
political person on the other side of
the aisle
ranking the number one and two you might
wonder are the countries of France of
Japan and People's Republic of China
those are the two largest creditors in
other words when the American government
borrows
who does it borrow from answer rich
people and corporations because if the
rest of us have no money to do that it
also borrows from foreign governments
China owes a little under 1 trillion
dollars of U.S government debt that
means we have to pay them interest if
you assume it's roughly four percent and
it's in that neighborhood that means
that the United States government is
raising taxes from all of us you RJ me
and everybody watching or listening
and that money roughly 40 billion
dollars a year
we pay in taxes to the government of the
United States in Washington which turns
around and delivers the money to the
People's Republic of China which can use
it to beef up its Army
okay that's one of the costs of a system
like the one we have and raising the
ceiling makes that worse
let me ask you about another dimension
of that I I mean that's that's obviously
significant and important people should
understand that but
something that people talk about much in
all of this discussion of the debt and
interest on the uh government debt and
so on you know it makes me uh you know
FDR I think it's an apocryphal story
about Roosevelt supposedly said when he
was talking with his economic advisors
got confused and said what the hell it's
all our money isn't it that the fact is
that we have the Federal Reserve which
is the creation of the U.S government
yes uh
creating money giving it to Banks
private Banks private banks are turning
around lending money to the U.S
government the U.S government is paying
interest to the banks the same banks
that it's periodically rescuing the same
bags it lets the mid-sized ones go under
or it cuts a deal for the largest
corporate criminal in history in my view
J.P Morgan Chase to acquire it instead
but they don't nobody ever stops and
says wait a minute we're generating this
Bank profit and then we're paying them
what the hell isn't it all our money
help me with that no I mean it's exactly
correct this is the it it's a system
built up over the years with the
government constantly being called in by
the private sector except when the
private sector is making private profit
than it wants the government nowhere
near them but if they break down if they
fail then the government comes in to
rescue them if it looks crazy to you it
is I mean let me pick up on the last
point you made
the the same United States government
that in 2008 and nine designated J.P
Morgan Chase one of the quote Banks too
big to fail a bank already so large that
if it failed if it made the kind of
blunders at the Silicon Valley Bank made
a couple of months ago it would take the
whole system down that's what it meant
too big to fail means that we can't let
it fail because it'll take us with it so
what did the government just do when the
First Republic Bank collapsed because it
didn't manage its business properly the
government came in solved the terrible
problem of the collapsed First Republic
Bank
by giving it excuse me selling it to JP
Morgan Chase thereby making a bank
already designated too big to fail even
bigger
I mean this shows you this is a a
government that cannot solve the
problems anymore the way it solves one
problem is to make another one worse
then it comes in to solve the one it
made worse and then makes it another one
even where this is
chaos that's why people say correctly
they're not banksters they are excuse me
they're not Bankers they're banksters uh
to make the connection this is a hustle
this is a Jerry rigged operation in
which they all save each other at the
popular expense we the people are the
ones on the hook to pay interest on the
government debt these clowns in
Washington make the debt when they don't
have to to placate corporations in the
rich when they don't have to and we're
saddled with the interest costs of the
debts they use to keep this hustle going
and that includes the deal made with JP
Morgan Chase over the First Republic
Bank it includes the bailout of the
Silicon Valley Bank and so on and it was
the same story 12 years ago in the crash
of 2008 and nine when the same Banks
were bailed out again and given all
these these gifts
people should not shy away from the
understanding that this is a game this
is not necessary these people are
playing a game that's why they have to
hide from us the obvious simple economic
statement that if you have a problem
with your national debt if you have
placed a ceiling so you can't borrow
more then you have to go look at your
taxes and spending so you don't have to
borrow more
instead these clowns pretend that taxes
are somehow not in the story and we're
only choosing between raising the
ceiling on the debt and cutting spending
it's as if you were walking in an alley
somewhere and a nasty person jumped out
of the dark and said I'm gonna give you
a free choice I'll either shoot you or
I'll stab you
I hope you're none of people listening
are going to be wondering gee what would
I choose the answer is not which one I
choose the answer is I don't accept this
presentation of my Alternatives how
about you neither shoot nor stab me
because I would like to live the
American people are now having to say
how about we talk about taxes who pays
them who doesn't who's gotten away with
a tax cut who didn't get one and then we
can fix this problem without having to
borrow all of that is off the table and
I have to tell you in all honesty the
Democrats are complicit they don't bring
up taxes either they keep talking about
spending how terrible it would be if we
didn't honor our debts we must raise
borrow more money and and we don't want
to cut spending as if the tax side of
this equation which is taught to every
freshman studying economics it's as if
they've all had us sudden case of
selective Amnesia and they do not
remember what they know is the balance
that has to be dealt with here between
taxes and spending
well I know our friends in modern
monetary Theory would say that uh that
deficits don't matter but when I hear
people say that deficits do matter and
talking to you is reinforced this
perception uh my response is
increasingly been then well then two
things we can't afford are bankers and
billionaires that there's just no money
sorry you know I mean there's just no
money to let these people uh continue
that you know we should tax it 100
percent uh uh you know over a billion
dollars in that the banking sector or
financial sector is just extracting too
much wealth and driving this deficit so
you guys got to go
you know I love it because instead of
telling taking telling poor people on
Medicaid or elderly people with limited
budgets on Social Security sorry there's
not enough money when we all know there
is why do we not say to the billionaires
you know we don't have enough money in
this Society to have
Elon Musk with a 150 billion dollars or
Jeffrey Bezos with 150 billion that's we
don't have enough money to indulge that
level of obscene wealth we can take the
300 billion you guys have leave you with
a billion we're gonna be generous you
have a billion dollars play with that
but the rest no that's something we need
because millions of Americans who need
medical care and millions of Americans
who need a social security check are a
greater concern in a democracy than the
wealth of a handful of individuals I
don't know of any modern major religion
or any modern major ethical or moral
code that wouldn't be in agreement with
what I just said that's why it's so
obscene when the money is sitting right
there not to taxes and give the the
public support to the people who need it
avoid borrowing so we're not all saddled
with debts we have to pay off modern
monetary theory is right if the
government used money in a different way
when there wasn't a need to borrow and
you didn't have to go through the
charade of letting the Federal Reserve
print money lend it to the government
all of that crap we don't need they're
right we could have a monetary system
not wrapped up with debt and we should
but as long as we don't then we have to
face this relationship between taxes
uh sorry the relationship between taxes
and spending and stop misleading the
American people into thinking that the
taxes are somehow not part of this
discussion that is a terrible disservice
that the Republicans do and it's a
terrible disservice that the Democrats
are complicit with doing by being afraid
because that's what it is afraid to
bring up the tax issue they don't seem
to want to offend the donors and those
are the only people for whom this tax
issue is what they want kept off the
table
well I think we solved it
um but uh no I really appreciate those
insights as always Richard Wolff uh and
as always I thank you so much for your
time and for coming on the program
and I I don't want this to sound like a
Love Fest but RJ I very much appreciate
your program above all that you are so
continuously willing to go after these
so-called controversial issues and allow
dissident perspectives to get an earring
it's a remarkable service which the
country needs probably now more than
ever well I thank you for that and and
um I will speak again soon I hope and
we'll be right back after this I'm
Richard R.J askal and this is the Zero
Hour



## Keywords:
