---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Liv0DKvRLvA
---

# Video
Professor William Mitchell - Reclaiming the State - Brighton, September 2017
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Liv0DKvRLvA)

## Transcript:

this is a dismissable coming this food
our architect Amma since Michael and
this is our this is our analysis and
staking that's what I call them with
demise of the lived in the progressive
political agenda and why it happened how
it happened and what can we do about it
if we want to restore the progressive
credibility so we just going through
some of that some urgent sort of
historical stuff the conceptual stuff
and then talk a bit more about what we
can do about so you only have to look
with tie yesterday's German election
edition you only have to look at the
traditional way the German election
results to realize the traditional cycle
democratically he's in trouble and we've
had others such as the one off we've had
whole sequence often we had the PvdA in
the Netherlands and the French
socialists the Democrats in the US the
failure of
Renzi's that referendum in Italy which
was American construct some selection in
the US there's a whole series of and
while they're all quite different types
of events they're meant by one thing
there's a major reaction against the
neoliberal consensus which has been
running for ninety three three or
slightly more decades and what what our
distinct people are starting to realize
with a sense of powerlessness though to
be fair is that you know we've had this
scourge but a whole scourge search as
neoliberalism and people starting to
realize that it hasn't worked for them
despite all the promises and it's
starting me in certain countries to
penetrate the middle class and once
these start to penetrate the middle
class then there's there's there's voice
the potential for an effective force the
working fire removing the lower income
Goods had a difficulty expressing
dissent and laws and they tend to take
it out on themselves we've all sorts of
substance abuse and things like that and
they're not the size of middle class
time also but the middle class of
educated and education is a powerful
force to be a great sports and the GFC I
think triggered all of this but what's
really exacerbated it free me from hey
this is sort of a scary part obsession
that has become the norm in advanced
countries and you only have to read the
the unpaid reporting time after the
training development last week and you
know it's just that this is you in body
they just documented a shocking story in
our advanced world and what's also
apparent I think people are starting to
realize this that the the a leaks were
really interrupted by the GFC because
prior to that they had a none travel
run at deregulation privatization become
support hacking even income support
systems and all the rest of the things
that define the advanced world and of
course the GFC interrupted that because
governments became very pragmatic and in
becoming the exact manic they did
exactly what does the neoliberal
consensus had said he shouldn't do and
that's brilliant the fiscal policy young
that is taxes and spending in which in
most countries side those countries from
meltdown and in Australia for example we
had a very extremely large fiscal
stimulus and Australia didn't have a
position and what a demonstrated growths
that all of the distractions in the past
about how I'm the monetary policy
adjustment interest rates could be you
must be the cannon stabilization tool
and they're just spending up and down
that was all thoughts I mean the central
banks have been trying their hardest for
10 years to push the inflation rate up a
little bit it's not moving it's 10 and
so what the June see was very
inconvenient for the neoliberal agenda
but for something somehow they've been
able to you know they've sort of went to
ground and widened took the past and now
the come back out of it they're sly
miles and they're just renewed their
agenda and the problem is that the wider
brights behind is predictable but the
responsible left all this has been
pathetic and debilitating and I'm
talking about the organizer it's been
and I've already mentioned the the
decline in the the political portions of
our traditional social dinner game
titles now why's that occurred what
would what this project we've started
now called reclaim the state project and
the books the first document England is
that we wanted to investigate why the
left has been decline what we did it
start and wise have happened and then
what can be done about it and what we
also observe is that the populist
right and I know popular vision is
always equated with the right at the
left and the populace to thing to do
things that makes that a poplar that the
populist right around the place have
really filled that with all of that
angst that that angst about the scorched
earth the left has been new but the
right has started to film again and
provide a narrative that the people
people can resonate in and and so we we
starting to to see that from the right
policies that the left should be
advocating and are some of the more
extreme social and policies and
certainly the immigration policies a lot
of what the writer saying in economics
is just straightforwardly great and it
should be being said by the left and the
the writer saying we've got to restore
national sovereignty they're saying
they've gotten reversed this D
politicization process
so what deep politicization is is to
have the near liberals have been great
at distancing themselves from
responsibility for all of this and so
they've deep criticized it by putting is
in the hands of technocrats throughout
elected and central banks who aren't
accountable and they can say well you
know the IMF is not accountable to me
one that can see now our elected
politicians say we'll see this is even
doing that to us and the the right now
see these they say no we're going to do
we're going to take control away and
when I talk about national sovereignty
from a progressive perspective I
separated from nationalism and ethnicity
and xenophobia and all of those things
and what it means is that we want to go
back to the situation where there's
explicit democratic accountability and
we restore the capacity of the state to
do advanced what I call public purpose
rather than the dancing physicality and
one of the problems on the left is and
are particularly in Europe is that the
Left have become obsessed with a sort of
pan-european concept sufen supranational
type solution whereas it's the
supranational bodies that have done the
bidding for the near levels
now when we when Thomas and I started
thinking about this book a couple of
years ago my initial input was that we
wanted to be able to trace that to trace
and work out it's beautiful
where Social Democratic parties
abandoned that agenda and became their
liberal and it's relatively it's it's
relatively easy to work enough the the
first the first part of the story starts
in the 60s where there was a complaint
what I call a conflation between
globalization which was the increased
international supply chain type of
linkages multinational firms and things
like that and global financial fibers
increasing there's a conflation between
that on the left and what I call
neoliberalism and then there started to
be I view that all the nation-state is
becoming increasingly powerless because
of this globalization and that almost
became a passive mantle that we can't do
anything about this is beyond our
control but what that conflation didn't
understand that they were there quite
separate developments and you can you
can have globalization without any
miracles where the where the
nation-state is still powerful because
as I'll say in a few slides
nearly the nippers liberalism hasn't
worked we go beyond the stage it's it's
co-opted the state the state hasn't gone
away as the left's seem to believe
the state is a tool for me everything
and then you think about what was going
on in the Academy where I lived all my
life and what what came at the end of
the 60s and especially around the OPEC
oil crisis and I said you through the
first of the two crises was that
monetarism started to infiltrate and
start to dominate the Academy the oil
crisis was a problem for the traditional
Keynesian consensus because up until
then the standard Keynesian - inflation
adjusted demand side phenomenon so it
was too much spending running up against
our physical production areas because
inflation but of course the oil prices
was a supply-side cotton stock which
which sparked off a wage price paddle
between firms and news which then
manifested into an open inflation and
paintings were sort of left floundering
at that stage and that gave the managers
to be adding on about the dangers of
fiscal deficits etc for ages as an
ideological statement they suddenly had
an empirical development that appeared
to support what they've been saying okay
so managers became an infestation and in
that one of the first manifested
expressions in the policy setting was in
Britain in under the heath government in
the early seventies with the where the
central banker had its credit and
competition policies in three cities
where they just took Milton Friedman
literally and tried to control the money
supply and if by 93 they'd abandoned
about 99 abandoned that because they
cannot monitor the basic tenant of
monetarism was found to be unworkable
yet that didn't stop Denis Healey is to
transfer in the Wilson second
later Callaghan
it's a panhandle Callaghan can I have a
hand yeah that didn't stop Denis Healey
is the Chancellor in that that second
Wilson government from becoming from
spouting all this manifest nonsense the
deficits were bad and government active
an austerity and all the rest of it
that's that that and then of course
Callaghan into the 1976 Labour Party
conference in blackboard may define a
statement that Keynesian economics is
here we're all managers this was this
was the British Labour Party for God's
sake becoming the voice of neoliberalism
effectively and of course what trends
what followed within the structures in
that time was the disaster of
bleed-through just refined and
prosecuted this man need to listen to a
higher standard action and then we go to
France because you know France why
didn't I was elected in the early
eighties on a really on a really
creative social platform to reverse the
the vestiges of indecency that the prior
regime with the Barclay and Raymond
Barbossa who was sort of the first to
inflict managers a moment Frandsen cause
dreadful unemployment and women Hot Rods
inequality and later on was their
response to that and but but within a
very short time
had this turn to turn austerity turn in
1993 with Jacques Dolores the economy
minister and this was a grand social
experiment seen as being total failure
and we had to go back to Tina there is
no alternative but neoliberalism and so
you've got Callahan is 76 saying we've
run out of money we've got a go and
borrow from the IMF because everybody in
the money anymore outright lie and
whether whether he was outright lower
and then you've got France about middle
who had alternatives he didn't have to
he didn't have to go the austerity word
but he did and then of course could pop
Maastricht and
effectively those turning points which I
call the surrender of the lip and now
I'm quoted by anybody
whenever someone puts their little left
hand up they they get throttled down of
what about Callahan and Blackpool what
about having to run Britain ran out of
money in 1976 190 it was just an
outright lead up it's a lie and and I'll
Francois Mitterrand had no alternative
well yes he do he could have dropped out
of the Exchange Rate Mechanism and
floated the exchange rate he didn't do
that because he was are getting
subsidies from the German for German
government through the Common
Agricultural plan and the French farmers
were very powerful beautiful
okay the other the other thing that the
left keep saying in which which bugs me
is that nearly Berlin legalism is a
retreat of the state
it's a hollowing out of the state that
the state has been overpowered by the
market but what Thomas and I show and I
think family in fair amount of detail is
that all the tap innocent state has been
reconfigured and it's been refitted
reconfigured away from pursuing policies
that broadly advance well-being of
everybody in other words in the in the
post Second World War period up until
the beginnings of neoliberalism various
times in various countries of the gang
the state was the mediator between
capital either it mediated that tension
and conflict and in under neoliberalism
the state was very configured to become
a agent of capital it doesn't matter why
as I say here the major changes that we
would call the neoliberal changes have
been state tripping the near liberals
knew that they they don't make the
legislature legislature changes the
politicians living them and the near
liberals knew that they had if they
wanted to prosecute their agenda they
had to work through the state so the
nation state never went alone and as and
the left has failed to understand that
it rides on about all the states
powerless now ball and they're the right
doesn't drive notes down one with the
state's not ours and all the lobbying
and political donations are in evidence
that the right know that they've got to
come off the politicians to get their
agenda run and we have discussion in the
book of their how the the left sort of
disappears e to itself the board is
postmodernist identity politics and so
marginality is no longer defining terms
of where you sit in the class struggle
with capital as a worker it's now
defined in terms of bottom what your
gender is or what your sexual
preferences are and things like that now
not I'm not wanting to downplay the
importance of discussions about you know
homophobia and all and racism and all of
those things but they should never use
serve an understanding that the
underneath all of this is a classroom
and there's a battle over national
income distribution and that the state
is a media should be a mediator to make
sure workers get a pair deal and then of
course it's workers do get a fair deal a
lot of the other stuff the identity
issues today in my view become reduce a
lot of that is just the angst of being
denied employment and denied a
satisfactory income so you turn on some
scapegoat okay so this is what we in the
second part of the book we oh I call it
the manifesto which was delivered and
what we when we talk about really
climbing the statement we're talking
about these things right back restore
democratic control of the economy so
don't allow the depolarization process
to occur
bring back the accountability including
fiscal fiscal policy for governments to
to honor their signatures to the
international covenants in the post-war
period relating to form one and I have
truthful employment here that that's
pointed so that would then we say we
restart on this free time in the state
and where we have to start is to learn
method
we can go and add on about these neither
with statements until the cows come home
but unless we are in peril with economic
understanding and economic arguments
there can counter it whenever someone
says all you how we're going to pay for
it or that all that'll that'll take us
to Zimbabwe all these sort of quick
quick so that the Ryan Hadlock just at
their clinicals because and I can get
away with them because of the economic
and literacy on the level so here's some
education most of most of what's taught
in economics programs in universities is
also most of it it's fate and one thing
that I've been associated with is it is
this thing we we call modern man of the
year we start off with a very small
number of us in the early nineteen
nineties we set out to build a a
coherent integrated empirical sound body
and macro con theory that reflected what
happens in the actual world not even our
imaginations and a very important thing
is we kind of will go through some of
the principles of this for those who are
fully available
one of the principles one of the
important things to understand about
modern math to do is an easily it isn't
arranging so I often hear people say or
when we have more monetary theory things
will be better or not that won't
necessarily
193 reason something you moved to it's
what is it's a lens for viewing the way
that the monetary system operates and on
top of that to get a policy structure
you have to have a value system in
powers so modern monetary theory could
work
extreme right-wing it just as well
doesn't work for extremely people so
it's it's it's a lens with a value
system that you have to put on time but
what it does is because it's the the way
in which it presents the monetary system
and the veracity of the theoretical body
what if what it does is makes ideology
transparent because it's how often do
you hear a politician so we can't really
the government can't create jobs to get
back to forward or because we haven't
got enough money well that's a lie
modern once you understand a lot of
money too soon you'll know that's a lot
so there must be some other reason they
don't want to get back to full
employment and then to put the private
forces those those reasons out in the
open they can't lie anymore
and so they're going to be forced to say
well one unemployment because we think
it's good for suppressing right
inflation of them what is the reason
but it makes it makes things that
politicians will hide the hide their
ideology behind the lie as if these lies
are the facts and we had no other we had
no choice so that's why I'm under 19
theories of friendly valuable lens it
smokes them out and one of the the other
things that I've done in a fair bit of
work alone
now is in the area of cognition and my
coals that dr. luiz de policies or is
that's an area PhD and they use of
language and the way we understand our
realities will attempt to and the sort
of the way in which we put together bits
and pieces that could add to
create our experience of the world and
what's really important is that we're
essentially we essentially relate to the
world through metaphors this is what
their cognitive linguists have
discovered and this what I argue is that
the near-lethal agenda has no evidence
credibility it fails every time and this
was a slightly in about the imn you know
if the if the colonists if if engineers
you have civil engineers government
breeches hadn't had the same
professional performance as my
profession well then they go to jail no
economist goes to jail when millions of
people are put out work because of
professional incompetence by economists
and the classic case was in 2012 and
they the first Greek bailout was being
discussed the ironmen came up of all of
these elaborate estimates and all the
austerity will actually be close family
and European Commission and the ECB went
along with that and handed the hell out
of the Greek economy and then not one of
course things went through the floor and
not long after that the IMF came out
with a new document so well we got it
wrong
in actual fact our revised estimates are
exactly the opposite
yet no one goes to jail laughing and so
the question is when you've got such a
poor record of forecasting and
prediction and analysis how do they how
do they stay dominant they do it through
language and finally because they are
experts at appealing to that out of the
way and each week we we learn and
understand so and that before I get to a
couple of those examples a lot of the
progresses to get locked into the same
metaphorical frames and we're not
confronted politicians of senior that
you know federal or national living I
said we wanna help you say that they say
I was real politic we're playing your
particular so you know we know when we
nice they come out and say all you need
fiscal fiscal rules to stop deficits
getting to be this is playing into the
mere legal from it I should never say
that they're just reinforcing the what
they are seeking to oppose so here's
some examples
we won't I'm not gonna go through all of
that these are the ways in which the the
metaphors are used the reinforced pot is
is a file paradigm so theme so I don't
know these are some of these policy
Namur for the other day and some of them
resonate the nation is maxed out his
credit card set one that they understand
I've read that in The Guardian labor
which is an atrocious
you know the garden was started by
business you know right right we into
business types it's sort of holds itself
out as a progressive development but it
was started by my auntie Union but as I
understand so you know nation is maxed
out its credit card what they're trying
what they what they're doing there by
saying that is relating what they
purport to be the finances of the nation
state relating that down to the
experience experiential level of the
individual the person in the household
because we do max out our credit card
see you sometimes and we know what that
means we've got it we've got to have
some personal austerity to bring the
packing up what you pay incredibly high
interest rates to the green banks and so
that tells us whenever the POTUS is
literally maxing out the credit card
date that sounds irresponsible to us you
know the budget black hole that's often
used in Australia and this is sort of
appealing to this idea that that these
fiscal balance the budget is beyond
human controls like a collapsing star
that's got catastrophic Nashville
information but then did survive works
and we were like that because the ride
alone is what's called an embodied why
do the like these metaphors to physical
types of thing he's a few good tools to
provide you with some ammunition when
you're confronted with those types of
miracles
so the first claim always is that the
government is just like a household and
just and just as we've got to balance
our budgets so does the government you
know that I've seen that in British
Piper's and us certainly it's everywhere
well the reality is that the house with
the non-government sector which includes
ourselves than us
we're users of the currency that the
government the national government
issues and the national government is
the only one that issues because it we
use it
they usually and our our own budgeting
experience has zero applicability to the
types of issues that a comfortable place
he's another one the balanced budget so
and even progressives I mean this is
where they buy into the the narrative
you'll hear progressive say all year we
can run deficits for a little while but
then we're gonna save up and make sure
that we run surpluses to offset let's
just say that's reinforcing the means

there's not there's this no such thing
as analysis of the fiscal balance of the
nation-state independent of what's going
on elsewhere and so when we look at a
fiscal outcome we we can only understand
that in context so a 10 percent deficit
fiscal deficit in other words government
spending more than its receiving in
taxes equivalent 10 percent of GDP might
be perfectly appropriate in one context
whereas I took the same surface might be
appropriate in another and there's no
way you can say that a 10 percent
deficit is pet is worse or better than a
3 percent of support at 2% circle it all
depends so country like Norway which has
a really strong export sector because of
its natural resources as first-class
services being provided by the public
sector
to the household sector has
non-government sector saving over all it
has to run or serve a fiscal circus to
stop inflation context to see external
sector private domestic sector
government sector you can't just look at
the government fiscal outcomes and say
enemy and whenever and what we also know
is that whenever the government runs a
physical service dollar for dollar pound
for pound the non-government sector is
running a fiscal deficit it's not an
opinion that's an accounting statement
and so whenever the government starts to
run a surplus in what its effectively
doing is undermining the capacity of the
non-government sector to save overall in
other words it's undermining
non-government sector well so whenever
progressives are confronted with some
idiots right wing politician saying well
we need to run services the first thing
I should say is what you mean the
government should be destroying
non-government sector wealth that's a
totally different construction isn't it
because well it's good and I don't want
the government to be stealing my wealth
I want them to be helping me just
accumulate wealth okay services are
saving me well that's just an extension
of what I said the notion of the
government saving is always pushed out
there's government's downside because
what saving is is suspending current
consumption so that you can have more
consumption later on
that's what saving is that's something
else outside they put away a bit of
their disposable income
because they are looking forward to
earning some interest which will
increase their consumption possibilities
next year or the year later but if the
government is a currency issue it it can
it can spend whatever on whatever is for
sale in its own currency so what does it
what sense does it make to say a fiscal
service deciding when the government it
doesn't mean anything
as the government irrespective of what
its fiscal balances today can always
spend next period as much as it was so
this notion that I we've got put away
services to pay for the aging Society
you know the health costs of the
characters like me in ten years time
it's just a lot of system nonsense a few
more fiscal deficits drive our interest
rates that's just a lie
first of all connotation government
never needs to borrow now one I won't go
into why they don't but why they do buy
it's largely an ideological thing
because the the right know that by
forcing the government to borrow it is a
big thing you know perception we don't
understand
public debt weakness it's a bad thing
even though the debt that the couple
sectors got is our work but the the fact
is that the government should just stop
Iran but moreover the idea is that all
will look when the government runs a
fiscal deficit that spends more than it
taxes it has to get the money from
somewhere by borrowing and then it's
alleged that it goes into loan markets
and competes for skier finite savings
for private sector invest with private
sector investors for those arms and then
you get all this moralizing on top of
that
about how public sector spending is
inefficient the market determines
efficiency in the private sector so
you're getting the double whammy you're
not only choking off private sector
investment but you're also substituting
efficient standing within efficient
scheme so that's the normal narrative
well that's not even a remote remotely
accurate descriptions of either the
banking system operates thanks there is
no finite savings available that they
will compete for banks will make extend
loans to any credit worthy customer the
country that all lands make deposits and
if you talk to any bank that in the line
Department they'll tell you that they
don't really make a phone call to the
reserve management department of the
bank and say have you got enough money
in the field so that we can lend it out
they just make loans make deposits they
create the liquidity whenever they make
a loan and then later on upstairs or
downstairs or somewhere else in the
building the reserve management of the
bank has to make sure they can get some
reserves why because all of those loans
in making deposits are then spent and
all of those checks and things have to
come back and be cleared and at that
point the bank has to have reserves but
and if they dine and reserve Susan who
can I get your reserves off
Bank of England central bank one of the
one of the responsibilities of the
central banking any financial system is
financial stability and the central bank
will always win reserves the banks if
the banks don't have enough so that
there's not a lot of checks bouncing and
Carlos created and the other point is
that spending dreams for the time saving
and so what I mean by that is that when
governments run deficits they stimulate
income growth and household disposable
income increases and not only can
households consume more but they can
save
so there's no static pool of saving if
they all had a mud fight over it and
then the government rules and the
private sector doesn't this doesn't work
like that
it's a minute deficits are inflationary
and then the next set next word is all
gone our public or Zimbabwe
well most even progressive anything in
the room though really detailed
knowledge about what happened in the
Bonnano public nothing that's like a
good omen
we're not having any embarrassment so
many people know exactly what happened
in Zimbabwe a few people but not mean
and so you're not equipped in other
words to encounter the nonsense that all
these governments run deficit argument
that you only end up like see gonna put
well what happened in Sinbad was very
clear lugar be foggy intent I think
wanted to live all his freedom fighters
who liberated did not be from Rhodesia
for the Bears and the why you did it was
really ridiculous because they're
Zimbabwean agriculture and she was
incredibly efficient and what he did was
he took the farms off the white balance
and open to the freedom fighters and
within a really short time you know
sixty percent of aquaculture production
collapsed well any any spending when
you've got a sixty percent of your
supply side collapsing it's going to be
inflationary it tells you nothing about
the normal
conduct of deficits and I can tell you a
similar story that violet did after the
first world war the destruction of the
the iron and steel industry in the Ruhr
and now assess the German that I think
the penalties fell dramatically and
again the same thing it was a supply
contraction not a demand the last couple
points she says this idea that deficits
through inflation revived by
and the the it's always talk about old
wood you know the government you say
what government to print money do or
government start treatment even nice
thing the way spending occurs is that
someone sits in an opt-in in the central
bank sits in front of the computer
types numbers into computers there's no
you know the printing presses is that is
this imagery of this man in Christ
character in the basement of the central
bank or the Treasury sort of running the
printing presses at crazy speeds and
getting out of control
let's just not how it happens and the
other point is that any spending has an
inflation visible whether it's
government spending on government
spending all spending paracin implies
rulers and if the government spends too
much and what I mean by two months
forces are convicted that aggregate
spending to run ahead of the capacity
economy to to produce real goods and
services there's got to be a pleasure
in the same way of listening vestment
booming the non-government sector that
could be inflation but it tells you
nothing about in the inevitability of
influx of deficits inflation Gummer will
run out of physical space this is
another one I mean the Left have become
obsessed with thanks you talk about
financial ratios public debt ratios and
all of that the the only sensible
concept of how much space fiscal policy
has is the availability of real goods
and services that the government can buy
with its currency and bring back into
productive use that's the only sensible
way in which we can say how much should
the government how big should the
deficits be all the services have
nothing to do all this talk about debt
to GDP ratios and deficit to GDP ratio
so it's just mere legal nonsense and the
left should just stop talking about
Australia life and be talking about
things like under utilization of Labor
and those type of issues that's what the
deficit
to advance public purpose and public
purpose includes full employment and
that should be the narrative all the
time not Oh will will bring down the
deficit but will just do it more fair
like that sort of narrative which
assists with details okay look this is
the last slide so what we're arguing and
I've got a slide on princess too and I
can answer questions about quixotic you
 are you say I love lifts in
Britain I would've I believe and and I'm
I am educated I'm not a racist I'm not a
 like like apparently all the
people who value believe so what we're
arguing Thomas and I and our you know
reclaiming the state project we want to
reframe the debate so the people on the
progressive side politics really educate
themselves and have a monetary system
operates that's the first essential
thing that we all need good because
without that literacy you just get
steamrolled at dinner parties and
steamrolled and political meetings and
you go to your politicians as I do this
myself can't afford it how we're going
to pay for it well then you just say
well I'm never going to go to you again
and we've got to learn the opportunities
that governments have to create
employments and regulate private markets
this idea that the government has no
capacity to stand up the capitol ball
that's just nonsense look what I slammed
into their capital to biggest hedge
funds in the world they've been money
stuck in Iceland for years now can't get
it out
sovereign state legislative power
capital has to do what it's told when
their citizens use the sovereign state
to advance their building we have to get
back to a prior priority of using fiscal
policy and eliminate all this money
nonsense normally governments will have
to run deficits so they're not bad
they're not necessarily good that
normally they'll be the case because
normally the non-government sector may
want to say about me and you know we
need financial reform we need to
eliminate


## Keywords:
