---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yn2gDY1081I
---

# Video
Republicans Don't Care About Incrementalism, Why Do Democrats?
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yn2gDY1081I)

## Transcript:
let's kind of go to the opposite of the
people's policy project this tax
monstrosity which is really I mean
what's extraordinary and let me just
I'll just pontificate for 30 seconds I
want your thoughts on this as well one
of the debates in my view between the
actual left Social Democrats let's just
use that as shorthand versus the sort of
you know the the center or whatever you
know the technocrats is that we're
always sort of in my view ordering
asking for a more kind of holistic
policy set you can't just do things
piecemeal you can't sort of fight
problems in one-off ways and you have to
kind of synchronize policy efforts well
man like Republicans and those lobbyists
I mean and granted it's a sloppy bill
because it's so rushed but they know how
to do it this is an integrated assault
which would implicate everything from
first and foremost obviously
accelerating inequality but even down to
potentially putting limits on what
states could do in order to circumvent
these savage cuts in the social safety
net so I mean maybe elaborate on the
kind of how you view it politically and
then sort of what's in this bill yeah I
mean I think that's right there are the
publicans do not have the same
incrementalist
you know cautiousness of democrats
they're very willing to say you know we
want to absolutely slash the corporate
tax rate to be one of the lowest in the
world and we're just going to do it and
who cares if it causes deficits or debts
or we don't really care about that we
can use those core connects to the bone
we're gonna do it and then they do it
whereas the Democrats should take a lot
longer and end up in some compromised
position even though all the
compromising is done internally because
they don't get any Republican support
for their bills anyways so it's a kind
of it's you know that they're much more
clean on their politics I don't they
care about getting it done as opposed to
kind of procedural compromises that
Democrats get
- in terms of the substance I mean I
think that the biggest part of this and
the whole point of this is they're
cutting the corporate rate from thirty
five percent to twenty percent and from
there that's that's basically the bulk
of it and then there's a lot of cleaning
up around the edges to try to raise
revenue to offset the huge amount of
revenue that will be lost by that and so
you get things like eliminating the
state and local tax deduction you get
things like capping the mortgage
interest deduction you get a lot of
really small bore stuff like taxing
graduate student stipends and on and on
and but the net result is the very very
rich the top 0.1% and the Senate bill
stands to get a tax cut on average of
two hundred and eighty thousand dollars
a year and the poorest 20% will pay ten
dollars extra in taxes each year so
that's sort of the on both ends and then
in the middle it just kind of walks up
the ladder right so I mean in and and
then the other aspect of this though
that I see playing out is that we have I
mean the bill itself is literally a
straight redistribution of wealth from
the poorest to the richest but when
people like bob Corker who come out and
we're Jeff Flake and they do all this
sanctimonious nonsense about how oh
they're so concerned about the deficit
which like the fact that the press still
takes seriously the notion that
Republicans care about the deficit or
even that the deficit is remotely
important compared to these other issues
is embarrassing
but when they start talking about
something like a trigger well you know
if our fake budget projections that this
massive you know redistribution to the
top doesn't create the kind of jobs that
most people seem to know it won't
including you know quite conservative
economists at place like Chicago then we
need to have a trigger which is looking
into dealing with the deficit which all
of a sudden gets us right back into the
holy grail cut Social Security and
Medicare yeah I mean I actually think if
you if you were trying to be completely
honest about what's going on here
you wouldn't analyze the tax bill
in a vacuum which is how most of the
coverage has gone so far in advancing
the tax bill basically cuts taxes really
really high on the rich and cut taxes
very very little on the core and then
the very poor pays a little bit more
like on average if you just look at the
tax bill you're like oh it's just a huge
tax cut for everybody but mostly for the
rich but like the actual game is a
two-step game cut taxes and then come
around on the other end and cut benefits
on Medicaid Medicare Social Security and
that's that's where the real
redistribution is gonna happen cut
benefits on those people in order to
fund these taxes these tax cuts for the
very affluent right so they're thinking
strategically I guess this is the thing
like as morally grotesque and as
horrifying as this is like this is the
sink they're they're synchronized and
how they do it and this is like we need
some type of large-scale counter
argument both because it's necessary for
saving a lot of people's lives and
improving this country's well-being but
also because it's like how can you
possibly match up such a sort of
coherent and fully spread world view and
way of doing things were kind of
one-offs yeah I think you know the
Republican that what the Republicans are
on track to do is something that they
have been planning to do for twenty
thirty years basically and they have a
window a really strangely created window
and they're gonna try to push it through
and it's been the same thing forever
block-grant all these benefits as many
benefits as you can to the state
privatize Social Security privatize
Medicare cut taxes massively on the rich
that's been the program for four decades
for them and they haven't had a good
window to punch it through and they
finally do and they're doing it the
equivalent window for the Democrats
would have been in 2008 to 2010 when
they could have transformed and punched
through basically anything that they
want and instead they spent you know
over a year tweaking and twiddling with
Obamacare on some faint hope that they
would pull in Susan Collins or some
other moderate Republican which never
had
come on Susan mom use the entire
legislative calendar for that and and
they didn't get anything else done they
didn't get the employee free choice act
on they didn't get the DREAM Act done
they didn't get any of these sort of big
ticket items and you know if the
Republicans the Republicans are showing
you sort of what the Democrats should
have done in that period in the other
direction and what they get done they
get done inside so I have no problem
admitting that like look I think
Obamacare and financial reform were
modest improvements right and that
translates particularly the Obamacare to
like very real life outcomes but it's
all within a Republican playing field
context so if Republicans came into
power and they were like we have this
massive ambitious plan for Medicaid and
Social Security and Medicare and what
we're gonna do is we're gonna sort of
modestly trim benefits for people you
know in Social Security and Medicare
people who are already wealthy and then
you know Medicaid maybe we were more
stingy with who could get in which I
mean that would be a lot because it
already is an incredibly stingy program
but the point being they're playing and
they would be playing inside the context
they come in and they go we're gonna
 destroy this stuff Democrats are
always and I think parsley it's
ideological and then obviously partially
that all of the structural forces which
we're talking about earlier all favor
wealth and that obviously cuts across
parties yeah definitely the donor class
in the Democratic Party they are
progressive in a very moderate way right
they want to see education improved
especially for you know this
disadvantaged children they want to see
health care improves like they won't
they want to see these things improve
but they don't want to see their taxes
go up by you know two to five million
dollars a year or whatever if they're
making a hundred million that they're
not interested in that so that
definitely moderates what's possible I
could have cut into a hooker budget I
mean there's things to be privatized and
doesn't act
yeah too right you would think you know
I there's a sickness and very affluent
people it makes them think that well an
extra million or two is really gonna
that's that's gonna make or break my
happiness when one probably won't but
that's nonetheless where they are and
you need donors to run you need donors
to run parties to run think tanks you
need unique donors for the whole
apparatus function and so you're kind of
bounded by the range of political ideas
that those donors are interested in yeah
no doubts so I folks Sam cedar here we
still need your help on our patreon page
YouTube ABS have come back but not
nearly as much as we had before so if
you can help us out any little bit helps
head over to our patreon page right at
this URL and you'll help us keep helping
you by making videos


## Keywords:
