---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jpn_WvkR-0E
---

# Video
Richard Wolff On Gramsci And Hegemony ft. Richard Wolff (TMBS 87)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jpn_WvkR-0E)

## Transcript:

so this is what cuz I want to talk with
you about Gramsci tonight and I want to
bridge this and I'm gonna start it's not
directly related but this is why I want
to know more about Gramsci and I've read
Gramsci a bit and I'm using him from my
book actually but this is maybe one of
the most moving quotes I've ever been
exposed to and professor Harvey K
actually forwarded this to me
great Harvey K another real teacher on
our show and this is a Gramsci in 1937
he's writing to his son from prison when
he's actually in the process of dying I
think you must like history as I liked
it when I was your age because it deals
with living people and everything that
concerns people as many people as
possible all people in the world and so
far as they unite together in society
and work and struggle and make a bid for
a better life and you can't fail to
please you all that can't fail to please
you more than anything else isn't that
right
that's an incredible quote to me and I I
think that part of what happens even
when you're explaining these things that
seem so common-sense like why do we want
to live in a boom and bust economy where
resources are so scarce I'll throw one
other example and I did a illicit
history recently with Professor Jamila
missioner brilliant healthcare historian
at Cornell and we talked about the
history of Medicaid and at the end of
the conversation as it broadened out you
know her point actually was like you
know basically unless you're Jeff Bezos
this Health System is a threat to you
you could be making a million dollars a
year and if your child is born with a
certain condition it could wipe you out
I mean this is fundamentally
unacceptable and dangerous even to some
of the most privileged people in the
history of the planet so we know that
and not only we know that we literally
experience it every day and then on the
other side of it and I feel that weird
voice in the back of my head
even with my politics when I hear you
speak like well I don't know but but if
we do that we do these things in fact
I'm working for well are we gonna miss
something
is it gonna become bad and that's where
I'm wondering if you could bridge
Gramsci and and hegemony because I've
almost started to think of hegemony is
almost like even that that kinesthetic
sense of an irrational fear of an
obvious change we should pursue yeah I
think you you're putting together in
your last comment there the wisdom of
Gramsci and the enormous gift his his
imprisonment in a dialectical Marvel
gave us you know he was in jail
Mussolini put him in jail in the early
1920s and kept him in there
until he killed him in 1937 38 the man
had been the head of the Communist Party
and Italy had been a dynamic leader I
don't know if people are aware of it he
was born and raised on the island of
Sardinia an unspeakably poor Island at
that times it's not other than for
tourists still a place eclis a poor
place and he was born deformed he his
body was all bent and as a young person
his parents believed that he would die
because he was so miss shapen as an
infant and so what they did in the
superstitious way that that part of the
poor Italian population lived is he
didn't sleep in a bed for a long period
of time he slept in his own coffin that
was what they did and he would try I try
to imagine what it would mean to wake up
each day in something that you knew
would be where they would end up well he
didn't die he grew up he never overcame
that he was a miss shape and adult too
but he became the leader he tells that
he told the story when he was older if
this is not taking us too far away he'll
go wherever he live he told the story of
being on a train after he had become the
head of a communist party and people
should remember he became head of the
Communist Party in Italy at a time when
the Communist Party was the biggest and
most powerful Communist Party anywhere
in Europe it was a stunningly successful
communist party for a long time and that
was devoted you know he took a lot of
credit for that and
a lot of credit for so he was on a train
somewhere and a person was sitting
opposite him and they got into a
conversation and after a while the
person said you know it's very
interesting to talk to you who are you
and he said well my name is Antonio
Gramsci and the guy got angry he said
crumbs
that's all greatly the guy could not put
together the great leader of the
Communist Party and this gnarly little
man and it really kept going and I don't
think he ever convinced the guy that he
wasn't a megalomaniac
anyway so he's in prison for all those
years badly treated his illnesses got
much worse he wasn't cared for it was a
way of slowly killing the guy which
another in the end it did but the thing
about Gramsci the gift he gives which is
where you're going with this and I think
you're quite right to do it is that
Graham she was always agonized over the
following thing his first introduction
into big-time politics was a massive
general strike that took place in the
Italian city of Turin Torino in Italian
which was the home then as it still is
of the Fiat automobile company and he
led that's why he became kind of a big
leader he led a strike a massively
successful strike for a long time in the
end it wasn't so successful but for a
long time they led the workers out you
know and out of that experience and in
the immediate years thereafter he
reached the following crisis if you
might say it his observation was the
workers are really badly treated they
know they're badly treated
they know who's badly treating them it
isn't a mystery or to use his language
the objective situation is ripe for a
revolution for the majority to rise up
and stop the exploitation that is their
daily life but they're not doing it and
we can't get them to do it why is that
why is it that the objective
circumstance is clear is decisive and
gives us the chance to win but the
subjective that's how he reasoned it the
way people think is blocking them from
seeing and doing what they're able to do
they could win tomorrow we could have
won that strike we could take over this
society so he began to do what he felt
Marxist had been not so good at to look
at this subjective to look at the ways
people think about the world which may
not enable them to see or to act in ways
that are their own self-interest given
the objective now that's a very modern
question because it's agonizing American
progressives to this moment why is the
obvious inequality that gets worse each
day the instability of a system which
just crashed in 2008 after 40 years in
which people in my profession taught two
generations of students that we didn't
have to worry about this anymore
because we had learned all the lessons
in the Great Depression that would
preclude us having what we just had
again so if you have objective
circumstance after objective
circumstance in the world and yet people
like you said just now hesitate feel
they might lose something or worry where
grungey went with it was to ask about
the consciousness of the Italian mass of
people the working class that led him to
become a scholar of the Roman Catholic
Church how did that church become so
powerful not just in terms of the
cathedrals and the churches and the
priests but in the deep consciousness in
the in the subconscious almost he
becomes interested in psychology trying
to understand what this church eNOS is
what what happens to a person who's
baptized at Birth who who has the
sacraments as they go through life who
sits at the end with the dying
and has the priest go through the
procedures that go with longer so we
asked that question then he asked the
questions about work the attitude of a
worker to doing a good job this
interesting desire to hold on to the
sense I do good work even knowing that
the harder you work at doing good work
the more you're making profit for
somebody who's not only other than you
but it's gonna use that process to screw
you 12 different ways and your family as
well how do you how do you work all that
out so it becomes and that's why he's so
powerful it becomes the first I mean I'm
getting him a little bit more than he
deserves but he deserves a lot one of
the early Marxists Georg luk√°cs a
Hungarian was another one but one of the
early ones who really began the interest
in Marxists to go beyond economics and
politics and look hard and with deep
respect and how culture works how
ideology works how religion works to
understand this how the capitalists the
employers who are in fact a small
minority of the community are able to be
as powerful to govern because they can
put together an alliance they can go
find other parts of society and work a
deal with them so that this minority
through these connections can become
dominant or in his language become head
germanic be able to control the society
as a whole even though they are a small
and in and of themselves vulnerable
minority until they have hooked in for
example the religious community perhaps
and the artistic community and the
skilled workers sense of themselves and
the minute you see what rump she's
trying to do for Italy the ability to
apply that to the United States today
jumps at you right so and also I would
go so far as into into looking at
ourselves self critically like in terms
of how we
replicate these things in our own
communities and our own activities and
obviously some of it is unavoidable I'm
not you know I'm not a especially having
grown up without any money I'm not a
hairshirt person so I'm not talking
about you know these like oh well you
should you know you shouldn't make a
profit or make a living or any of this
sort of thing we live in the world as it
is but then conversely when we're
constantly even if we're discourse in a
certain politics but we don't treat each
other with compassion or solidarity or
we don't try to at least somewhat model
or prototype something different in our
own you know spaces we could be
replicating that same hegemony yeah I
think prompts you were here today for I
mean I'll pick a provocative example if
grumps you were here today he would say
something like this to us say about the
last 50 years of the afl-cio afl-cio is
a minority
it's the organized workers the unionized
workers back in the 1940s 50s they had a
third of the private sector work force
in the unions that's a minority but a
strong one they needed to understand
they didn't but they needed to
understand that like the employers a
smaller minority they had to build their
own using Gramsci's language now countr
had German in other words they had to
struggle for hegemony and they and to do
that they had to build alliances now
coming out of the Great Depression they
already had an alliance they had an
alliance with two socialist parties in a
communist party and all and they were
big in those days and all of the people
who were touched by all of that which is
a lot of people they either could build
on that coalition which had been very
successful in the 1930s getting us
little things you know Social Security
unemployment compensation a minimum wage
and a federal jobs program which
affected you know almost every family in
the country one way or another right so
they had proven that they were powerful
they were proven that they could act
politically they could they had proven
that they could become close to had
Germanic since every one of those things
I just mentioned was opposed by the
business community with fervor
all through the 1930s but they lost
instead the anti-communism after the war
got to the union leadership the afl-cio
and they broke that that coalition
they went down the rabbit hole of
anti-communism that was a hegemonic
project and that engine manic strategy
yes it was a hegemonic strategy of the
ruling groups in this country but they
got the active cooperation of a trade
union leadership that didn't think it
needed allies and a coalition it went on
its own and it's been 70 years of
decline that we see as the result and
even with this 70 years of decline and
by decline I mean the number of people
in the Union goes down virtually every
year for the last 70 years despite that
that spike those years they still to
this day are very anxious about a lying
with people on the left you could see it
with Bernie the only a small number of
unions went with him the first time
maybe a bit more this time some of them
have learned but the hesitancy is like
what you said a moment ago there's
something deep inside the American
people were traumatized by the
destruction of the New Deal coalition to
the point where getting involved in any
collective enterprise with a leftist
tinge is scary is something that without
understanding it my students who don't
know any of this history and certainly
didn't live it they feel anxious in the
way they can't pinpoint even when
they're honest enough to admit it
and my argument is that scrunchies
wisdom something was done to immobilize
the risk of a counter hegemony to better
solidify the hegemony of the employers
how do we build counter hatchapee well
the first thing is to recognize the
prongs like with everything else the
first step forward is to recognize that
the labor movement for example if we
were to start there we don't have to but
if we were has to have broad social
allies if there's a feminist movement
rush towards it to build an alliance
if there's an anti-racist movement do it
there if there's a movement for gay
libero what it wherever is did you see
some of this in the Chicago's teacher
strike yeah I just keep emphasizing that
was so important we think of these big
things which were huge occupy black
lives matter in Bernie but in 2013 I
think it was there was the great teacher
strike and uprising against the rahm
emanuel mayorality and there's a lot of
reporting about how it was but it wasn't
just a strike they were helping parents
find other places that kids could go
they were there was so much more
happening in terms of a base of the
teachers saying like not only that we
need more obviously but we could use
what's happening these schools as a
launching point for all of the assaults
gentrification loss of housing all of
these things and they really had a sense
of that I think I think they do but I I
don't mean to be depressing anyone but
they need to because goddammit I get it
I know for brand propositions on the
right I think they're still ahead of it
I think there's no mr. Trump is going to
be the ally of fundamentalist yes in in
in the traditional religions he gets it
he has never shown the slightest respect
for any of that
he's never participated he has he has
made public and private jokes at the
expense of those people as the
traditional Republicans always did the
bushes and all the others but he is
gonna go further to solidify them he has
to impart living the life he has you
know with the ex-wives and all the rest
of it so he has to him some sense go
further but he's eager to do that he's
eager to do it with the military he's
eager to do it with the National Rifle
Association
and perhaps better than even the other
Republicans that you have to work hard
at these hegemonic alliances you have to
renew them you have to reap refresh them
and you have to go however far it takes
the left may be outraged by the latest
trumpism but those Trump isms are all of
a piece whether he understands that or
not who cares
he is holding on as best he can to that
core of 30 to 40% whatever it is that
are the people he needs to hold on to
including the threats which are right up
Gramsci's idea the threat yeah I don't
know if you noticed when Cohen his
former attorney was finishing his
testimony yep one of the last things he
said was and if he loses I'm not sure
he's gonna leave the job I that that's a
threat that's the kind of threat he
repeats from time to time but he wants
people to understand that I have enough
hegemony not over majority not even
close but I have enough that I can make
it impossible for this society to
function don't push me
he said that to the Republicans during
the race the others that he was running
against when he won the the nomination
and he's continuing remember with with
Hillary when he said she said you will
agree to abide by the results of the
election he waffle he didn't want to be
caught these are ways of cementing your
people together and something comparable
on the other side I don't see that often
I see much quicker willingness to forego
an alliance forgo a coalition well you
see a great example of that we talked
about her a lot is how they relate to
Ellen Omar right I mean there's a
handful of people I think very clearly
in the last cycle of this outrageous
incitement against her Sanders has been
clear Warren's been clear tulsi gabbard
put out a good video but you see I mean
as an example Nancy Pelosi right she's
the leader of the Democrats for God's
sake and her angle was in this appalling
video and I you know and I'm when I call
something appalling I'm good at that
because I'm you know a better for worse
my usual default mode would trump maybe
should be more outrage I still find the
guy pretty funny obscene I wanted to
feed him and everything but I'm not the
typical I know I can't believe he first
of all I can it secondly sometimes it's
pretty funny in a disgusting way but
this one really was
you know a video splicing her footage
with celebrations of the September 11th
terrorist attacks disgusting and
absolutely incitement in my opinion and
her angle of oh well you know
essentially it's really tasteless to use
9/11 footage like that completely
evading the actual reality of what the
Republican Party and all of their media
apparatus is doing here to someone whose
literally facing death threats is a
great example I think of what you're
talking about and also the fact that how
could that ever even be counter
hegemonic I mean I think of the first
election that I you know could vote in
and it was Kerry and Bush and that
that's interesting cuz even in that
narrow lane it was we need to beat
terrorism and we want to give you more
freedom to own houses and the answer was
goddamn we gotta beat this guy that was
it he's really bad and I went to Vietnam
right but the bill Dee's hegemonic
alliances I mean you really have to
understand that that's what we need to
do it doesn't mean that you give up your
own positions your own identity your own
particular focus in whatever movement
you know gets you going and it motivates
you excites you you can stay with your
position you can disagree with others
but you can do that in the context of an
alliance if a fundamentalist Christian
who believes that God is running
everything can get into political bed
with mr. Trump who grabs I mean
for God's sake you can see people who
understand even if they don't never read
a word of Gramsci they understand a deal
right by the way these deals can unravel
it's it's not it's not made in cement it
has to be cultivated and both sides have
to give something but they're doing it
over there in a way that I think the
left has to catch up these are far more
strategic and less dogmatix yeah what we
gonna say David well I just I think you
like another way to think about hegemony
to is like an example is like country
music in the United States right so
think about like this
60s and 70s I kept to Allah country
music like Johnny Cash right right like
if you listen to Johnny Cash lyrics like
they're really radical we like powerful
yes you know I mean like man in black is
an incredible song he talked about
poverty talks about you know mass
incarceration he talks about ending the
war in Vietnam it matches something like
that going on the the country radio
today it wouldn't happen and what you
see in the 90s is you see a
consolidation of power of a few small
record companies that basically pushed
out any kind of more radical left-wing
ideas in country music and now you see
country music being more identified it's
like a right-wing genre of music and
that's how you also create like now all
these people who grew up in the south
and that's like their traditional you
know the music that they listen to it
they think it's like their cultural
music you know it comes imbued with all
these ideas that are being fed to them
and it's not even an organic thing and
understanding that aspect of politics
too I think it's something that we
really have to get better on the left
like significantly better because and
right it's everywhere and think of the
irony the the choice of folk music or
country music in the 50s and 60s at the
height of anti-communism it was the
reverse the country music and the folk
music was almost the the literature of
opposition the leaders were Pete Seeger
that's a communist
you know Woody Guthrie I'm like a
literal guys went on line a literal
commie that's right members oh yeah he
was like Woody Guthrie another one and
the weavers another group they were the
dominant things you went to a folk music
concert 90% of those performers were
left by modern American standards far
left-wing so the music was going
directly up into the left when the
popular culture was was going through
the the McCarthy period so there's an
unevenness here but it's also a lesson
that the music that is going in one
direction now can go in another one if
we are aware for example suppose the
American left listen to what you just
said and took as an important goal the
beginning of finding and celebrating and
building the audience of those musicians
who
there there that we know they're there
if we celebrate the few that there are
now what about making it a real project
to help them to bring them to the
conference is to put them on the
television shows in order to understand
the importance of popular music which
has always been an important place
Graham she wrote about popular music
there's a line I don't remember what
book it's from it might be born feed ed
which is a great book about Jamaica and
Jamaican gang politics and really how it
was accelerated by Reagan same dynamics
in some ways but they had a line they
would say I'm paraphrasing this but it
was something to the effect of the
perception at a certain time this is
probably back in the 70s that uh that
reggae that that country was white
people reggae they perceived it as like
oh no this is about being poor it's
about struggling like they saw a total
kinship in that music that's like well
before the reversal you're talking about
so you know I mean all of these things
are very malleable and I remember you
know I was living in New Haven
Connecticut at the time and working with
the afl-cio
Central Labor Council and I remember
being taken aback by the number of
workers men and women who came to the
monthly meetings of the council and who
loved that song of forget the artist's
name take this job and shove it remember
that that was an incredibly excite and
just the words hate this job and shove
it I'm not working here anymore whatever
that red lines were this this was
exactly what they wanted to hear
this is better than a check the Johnny
paycheck it's better than Darlene left
me and let's bomb Sudan yeah yeah yeah
and it's also during that period talk to
not to derail us on this but like you
know in the sixties and seventies this
is them this is the American Indian
Movement was going on right these guys
will and Jennings at this period of time
was one of the most popular artists in
the country and the American Indian
Movement they were literally like Friday
the United States like an armed
rebellion right and like those people
were supporting them you know like these
were powerful movements you had and I
remember and that with that great point
counterpoint we're Marlon Brando at the
Academy Awards
that year had someone from Haim right
and then the counterpoint though I have
to say is clint eastwood in total i he
did he came up and he said i want to
honor all of the dead cowboys and our
movies which was both so it was it's an
amazing clip because he's an and
totally reactionary but it's also the
precursor like 1990s to cool for
politics because he isn't doing like i'm
so offended you do that he's doing like
all right everybody let's not be so
serious also i'm compulsion became the
kind of irony mode yeah i'm compelled to
add that the early cowboys weren't white
guys typically small that's very true
but he was literally talking about our
boys it wasn't he was just being an
you've just watched a michael
brooks show video and you can watch all
of our full main live shows every
tuesday night at around 7 p.m. eastern
time and subscribe to get all of the
clips you want we're covering the globe
we're focusing on international
relations the intellectual dark web
we're having fun we're doing deep dives
with a lot of amazing guests of course
become a patron for the whole thing at
patreon.com slash t MBS or subscribe to
this youtube channel and help us keep
growing and get that content out there
subscribe below


## Keywords:
