---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SPMX1I5wt18
---

# Video
Roland Boer, “Anti-Imperialism & the Socialist Project”
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SPMX1I5wt18)

## Transcript:
all right well welcome everyone I hope
you all had a nice weekend we're very
excited to kick off our second week of
the summer school with Roland Moore
who's here with us Roland is a professor
holding an overseas Talent host in the
school of philosophy at Redmond
University of China Beijing where he
teaches and researches in Marx's
philosophy and political philosophy his
most recent publication is socialism and
Power on the history and theory of
social governance that is out just
recently in 2023 Roland's written very
widely on a large number of topics I
learned a lot from his work I hope he
appreciated the piece that we've
recirculated it's a great honor to have
him here to talk through some of his
work as usual we'll kind of follow the
general protocol where we've generated
about five questions to work through
with Roland and then we'll open it up
for 45 minutes to an hour of discussion
so Roland to start things off I'd like
to ask you about your intellectual
itinerary and how you would describe it
what were your early research questions
and kind of political Horizons and how
have they evolved over time
uh yeah that's uh our first of all so
look thank you very very much for the
invitation to be here and to be involved
um it's been an interesting journey to
get here flying from Beijing to
Copenhagen have been taking a train from
Southern Denmark with Christina to Paris
and arriving on Saturday evening and
thank you for the opportunity uh to be
here and discuss and uh and so on
intellectual itinerary it's an
interesting one there's a one-word
answer and there's a long answer I'll
try and steer between the one word and a
shorter version of the long version
there's the one word answer is texts
textual research now what do I mean by
that my first degree was in Western
Classics Latin Greek and Sanskrit and
then I taught Latin and Greek in a
believe it or not private high school in
Sydney in Australia for two years but
for some strange reason I was not a good
fit
and so I decided to study theology
and I actually came from a family in
which my father was a minister in the
reformed churches of Australia Dutch
background and then Presbyterian Church
so I was brought up in an environment
very similar to Friedrich angles
who grew up in wuppertal in a very
reformed background
and there I studied Hebrew
and also New Testament Creek and ended
up teaching Hebrew for six years in a
theological college
but by that stage I was developing
research interest in two lines or two
questions which actually arose out of my
theology studies and one was the
question of religion and theology
obviously and the other one was the
question of Marxism and Marx's
philosophy and my Master's thesis was
actually on the question of Max and
Hagel but on the theological register so
I've constantly moved between those two
questions early on and they developed an
interest initially in the engagement of
broadly Western marxists which Gabriel
you have written on
a number of pieces recently and I've
sort of published a couple of pieces on
that as well in hindsight and then kept
moving uh into the Soviet Union with
Lenin and Stalin and then there was a
logic to move in a Chinese Direction and
I first went to China in 2007 for
shorter visits and then in 2012 they got
longer My Mentor in Beijing young Way
Lynn said look it's fine to visit China
from time to time even for a week or a
month it's much better to work here and
be here for longer you might actually
begin to understand something and I
began that at Redmond University of
China back in 2000 and late 2013 and
that sort of grew under where I am today
where I'm working full-time the brand
meeting in the meantime during that
decade I basically had to discard all of
my previous assumptions about how you
work and begin again and what was my
Foundation it was texts and I've always
had this thing from my training in
Western Classics but then also in Hebrew
and grew New Testament Greek and so on
that where possible you study the
material in the language in which it was
written
and so for 10 laborious years for two or
three hours every morning I studied
Chinese for the purpose of understanding
Chinese Marxism
so that's where I am today yeah well
it's fascinating in the same ways with
the next question which is precisely
about Western Marxism one of the things
that will highlight in some of your
writings are the kind of extreme limits
of the western Marxist tradition and I'd
like you to maybe just outline for us in
the most concise manner possible what
are those fundamental limits within the
Western Marxist tradition and how has
eastern and more specifically Chinese
Marxism sought to move Beyond those
um
well let's begin by putting it this way
because it is actually a a
refreshingly complex question which we
can dig into further but the the first
one a basic question what ultimately is
the purpose of Marxism
all right well let's go to the 11th
thesis on forever
it's to interpret the world
and find the best way to interpret the
world and this is a Chinese reading but
also change the world in other words the
purpose of Marxism is ultimately to
seize power
and set out on the construction of
socialism
that's the first answer it's critique
its interpretation but it's also to take
that other step
and the second part of that and this is
where the limit of Western Marxism comes
in that they've Fallen back onto
interpreting the world
primarily interpreting capitalism
but not seeking to change in a realistic
fashion the second one is that Marxism
and socialism develops in light of
concrete practice
it develops a lot of concrete practice
in solving problems and difficulties and
then making theoretical innovation in
the process of doing so and this is
where you get and it's it's the Chinese
situation the Soviet Union for 70 years
the dprk today and so on also in Lao and
Vietnam it is in light of concrete
practice and solving concrete problems
that Marxism develops its theoretical
Edge and is constantly renewed and
innovated
and the problem with Western Marxism
there's complete absence of that
practice so you start to lose that
grounded theoretical Innovation that
takes place and end up producing a
plurality of approaches within those
profound limits that's how I put it for
now we can discuss that further later
yeah I'd like to hear you a little bit
more than on one of the themes
particularly in the piece that you
shared with us is the centrality of
contradictions for understanding the
development of not only the kind of
social world but also the natural world
and it strikes me that one of the issues
with a lot of Western Marxism is that it
operates at the level of what Hegel
would refer to as sense perception
meaning that you look out at the world
based on a preconceived idea of what
socialism is supposed to look like and
if you don't see it immediately based on
that preconceived uh set assumptions
then you condemn it and there's a lack
of operating just even at the
intellectual level at a higher and more
sophisticated mode of apprehension in
which you would recognize the kind of
dialectics of socialism that socialism
has emerged uh principally within the
global South in countries that have been
underdeveloped by centuries of
colonialism that they're subjected to
Imperial Siege and so in fact if we were
just to think rationally at the level of
understanding you should presume that
socialism is going to have a lot of
difficulty emerging from the capitalist
system and so I was curious to hear you
more on the kind of actually lack of
sophistication of Western Marxism
compared to a broader understanding of
the social totality in which you look at
objective forces in international
relations instead of just fixating on a
set of ideas and what they're supposed
to look like in the world
yeah maybe I'll begin
with an article that I've just finished
and it's on the Chinese reception of
Western Marxism uh for a couple of other
other articles considering Western
Marxism and its various uh ideological
limits that take place and
um
one of the two phrases which have caught
my attention from the beginning of that
research is that Western Marxism
may have some contribution to make but
it is characterized by an imbalanced
profundity
so it may have a lot of sort of deep
philosophical analysis economical or
economic analysis but it's imbalanced in
the way as I mentioned before there's a
profound distance from practice and the
other one is it tends to produce
beautiful utopian blueprints
and it's characterized by this utopian
cue
and by what is what is meant by that
phrase of course is that there is this
kind of
transcendent ideal socialism
that is there it's Frank you pick a few
phrases from marks and Eagles and celery
you have this Transcendent ideal sort of
utopian socialist and then you see
something in the nitty-gritty of
actually trying to get underway so what
that doesn't measure up to that utopian
ideal and then you condemn it in that
way and that is as you point out very
undielectrical in the way in which it's
actually engaging with the process now I
could say more but maybe I'll stop if
you've got another one well you're just
following up on that because it reminds
me of another figure who's been
important to your work is Dominic or the
sort of who we've talked about uh last
week and he refers to socialism as a
process of learning but of course a
practical process of learning and that
that process of learning is rooted in
the material analysis of the gains and
advances as well as the mistakes on the
part of the global communist movement
and I'm wondering if you could kind of
relate that logic of a process of
learning and a dialectics of socialism
to what angles calls you know Scientific
Socialism overt against utopian
socialism because I take it that those
are the overall Horizons of a lot of
your work so how would you articulate it
in your own words the importance of of
breaking with this kind of utopian
orientation in in favor of a more
scientific apprehension of the
dialectics of actually existing
socialism
uh I'll begin by with this this part of
the answer with the the Chinese
translation of utopian socialism is
empty thinking socialism
so it actually has no contact to it
um that's not to say that there are
contributions and who might get into
this later in sense of of the warm
stream and so on that comes from uh
maybe that side of things but empty
thinking socialism
in other words there's no concrete sense
of what actually needs to happen in the
process of moving forward there's a
second part of this and to pick up an
emphasis from the sort of that it's a
learning process if we look at the
Communist Manifesto
then there's a phrase and you ask a
question say in a western context please
give me a quick definition of socialism
and then it would be
the ownership of the forces of
production or the means of production by
the proletarian
that would be the answer so a shift in
the ownership of the means of production
from the capitalist to workers and in
countries like China and peasants
that's a one-sided reading of a very
important sentence in the Communist
Manifesto because what marks and Eagles
actually say is a proletariable Seas by
degrees
the means production from the capital
sign paraphrasing and in public
ownership in the form of the state and
accelerate the forces of production as
rapidly as possible
that part is left out
and if you have a Communist Revolution
that's able to take power in a very
underdeveloped or undeveloped country
with chronic poverty and life expectancy
in 1949 in China was 33
it's now 79 and rising and higher than
the United States
when you have that situation of chronic
poverty the second part of that sentence
becomes crucially important what do you
need to do to accelerate the forces of
production deliberation of the forces of
production so as to lift people out of
poverty that's the learning process
comes out of concrete practice whereas
texture being said and the Gang of four
was promoting the support socialism is
better than Rich capitalism and egg
shopping said poor socialism is not
socialism at all
socialism is about improving the lives
of everyone
why
because socialism is a platform for
communism you cannot have from each
according to need from each according to
ability to each according to need unless
you have a situation of significant
common Prosperity where you can do that
so that's
sort of that's a sense of getting at
this question of the sort of emphasized
again and again whether it's in Vietnam
or in China or elsewhere that it was a
question of how to liberate the forces
of production so as to lift people out
of poverty and actually materially
improve the quality of life it's
interesting just really quickly on that
point that then a lot of the western
left even the many many marxists turned
away from the Communist project in China
at the moment of the reform and opening
up right and so I'd be curious for you
to kind of connect that point concerning
the dialectics of socialism and a need
to develop the productive forces to the
need to engage in a capitalist World
system in order to be able to do that
and instead of immediately abandoning
that project or slandering it because it
trafficks in and engages with the
capitalist Global Market can actually
understand it at a higher level as what
I take it in your work is more of a kind
of tactic related to a very long-term
strategy as opposed to the end game in
and of itself could you flesh out your
thoughts on that a bit
yeah
um maybe I'll stop with a small comment
one of the things you find thrown around
sometimes is the term capitalist rhodo
the dungshot King was a capitalist Road
and their mouths are doing never caught
them shopping or capitalist Rover this
was the gang of four because mothers are
doing knew very well that don't shocking
was a lifelong communist uh way back to
the Revolutionary struggled but the
question that they were facing now we
need to get this in a bit of context so
Chinese Scholars talk about the first
economic miracle in the first 30 years
since not from 1949 to 1978 in the sense
that China achieved the basis of a full
industrial chain not a complete one it
now is the only country in the world
with a complete industrial chain but
that it started to reach its limit point
after about 20 odd years and the the
efforts where there were some
achievements the Great Leap fall in the
cultural revolution were actually then a
a response that things were getting
locked into intractable contradictions
they weren't going any further so we'll
just exercise a massive effort of
willpower they will overcome these
problems in that way and for double Xiao
ping that was not the way forward
that was not the way forward what you
needed to do was focus on overcoming the
contradictions that had Arisen economic
contradictions could go to that more in
a moment and I do emphasize that a lot
and what was the means to do so was to
develop a market component within a
socialist system in order to overcome
those particular contradictions and
where the forces of production were
actually being held back
um so I I find the whole idea of doing
shopping somehow betraying you know the
true communist project there's many
levels to it it is a betrayal narrative
which is unfortunately too common even
in left circles uh it's I find it
without mincing words a lazy analysis
when you actually look at them shopping
as material in the time it was a
resolutely Marxist approach and a deeply
dialectical approach to do so
um and it's one reason why in fact after
the introduction the first chapter of
the book on socialism with Chinese
characteristics begins with reading done
shopping
because he has actually ignored too much
right wonderful could you give us a
sense of if we kind of pivot from some
of the limits that we were talking about
earlier with Western Marxism to some of
the interesting strengths of Eastern
Marxism could you give us a sense of
what some of the most significant kind
of intellectual and political debates
are in contemporary China and how people
like us the majority at least of him do
not read Chinese might be able to get
access what are the kind of publication
platforms magazines uh other venues that
could allow people to if they're
interested plug into and get a more
refined understanding of Eastern Marxism
I'll start with the second part of the
question actually
um there's an incredible process of
translating a lot of materials by
Chinese experts underway at the moment
one of the main locations for
responsible material is Springer press
it has a big office in Beijing with
autonomous editorial decision making
they're not cheap books so you'll have
to get them institutionally or use what
communities often use is basically
illegal means to get hold of these
things
when you access that material this is
something you'll need to get used to is
there's a whole framework of
intellectual academic and Marx's
discourse in China which is quite
distinct
and if you haven't encountered it in
Translation you'll have to get used to
the discourse framework
as has been put for example by one of
the leading younger Scholars of teachers
in the central parties called in Beijing
up until recently Western academic
discourse and Marxist discourse set the
questions set the methodology for the
way in which you would deal with the
questions set the framework of possible
answers and also set the way in which
that's assessed
it was a closed system
and the question facing Chinese Scholars
was do we try and get into that closed
system or do we actually try to get
people used to a Chinese
discourse framework for dealing with it
and the answer increasingly now in
Lighthouse What's called the four
confidences in confidence interval
System Theory discourse and project is
that people will need to get used to
Chinese discourse so there are locations
for this uh material or both online and
in print and I can provide these later
the first part of your question what are
the Hot Topics in China today or maybe
I've mentioned two the first one is the
question of Justice
still a hot topic 10 years later
now why the question of Justice well the
first one is from
an overflow from the wild 90s so to
summarize quickly so the wild 90s was a
period of of chaotic and rampant
economic growth but it led to a
significant number of problems a large
area a large gray area in the law a lot
of malpractice in labor relations
workers losing jobs without compensation
significant problems in water air and
land pollution uh significant and
growing gaps between richer and poorer
regions and a gap between the Communist
party and the common people which led to
significant problems in corruption and
lack of knowledge of Marxism even by
Leading card rails and lack of unity in
the party
that's the context in which the question
of Justice started to come to the form
but what is meant by Justice
it's a very concrete
notion of Justice
it means common prosperity for all it
means rule of law operating right across
the board it means dealing with the
complex pollution problems so that I've
witnessed now the greeting of China in a
way that is absolutely astonishing and
it also meant in a huge process of
rectification reform within the
Communist party so a lot of its old
problems are resolved it means also
access to medicine for all of the 1.4
billion people in China imagine rolling
out a medical scheme a national medical
scheme for 1.4 billion people disability
Escape retirement scheme education equal
access to education the remotest regions
in Tibet to the largest cities like
Shanghai or Beijing and so on and so
forth that's what Justice Means at a
common level and on the path of common
Prosperity means no one was left behind
no one has left behind in that there's
another really hot topic but I'm going
to go on too long on that now called the
two Integrations
you'll get used to this there's a way of
doing this so two Integrations it's the
integration of Marxism with China's
concrete realities this was settled in
the 19 late 1930s and it's the intro
integration of Marxism with the best of
Chinese traditional culture
this is very recent and it's an
extremely hot topic what does that mean
especially the second one with the best
of
Chinese traditional culture there's two
angles very quickly you can ask
questions later the first one is to
identify core values from traditional
culture and seek their
um you know how they link up with with
aspects from Marxism the second one is
methodological
how do you engage engage with
traditional culture what are the
elements that you want to draw from
traditional
and develop within a new cultural
framework
that's the they're the two initial moves
that are being made in this discussion
but this is going to be the Hot Topic
the be hot topic of the next five years
kind of following up on that point you
know one of the debates in the history
of cultural politics and the communist
movement has been what to do with the
forms of culture that predated the
emergence of the socialistic in question
should we burn down Bourgeois
institutions you know should we
integrate uh Bourgeois artists and
intellectuals uh should we find some
particular line of demarcation
um of course in the case of uh Fidel
Castro who famously said you know within
the revolution everything against the
revolution nothing so we welcome all
except for those who are the counter
revolutionaries who are trying to
overthrow us but if you're a petty
Bourgeois intellectual producer kind of
on the fence let's kind of bring you
into the game and it's just in listening
to you and also knowing that your
broader work on the kind of history of
religion and things like this is there
in your sense a kind of consensus in
China around the cultural politics and
how the current state relates to earlier
both you know religious and cultural
Traditions is it a kind of ongoing
debate in which there are different
positions that are mapped out how would
you describe the cultural politics of
contemporary China
um well let's step back a little bit so
uh there's still quite a bit of
discussion about Chinese style
modernization and how that differs from
other other models of modernization
um and we can explore that a bit later
usually the contrast is with Western
modernization processes but also some
with Soviet models but in light of the
the
um sort of consensus that China has
achieved a basic modernization the
question arises what is the relationship
with that modernization through
traditional cultural and the usual way
of framing that say the Western context
is to say that traditional culture is
challenged by modernization
modernization overturns a lot of the
traditional assumptions
um now the Chinese approach is quite
different to that many many ways of
expressing it but there's a common four
characters saying things that oppose
each other also complement one another
so what are the elements of the
traditional cultural again I want to
step back
here's a translation issue okay so
culture is a Latin derived term which is
agricultural
you cultivate
something that comes up the Chinese term
is translated as culture is
when
means the character the letter but it is
a very large semantic field
but it focused on the Chinese character
is to transform to change together
so culture itself in a Chinese framework
is constantly developing it's not fixed
it's not not set in time there's a
sediment but it's constantly developing
in the process of each generation in
each situation
the related term is civilization
again that's a Latin term which is to
turn into a city
kiwis
in other words in the Greco-Roman world
the city was the focus of
everything that was good this is
civilized the world the peasantry and so
on was backward
now the Chinese term civilization is
quite different this one is
again the one character the Wayne
character which means character and in a
whole range of other associations mean
means brightness
so it is the essence that arises out of
the cultural process that expresses
civilization
so when they talk about ecological
civilization
it is the essence that comes out of the
full ecological context that expresses
the core of the human nature
relationship
so I went back to those sorts of
sort of issues because we we move too
quickly before asking that fundamental
translational question and in doing so
of course I've forgotten what you asked
me
well it seems like you answered it to
some extent because the question in
short was whether or not the processes
of modernization and socialist States
you know has taken different positions
regarding the cultural heritage that
proceeded if it'd be feudal or Bourgeois
or other and so in the case of china I'm
curious how that has played itself out I
mean like like any country that's been
sitting on the Socialist Road the Soviet
Union faces problem as well
um do you just toss out everything from
before and begin again and it can be
immensely creative and there was a big
debate in the 1920s Lenin was tempted by
this before 1917 but after 1917 along
with Anatoly lunacharski the commissar
for enlightenment they realized that
actually they I needed to use the
building blocks what they had and
especially in cultural terms the the
best of the Russian cultural tradition
and developed that further that tension
between old and new has shown itself in
in China in the last 100 years we can go
back to the May the Fourth Movement when
the more extreme forms wanted to throw
out the whole Chinese character system
and just shoots pinion because they felt
it was holding China back or throw out
the whole Confucian Heritage which
manifested itself again during the
culture Revolution and those were
moments where there was a felt we need
to abolish everything that went before
but then the other line which has
a more dialectical line really is to and
you find this in martyrdoms reading
notes on dialectical materialism he
constantly draws out of the Chinese
tradition and says well yes here we go
now we can sort of see how this works
I should add to this that there is
coming out of the Chinese tradition The
Cauldron philosophical tradition a
profound sense that you think
comprehensively and you think
dialectically
you begin with the whole you see the
relationship of all the parts and then
you explore the ways in which they're
related to one another and that is very
much you want to use the term a very
rich soil for Marxism to take room which
is quite distinct from other situations
you know just on that front and then I
want to give you a different kind of set
of questions one thing that has always
really struck me in your work is your
insistence on creativity within the
Marxist tradition and given the number
of stereotypes that I've been exposed to
in my professional education about
Marxism being dogmatic and they're just
being a blueprint and that it's really
boring because all you do is apply the
same method over and over again I found
that very refreshing but the also the
way in which you teased out what
creativity means within that framework
is really important for people to
understand because it's not the same
thing as just you know effusive
individual freedom of exploration or
things that creativity tends to be
reduced to within the kind of Bourgeois
cultural apparatus or the Boudoir world
so could you speak about how you
understand creativity within Marxism
yeah
I'll preface it and try not to forget to
answer the main question this time
with this observation at um one of the
things that I've noticed in my research
on Chinese Scholars who specialize in
Western Marxism is trying to make sense
of the extraordinary plurality of
positions it's almost as though every
single Western Marxist has to develop an
other approach
in this kind of constant search for
something that's new but the question of
creativity perhaps I'll put it this way
that there is a strong emphasis on
what's known as the basic principles of
artism and is one of the sub-disciplines
of the academic discipline of Marxism
and the need to solve concrete problems
in light of those basic principles now
when you first hear that you might think
all the basic principles would be fixed
they come from The Works of Marx and
Ingalls perhaps and then you in light or
concrete situation develop new Solutions
no in process of solving problems you
actually find that the basic principles
themselves develop further so basic
principles relationship between force
and relations production base and
superstructure dialectical materials and
historical materialism Etc but they're
also now in a Chinese framework is a
socialist market economy is a basic
principle of Marxism for example so the
basic principles themselves also undergo
the process of development and and if
you like to say creativity where's the
creativity where does Marxism remain
the most valid approach as far as
Chinese analysis is concerned is
precisely by its ability to innovate and
keep up with the times and solve new
problems and later today and that
relates to questions of socialist
construction Economic Development
dealing with the next step in the
process after alleviating poverty
etc etc this is where and this is so
different intellectuals in the whole
Chinese tradition but especially in this
are not disengaged intellectuals you
might find one or two they're involved
in solving concrete problems and making
concrete proposals for solving problems
uh you you can't be a disengaged
intellectual uh in that framework and
that creates a whole new environment for
the way in which you work and engage
with with all sorts of things
let's pivot to the role of China and the
Contemporary world one of the things
that has come up in the workshop
including last week was the uh specific
forms of internationalism that China has
developed that one could and it'll be
interesting to kind of compare and
contrast to other moments in the history
of the global communist movement the
third international comes to mind or the
support for anti-colonial struggles in
the wake of World War II in particular
it seems that China's kind of
orientation at this point in time
overlaps but is also significantly
different in various ways and I'd like
to hear you in particular on the world
of Belton Road initiative as a kind of
global infrastructural project that
isn't only working with socialist
countries or even left-wing or
Progressive countries but works quite
ecumenically with many different
countries around the world it seems in
order to demonstrate the superiority of
socialist development in general and so
this has led me to wonder as well
whether or not there's a way in which
some of what China is doing is
demonstrating at the level of the
socioeconomic base the superiority of
socialism and if that might even be
primary to a kind of ideological war at
some level meaning that the ideology
will also follow the base that if people
see and experience
better forms of development they would
be much more likely to support it
ideologically so I've thrown a lot at
you you can take what element you want
but I'm curious how you'd understand
what China is doing internationally in
order to promote both its goals but also
the goals of socialism
uh let's begin with the international
relations one there's two levels of
actually the international relations uh
and this is something that has to be
managed because it's actually a
contradiction so China is um a country
now a major country and or nearly all
counts now the country with the largest
economy in the world contributes 30 to
the global economy does heavy lifting
etc etc and that framework it has to
deal with other countries as a country
as a state and has to carry on diplomacy
in that part I'll come back to that is
to ask how they engage in diplomacy the
second level of diplomacy is between
communist parties and workers parties
and there's the immense amount of
activity especially in the last five
years with the international Department
of the CPC many many delegations and
visits connections conferences and so on
and the role of ambassadors in in the
embassies and so in different countries
is actually to meet the leaders of
communist parties and so there's two
levels of international diplomacy taking
place now the question sometimes asks
why doesn't the CPC take on the
leadership of the world communist
movement as a historical reason for this
um that they had an immediate struggle
in the 1930s early 1930s where there was
a common turn appointed Central
Committee approved Central Committee of
the CPC and there was a conference in
Zuni on the beginning of the Long March
where there was a huge struggle because
it was felt the common term was
interfering with the process in China
and not actually being aware of the
concrete realities in China and it was a
circle around Marcy Dawn that was
elected to the Central Committee at the
zoo near conference and that's where you
start to get the emphasis on developing
Marxism in life of China's concrete
conditions so there's a historical
reason that they don't the CPC simply
will not engage in hegemony over smaller
communist parties around the world while
treatment was equals but not engaged in
internal problems with them that's also
part of a Chinese approach so that's the
first part of the answer or maybe I'll
keep the set one on the Belton Road
there's many many other projects out
China Corporation and so on the Shanghai
cooperation organization brics and now
the most important organizations in the
world actually are the Senpai
Corporation organization at brics uh you
can forget all the others there now
increasingly irrelevant I'll come back
to that as well because as far as China
is concerned the West is irrelevant now
um
how can we see the Belt Road yes it's
infrastructure very much focus on
infrastructure because this is the basis
it provides an alternative process for
the term broad term modernization
Chinese style modernization provides a
model for other developing countries who
have thus far failed or kept being kept
in a state of undevelopment or
underdevelopment but the way I think we
can perhaps see that is it's a
completely different form of the way
which a Soviet Union engage with
developing countries in the
anti-colonial struggle
and many many African countries still
remember their positive role in the
Soviet Union play in their anti-colonial
struggles there were problems and
contradictions and in a sense
China's primary relation has always been
with developing countries always been
primarily with developing countries
because they share a common history of
chronic poverty Colonial deprivation and
so on and so forth
what uh
it struck me when you said that China
thinks that the West is irrelevant and
maybe we should unpack that a little bit
more particularly because from the point
of view at least myself living primarily
in the Western World
um we seem to be moving more and more in
the direction of World War III uh
because of the imperialist powers
interest in halting China entirely
um China's obviously be playing a long
game uh for quite some time by becoming
a kind of production house for Global
capital and other such things and so I'm
curious now with the kind of increased
kind of strong positions that China's
taking on the global stage uh if you
could unpack this sentence a little bit
that they consider what's going on the
west they're relevant but then also what
from the Chinese perspective is going on
with this threat of World War III
all right so the first point I had a bit
of a sense of this before I got back to
Beijing they're simply not interested in
the West
people don't think much of the West uh
it doesn't show up in the newspapers the
antique sequence of the United States
might appear right down occasionally on
the newspaper page
um why because the growing consensus is
that the West has hit rock bottom it's
not in Decline it's hit rock bottom
and the manifestation of 50 years of
economic decline are now fragmentation
and so on has manifested itself in
political
disintegration social Division and so on
and I don't have to mention examples
they analyze these the West has said
rock bottom
they don't want as so many people in the
world
would like for many reasons which you
can find justifiable that the West would
disappear and collapse entirely they
would rather that the West actually
realizes the causes of it hitting rock
bottom and goes back into its tradition
to find alternative sources for Renewal
not law mongering and seeking hegemony
not chronic focus on the individual and
so on but alternative resources but by
the time the West finds renewal the
world would be a different place
in other words the real world is
elsewhere the important developments are
elsewhere and that's where China is
focused
as a way of framing this there's some
shorthand phrases which sum this up uh
and emits amount of research the first
one is qualitative change
or to spin it out the world is
experiencing changes unseen in a century
go back a century where were we
've done the Russian Revolution
the times are different the changes are
different but the qualitative change
underway is comparable
and China's playing a major role in
those changes but not the only one
the second one is a phrase
a new form of human civilization
now that is where there's a lot of
energy because in light of the fact that
the world is undergoing immense
qualitative changes
then there are significant risks
obviously of conflict but also immense
opportunities for what others might call
a multi-polar world but in a Chinese
framework it's a new form of human
civilization
is irrelevant but they're not afraid of
the West
do they expect Conflict for example over
Taiwan the short answer is no
why
times on China's side
it's framed in the west the time is
running out for China
that's actually not the case the window
of time for operatives like the United
States to force a conflict over Taiwan
is either closing very fast or closed
already
times on China's side they don't expect
a conflict but if there is one they'll
father
so that's the framework so they're not
afraid of the West they don't expect War
but they're ready for war and one reason
for this is the terminology of a new
Cold War
very specific terminology in China it is
outdated Cold War thinking
in other words the West cannot innovate
it's purely at the level of thought of
rhetoric there's no economic foundation
for it
for example
2022 was the best year for trade between
China and the United States there's no
economic Foundation 2023 and there's all
this stuff is going on in Australia will
be a bumpy year for China Australian
trade so that's the framework which may
be surprising for some of you that is
actually part of the debates they're
sort of looking elsewhere the real
developments are elsewhere and yes the
West is Irrelevant in the sense that
it's hit rock bottom and really can't
in reality do much I want to say
something about but I'll come back how
they assess International leaders that's
also very interesting okay
because he's a geriatric
it was a very I'll go back to this um uh
experience I had 2012. I was at the um
Nishan forum and Confucius person place
in full and there was an 1870 year old
American Adventure even evangelist there
a friend of Billy Graham who got up and
spoke and talked about how he's hoping
that China would become in the 21st
century world leader for the Christian
faith and then lots of people went up to
him afterwards a lot of photographs with
him and I said why are you doing this he
spoke complete rubbish I said well we
respect all people but we know he's
speaking complete rubbish because he's
brain score
foreign
part of this year a number of visitors
now the way in which this approach works
when it goes back Millennia it's
assessed in terms of competence and
experience
and not in terms of political
orientation this may have its faults
so for example
The Driven foreign minister what's the
name can uh
yes she arrived had a very uh grilling
press conference in a way that Jamaica
elsewhere and she was judged by
comparison with Uncle America as utterly
inexperienced and incompetent
they also see blinken as basically
incompetence
they see Schultz the German Chancellor
as cunning but not competent
most much attention was given to macron
which might surprise you
because they see him potentially as a
competent leader they don't agree with
what he's doing but he's competent
there's an example of how
internationally go from work talks in
Lula's visit because he's an old friend
but also as seen as competent was given
much attention and so on so there's an
example of how leaders are assessed in
their engagement when they come to China
and a lot of commit to China the last
question then we'll open it up
given the fact that time is uh running
out or has already run out one concern I
know that a lot of people on the west
have is that the only option on the part
of the leading Imperials power is war or
and more war and clearly there's been a
very serious pivot to that by the proxy
war in Ukraine and aiming for ultimately
a war against China that certainly
doesn't look winnable on the part of the
west but a concern is whether or not
they'd rather kind of burn it down than
anything else and so I'm curious on
China's front about the concerns with
just defense obviously if China and also
Global defense and what that means and
what that looks like
um
perhaps you can look at it this way and
this comes actually out of dialectical
materialist approach when Chinese
analysts look for example at the United
States they look at internal
contradictions
and there are many internal
contradictions and they're not solved
they just kick down the road a bit uh
the image that's used sometimes is like
a volcano
so a volcano has eruption small
eruptions from time to time and they can
be managed in certain ways but at one
point the volcano is going to blow its
top and that's what they're concerned
about with the United States that it
will blow its top internally and this
will have profound ramifications
internationally
that's what the policy workers are
working very hard at in trying to ensure
that China is not too badly affected
should that happen or rather as they
anticipate unless there is some
significant work done the volcano blows
has stopped
well that's an intense uh moment to open
up for questions I can take a stack and
obviously anyone online Sabrina I see
you already have your hand up so we can
start out with you and Rhys and just
signal me in the room uh otherwise but
go ahead Sabrina and start us out
hi I really really enjoyed this thank
you
um
I
options
um one I kind of just want to ask if you
can expand a little bit more on Mal's
contemporary relevance to China
um
like in terms of like what's the
relevance of maoism versus Mao
um and uh the other is uh China's uh
ecological project
um
you know being trained by someone who is
a Marxist ecologist John belney Foster
uh I constantly think of his lectures on
technological solutions to ecological
problems are not sufficient in terms of
the in terms of global insurance
transformation and thinking in terms of
the global totality and the certain
ecological risks as he puts it
um and you said that trying time is on
China's side but I'm I want you to kind
of think I guess I kind of want to think
through that in terms of the ecological
Devastation that has already happened
um because you know what we're dealing
with is like a very Global phenomenon as
I as I already put it and I guess I just
want to expand on your idea of time in
terms of geological time
Greece
hi and thank you so much for your talk
um my question actually ended up being
basically the same as Sabrina's second
question excuse me second question so
yeah could you say a little bit more
about uh this problem of ecological time
and uh to what extent is time on China's
side in the bigger picture in the
ecological uh sphere when it seems that
time is limited for all of us um a
global scale to resolve these kinds of
problems what kinds of concrete steps is
China taking what are the outcomes and
tendencies of those kinds of steps
towards solving this ecological problem
in a way that could actually combat the
problems that are continuing to be
reproduced for example on the side of
U.S imperialism
great and why don't we go ahead with
Emma Marshall online
um Hello thank you I just had a question
about
um in Christina's piece for later in the
week she situates you as opposed to her
as finding yourself situated in a
Christian communist tradition and I
wonder if you wanted to
I wonder if you could say maybe what
that means in terms of your scholarship
and to relate it to China maybe very
tenuously related to China
um I I have a theology degree I was at a
Divinity School and I studied religion
now at a secular program and it seems to
be the kind of accepted assumption that
the situation in xinjiang with the
alleged weaker genocide is a
um a very clear and the very clear case
of State secularism
um and it's uh I guess kind of like used
to associate Marxism with a kind of
atheism and that's like nope it's
religious freedom uh and so I'm
wondering if like if those things your
kind of Christian communism and that
situation can be connected at all or
maybe they're just very two separate
questions but um how we ought to
approach
um the lab of the weaker genocide from a
religious
um or if at all if we should approach
from a religious uh Freedom kind of
question thank you
is that enough for you you want to know
how to start
okay let's start with that and we'll do
another round that's enough just uh yeah
um
yeah look out a very interesting uh two
questions I think the main one was a
question about ecological time
um
what's uh now uh John Bellamy Foster's
work has been now for 10 15 years deeply
studied in China a number of other
uh sort of I guess you'd say ecological
marxists have been studied but Fosters
has had the most traction
and a lot of and fosters done a number
of interviews now as well with uh with
Chinese Scholars about it because it has
a very concrete relevance obviously uh
what they appreciate about it is that
it's thoroughly rooted in a Marxist
materialist approach and that it's
something you don't have to bring into
Marxism that it's actually already in
the material The Works of marks and
angles and especially the way in which
Foster in this curious narrative in
Western Marxism where Ingalls was
basically cut out as bringing people's
back in in a Chinese situation Eagles
has always been part of it and the core
journal and the Sciences is called
research on dialectics of nature but
let's let's um perhaps I can give a
couple of personal examples of this um
the four years ago I already started
well if I go back earlier actually when
I first went to Beijing in 2009 and
people used to joke about out the
previous year 2008 they actually were
able to see the sun in the sky for a bit
because you know cars were limited the
industries were closed for the Olympics
but 2009 was back to normal couldn't see
the sun couldn't see the sky it was
clearly you couldn't see the sun
2019 I began a series of long hikes
through Beijing 15 20 kilometers every
time and I started to notice
more and more areas the waters were
clear and water life was returning
there was an intense program that had
been continuing for some time he began
to notice at a planting Greenery trees
everywhere every possible place when I
returned to China in April this year I
was thoroughly astounded
Beijing has in a sense become a Garden
City
and it's it's extraordinary to think
that a city with that population would
have so much Greenery around but also
develop policies in other parts of trump
and other cities in China where they
become water sinks where they capture
all of the water the rainfall and it
goes into the ecosystem and then
obviously generates uh things like that
and develop this right across China I've
also been to shitsang also known as
Tibet and you don't hear much about it
but the extraordinary projects there in
ecological development for example
uh so it lasts a 3 600 meters above sea
level the mountains around Lars are rise
to over four thousand meters they're
currently in the process of and
historically the mountains around Lars
have been bare of trees
they're currently a project is to have
the mountains covered in Forest within
10 years they've been doing this already
14 years but how does this actually
influence uh aspects around the globe
um now the assessment is and they're
quite cyber about it that they've still
got a way to go first of all to read
zero emissions
and then provide models for um for
elsewhere but that's only the first step
it's a bit like poverty alleviation that
the project of ecological civilization
is to begin a much more comprehensive
process of environmental restoration
but I'd also like to address here which
may be a topic for some debate the
the
long-standing argument over the
relationship between let's say economic
growth
and environmental preservation
protection and not uncommon argument
that economic growth is damaging to the
environment that it can't continue the
way it is
um if we shift that into a situation of
a country suffering chronic poverty
that becomes a whole other question
but one of the arguments a strong
argument is China that is you actually
cannot undertake competent or
comprehensive Environmental Protection
and actually environmental restoration
without a strong economic base
the two are closely related to one
another
um anyway I'll leave that question there
there's much more we can do just go on
to the question of Christian communism
although I think we need to the question
of xinjiang and the wagor that's typical
anti-communist atrocity propaganda
I'll leave that the population in
xinjiang has been growing and continues
to grow but I want to give an example of
the role of religion in China there are
uh Islam the obviously Buddhism is the
oldest but Islam Christianity and so on
um I occasionally
um attend a local church radio Church it
belongs at the three cell patriotic
movement bad translations Protestant
church with 20 million members the Roman
Catholics got 10 million members uh
Freddie and church has four services on
a Sunday in Chinese the church seats 1
000 people but if you join it online via
the WeChat Channel there's usually over
900 other people who are attending the
worship service so On Any Sunday at this
one Church in Beijing you get anywhere
from let's say roughly 7 000 people
attending worship and it's perfectly
legal for me to do so and the whole
framework is that the religions in China
should work to contribute to the
construction of Socialism or Chinese
characteristics
so I could say more on that but
let's do another round I think we'll
start with Joel and go around and Signal
me if you hear anyone
oh yeah of course
thank you very much
uh actually my my question that I
initially want to post uh Gabriel has
already uh brought a topic which is
about the language as a barrier and how
can we understand more uh Chinese
marxists and the development and I think
this is uh really a primal tool like
your
your biography that you learned language
to understand the culture and everything
that's ongoing different uh processes
and social process I think it's really
important also because of the different
countries and and learning different
languages I have experienced this a
little bit myself so actually uh have
been studying China for the for the last
years this is as a way to to develop or
to to rest from another perspective more
accept and a form of concrete socialists
and communist society
and since Gabriel has already posed my
question in that way I would like to
make a suggestion if maybe uh you and
Ken could would provide us a sort of a
Chinese body of literature so we could
uh
so we could try to over the years inform
ourselves and go direct to the source
because for instance even though I read
different many Western Scholars and
people who I respect is different than
going to the source and then there's the
question of translation of course for
instance uh I'm fluent in German and I
read a lot of German English
translations of Marx and Etc and I think
they're the deplorable in many aspects
from really important publishing house
so in the end I prefer to to go the
source breed myself and I made the
translation myself I could give some
examples but there's no time or not made
doesn't matter but the point is about
Chinese I couldn't even access in the
slightest if a translation is good or
bad so this my suggestion is body of
literature in the sense of Scholars from
from Chinese Scholars and uh with good
translations yeah thank you
yeah
um the first one was also a question for
me
sorry I didn't know why I forgot that um
yeah that was also my question so it was
wondering if you could mention some of
them
the journals or whatever we can
translate it and in some cases also when
it is more complex how we can access
them because I saw you mentioned some of
your book but one of them I just
couldn't find in any way like I've done
quite some extensive Googling which I'd
say I'm pretty good at normally but I
got nowhere yeah
um so that's that's one
um the second one is I was wondering
um about the involvement with the
Communist Party of Australia and how
your research shapes it and vice versa
um
I guess one part in relation to you and
the second one just out of more general
interest
um the CBS
standing within Australian Society like
how is yeah where is it at
I would do Jake steps so thanks very
much I think Grant and then we'll come
back
yes hello yeah thank you so much um I
had a I guess a question that stemmed
from the reading we did of your your
summary of your book so uh kind of a
thing that's I've been uh ruminating on
especially since last week uh with a
with hand last week
um is our characterization of socialism
um because we can definitely see that
China's on the Socialist path and I I
often get confused between the
self-titlement of of we are a socialist
State
um and then yes of course we're going to
have
a combination of market and State
Control uh
most production
um but then at the end uh end of your
summary we say we we got to the point
where what's the goal well the goal is
eventually the communism
um and then how so so how are you going
to separate um what we're doing now uh
from what would communism be
um especially uh I I'm concerned about
the straying from a critique of we need
to change the mode of production
um and and that has typically been what
has differentiated in socialists
um and especially I'm thinking of taking
this back to the to the states of
socialists want to State uh have a line
of differentiation from social Democrats
especially and maybe just one more yeah

I focus on
socialism so I was really interested in
what you were saying about the Chinese
engagement with tradition
um and I'm interested in the application
of the creative methods that are being
developed in China to
contingents religious Traditions like
Islam
um and you know you had mentioned this
earlier but part of what socialism with
Chinese characteristics seems to mean is
intolerance and respect for religious
ways of life and thinking at the same
time it seems that there have been
instances of reactionary forces and
Western imperialists taking advantage of
religious groups in China when you look
at the early 20th century
Evangelical American groups in China the
rumors about bigger internment
immolations into that in the way that
that's been picked around in the western
media so I'm wondering if you can speak
a little bit more to how China has
managed to balance pluralistic religious
space while continuing reactionary
forces
okay
right
um just uh I'll go through the questions
in sequence thank you they're very good
questions and Gabriel did warn me that
the the questions usually have quite a
bit of warmth to them which which I
appreciate very much thank you as far as
platforms uh for material to be
available
um I'll go back there for about 10 years
I've been a phrase to tell China's story
well to the world
and the
maybe it was conversation that we put it
this way conversation I was having with
an old friend of mine and he he looked
at the socialism with Chinese
characteristics book and he said why did
you write that it's nothing new in there
for Chinese Scholars
and I said well it's not for Chinese
Scholars I'm trying to touch on this
story well
um so there's been a lot of progress but
there's still a fair bit to go and
there's an awareness of that and one
thing we're doing and I'm afraid is just
the beginning is where actually in the
process of establishing a um a Center
International Research Center for
Chinese Marxism
and this will be a bilingual Center and
it will have a whole range of projects
we want to develop a masters and
doctoral program in English on Chinese
Marxism for students currently there's
quite a few coming to China but they
have to learn Chinese first
we also have a series of conferences
planned the first one in November later
this year pilot project approach which
the Chinese approach you begin small see
how it goes fix up your problems move to
a bigger platform but one of the things
we want to do is develop a publishing
arm who will work with the established
publishing but focus on translating
providing a translation the best
material that we can assess with Chinese
Scholars advising us on what should be
translated apart from their own work
and one of the one of the journals that
I'm suggesting is actually called a
simply Chinese Marxism at Treasure House
of knowledge
and getting that working so that
actually can be a provision now I know
that's in the future there are currently
resources in different parts in Canada
and perhaps sort of talk a bit more
about what to uh where to point people
for without sort of being overwhelmed
with heaps and heaps of material on what
can actually provide some insights into
that the second question about my
involvement in the Communist Party of
Australia yes
it's a party with a complex history it
used to have in the 60s and 70s
significant impact in Australia it's had
a long history of of Union involvement
and as the party is growing again
significantly which is a reflection of
situation in Australia of course it is
increasing its Union presence however it
still doesn't have the
density of involvement to have a
significant influence accepted as in a
number of areas I'm as far as I know the
only University intellectual in the
Communist Party of Australia so my
limited skill set I do try and make
those available where possible with time
so I'm on the editorial board of the
Australian Marxist review for example
and when I was in Australia for a year
last year I was involved in
re-establishing the hunter branches
north of Sydney where
to do that
now the question if I've got it
correctly on the relationship between
socialism and communism
now the
the principle the position in China is a
child is still in the primary stage of
socialism
so it's a long long way to go and you
probably know that they take a Long View
on these things there's a nice anecdote
that soon after 1949 I can't remember
whether it was in Beijing or in Paris
the Joe and I was asked after the
liberation of China in 1949 as to what
do you think is the effect of the the
French Revolution on the world and
especially in China and John live said
it's too soon to tell
we can really there's a good phrase from
Anatolia nacharsky I'm talking about the
Soviet Union and all of the problems it
faced he said they were setting out on a
road on which no one had traveled before
and now of course we have more than 100
years of experience
but all we can do is in a sense discuss
this in terms of broad principles it
seems to me for example an important one
is socialism since the 1930s in the
Soviet Union is defined as from each
according to ability to each according
to work
communism is defined as from each
according to ability to each according
to need
now they're short
descriptions but they have a wealth of
detail about them what does that mean
economically what does that mean
socially what does that mean culturally
I mentioned earlier and this is a great
emphasis of Deng Xiaoping
that if you're not able to move into a
communist mode of production unless you
have a significant and higher level of
common prosperity in order to enable
that to take place that means the task
of socialism with all the problems or
contradictions is to work to that level
of common prosperity and that is the
project in China today common Prosperity
yeah
now the question of traditions religions
and so on
um
and I
I think I'd like to answer this in
um a question of minority nationalities
we usually use the term ethnic groups
but the term that comes out of Russian
and then in China
is better translated as nationality
and
there's a profound difference between
the development of the capitalist State
and socialist governance in the sense
that
minorities minority nationalities from
the very beginning about a constant
needs revision and updating are included
within the structures of governance
Soviet Union had a Soviet of
nationalities which had legislative
power and China members of the
nationalities can be elected to the
people's Congress as five levels but
they're represented in the Chinese
people's political consultative
conference
and so you have a democratic system
which has both electoral and
consultative processes that take place
to give you an example in Tibet or
song as it's known in the last two
elections to the local people's
congresses
which are direct elections deal with
local issues the voter participation and
everyone over at 18 can vote and
candidates can be put forward was over
90 percent
in the elections the people's congresses
and then you also get representation in
the consultative conferences in other
words the minorities are represented
within the structures of governance this
can lead to problems but that leads to a
whole new approach why because some of
the minorities are identified primarily
in terms of religion
minority
which is actually historically developed
by immigration from Central Asia and so
on over the long period of time from the
tongue University to the Song Dynasty
became over time a distinct identity a
minority nationality in China which is
identified by its adherence to Islam
that's its primary identification many
of the smaller minorities in the south
in unan and because of the influence
Hong Kong have adopted forms of
Christianity or other forms of religion
and that's quite strong
I've been on a research field trip to
Tibet where she'd sung in May and one
aspect of course was the role of
Buddhism
in
that part of China
and it's very interesting to to notice
immediately that you can't separate
religion out from the cultural framework
the religion is very much interwoman
with the whole cultural framework in
shinsang which is part of the whole of
China's cultural diversity
we of course went to different places we
went from the Tyler Palace to the museum
for the liberation of the Surfs but we
also went to the drochheim temple in
lhasa where there is a statue of the
Buddha which was brought by and princess
from the tongue biomski Way Way Back
now there are about 30 monks inside I
bought myself a properly prayer wheel
which I was immediately told not to turn
clockwise because that would enhance my
my sins anti-clockwise
um
and there were many many people present
very very interesting to note the
observance at this particular statue of
the Buddha
so the local people did a fairly minimal
observance which was appropriate and who
gave the most elaborate
I think wiping clothes on the sides of
things and so on it was the Forum one or
two foreigners who were present and not
Tibetans
so people you know it's part of the
whole way of cultural thinking and so on
so it it is again this comprehensive
approach you can't separate religion out
from a particular cultural identity and
the best example is the way Buddhism has
become very much part of Chinese culture
but in the wider framework so there's
many things we could say about that but
I think that's one a good way to focus
on and focus on the role and place of
minority nationalities and Royal
religions among those
great there's a series of questions
online so we'll start with Robert
yeah
thank you
um can you hear me
hello hello yes yes yes we can okay good
um so I'm I'm actually calling in from
Brazil
um and in that context
I am a black American living in Brazil I
lived here for 25 years
so the research that I'm conducting is
at the the Nexus of Marx and Duluth
marketing
and in that context
um I want to pin the name that Gabrielle
mentioned the first day
which is Reinhardt Gellen
not a lot of people know who he is
but the issue of
sub-histories the issue of histories
that are Unwritten
or at least not communicated to the
mainstream
and how those histories interact
basically histories that are in a race
or histories that are suppressed how
that interacts with historical
materialism is is kind of the framework
of my question so my question has to do
with one after reading your concise guy
which is the only thing of yours that I
have read
um I didn't see anything in there
particularly focused on women
and I'd like to you to address the issue
of women in the context of
the revolution that at least
theoretically was taking place in China
um and then secondarily but notice
importantly there is an official story
circulating in the West
that is somewhat schizophrenic with
respect to covet because the the story
in the in the West
is that there was either quote unquote
an official story of a lab leak which
means it was done by accident
or there's a story of also an accident
that took place at a potential Market in
Wuhan and I'd like you to talk about the
quote-unquote official stories
that are coming out of the Communist
party with respect to covet
thanks Juan Yoon
oh hello can you hear me yes we can
thanks
uh thanks for this speech
um my question is
period in China the Chinese government's
attitude towards
a European American is more likely
positive is more like work with them but
the attitude and she's period in China
exactly changed to the opposite side the
government thoughts you were more likely
rivals or enemies
which political
economic cultural reasons do you think
that leaves the government
actually changes Japanese
and what do you think is the turning
point of that attitude change thank you
yes
um yeah thank you for your talk doctor
I thought that one of the most
interesting chapters in your book was
the third chapter on the contradiction
analysis but it's also
um in the most difficult for me to
really wrap my head around so
um one thing that I thought was
interesting in particular was your
discussion about
contradictions and antagonisms and how
under socialism contradictions remain
but they do not at least don't have to
be antagonistic even if they can
sometimes we come into antagonistic so
my question is um could you uh explain a
little bit more about uh contradiction
analysis and maybe how we might use
dialectics in our in our intellectual
work in our research and maybe also
touch on that specific topic of how
contradictions under socialism are
different than contradictions under
capitalism or other class Society thank
you
great thanks
to me yeah
all right
interesting set of questions thank you
um
where to begin all right history is
outside the mainstream
and begin with that one
and the whole covid-19 uh narrative if
you like
um there's three shorthand phrases that
are used in China for this one is the
China collapse Theory and this has been
propagated non-stop since 1949 to get
all sorts of versions of this one but
China's at the moment of imminent
collapse politically economically and so
on and so forth the second one is the
China threat theory that China is a
great threat to the world well it's
great threat to maybe one or two
in their own minds and the third one is
the China responsibility Theory
that well they're a bit torn they're not
sure whether to blame Russia or China
for everything
the response from a Chinese perspective
is
you need to look at your own problems
analyze your own contradictions
you need to look at actually what is
going on internally if you're going to
keep blaming someone else
then you're not going to get anywhere
you're not going to get anywhere I
haven't directly answered that but it's
a good example of the China
responsibility Theory and we have we
were you know well we if you're in one
of the few Western countries of the
world you're pumped full of all of this
sort of stuff and so on look over there
look over there
but the response is the other one of
course is they've always said science
will provide the answer
that's the bottom line approach science
will provide the answer and it may take
some time
um the question very interesting
question about the turning point
or working with Western countries to
opposing them I
my sense of this is that it's fallen
asleep there was an assumption in
Western countries that China would
follow they thought China was on the
capitalist Road and that it was logical
that China would adopt some form of
capitalist liberal democracy in the
process that was extremely lazy uh the
2012 Congress CBC National Congress
where Xi Jinping was elected General
Secretary
um if you'd known XI jinping's
background you would have known that he
was right from the beginning of his
debut series about Marxism but it was
actually at the 19th Congress and I was
present in Beijing
the three hour plus speech to which I
listened
which seemed to be the moment when the
China observers in Western Country said
oh my God
China is serious about Marxism
what do we do
and they suddenly woke up
however and so you get all this sort of
propaganda and stuff like that that you
know when you for example you ask people
about high-speed trains oh yes Japan is
high-speed Trends yes well the standard
trains in China if you've ever been
there now right across the country for
tens of thousands of kilometers are the
older 300 kilometer an hour Harmony
trains
they're now rolling out the new ones the
fusion China 350. you don't hear about
that you don't know about that unless
you're getting into plenty of resources
for it but
um but I actually like to answer this
beginning with an anecdote and it was a
sense I had on the flight from Beijing
to Copenhagen uh about 10 days ago and
there's a daily flight the flight was
full
and about 30 percent of people were from
Scandinavian countries I sat next to a
Swedish businessman who'd been living in
China for 10 years and were they a
Swedish business collaborating with
Chinese
colleagues in expanding their business
framework and he said we have no time
for the politicians they don't know what
they're talking about when I came out at
the airport in Copenhagen there were a
number of Danish Representatives
welcoming Chinese
Enterprise representative so we're going
to work with Danish companies
in Australia it's the same
any serious business wants to deepened
or begin its engagement in China because
this is simply good for the bottom line
in other words if we apply Marx's
contradiction analysis the economic base
even in Western countries is way in
front
of the politicians
on the economic level they're looking to
deepen engagement with China
in Germany there's such a distance
between the political or not even Elites
anymore and educational institutions
technological development and Industry
they've got a 50-year history of
development and universities which is
where our work are actually increasing
their engagement with China
this is where the real activity is
taking place so we've got an immense
contradiction where the superstructure
at the political level
is way behind what's actually happening
at the economic level
so all of this China bashing China
throughout China responsibility
etc etc is at the political level of
political rhetoric at a economic
material base level it's not having an
impact and the only time you hear from
these people involved in economic
activity is when it interferes with
their core interests then they'll make a
noise but otherwise they ignore what the
politicians are saying and get on with
what they're doing that seems to be the
reality or is the reality at the moment
so you can look if you look at the sort
of Western sources about you know China
this China China so on you need to look
elsewhere to find out what's actually
happening I think contradiction analysis
where was that question uh sorry yes yes
yes no actually
um
shorthand correct yes
in the project of constructing socialism
they're even more comprehensions
even more contradictions that need to be
dealt with
and there's a very important history
with this in the sense that first of all
and this is what blocked out of Western
Marxism the development of marxist
approaches dialectical and historic
materialism Soviet Union reached a
significant maturity in the 1930s
whole series of books were produced
which
usually influenced my own sense of
dismissed and I went back to read them
because I was actually reading Mao
zedong's notes on translations of these
Works was after the Long March they
arrived in and they were able to engage
in in-depth study research groups
publication translation and the circles
and the leadership and everywhere in the
Sydney sea were really studying Marx's
philosophy very very deeply and that's
where you start to get the development
of contradiction analysis taking place
you get this contradictions are
Universal
contradictions as a primary
contradiction and secondary
contradictions which is core policy
issue these days in identifying the
primary contradiction which influences
so many other things
and so on but that period is absolutely
vital and and okay a series of lectures
at the party schools have took place on
dialectical material and based on this
material and out of that two essays were
published on practice was published
basically as he was from the lectures
but on contradiction is absolutely
fascinating because he sweated on that
in the 1950s
why because they're in the first decade
after liberation of China in 1949 and he
was a concrete realization of
contradictions under socialism so a lot
of it's revised and it was actually he
sat on it for so long that in the first
edition of selected works it had to
appear in the second volume
at the same time there was another
important essay on correctly handling
contradictions among the people the two
have to be read together and these two
essays in a sense in the 20th century
are the most important tips on the
development of dialectical approaches
the question of non-antagonistic
contradictions that's a big question how
do I deal with it briefly
in principle
contradiction should be not antagonistic
on the Socialist path however there's
always a risk that they can become
antagonistic
and this is the point of the essay on
correctly handy contradictions among the
people that they need to be managed
quite carefully
let's come back to the covert question
just out of interest to you this is
where contradiction analysis also
Instagram if you like
um
you probably came across and you're
probably entirely sick of it they've
been a western context at least they
said well either the economy or
you know pandemic measures and we can't
hobble the economy for any longer we
need to let the economy you know and so
you need to this that and the other okay
so what's the Chinese approach it's
managing the contradiction between the
two so that you have adequate medical
protection and you ensure economic
activity at the same time this is a
classic recent example of how
contradiction analysis works on the
ground in policy and in how you deal
with the measures and so on I've said
more than enough so more questions
there was the question on women as well
briefly and then yeah yeah yeah yeah no
there's nothing sorry there's nothing
much in that particular part of it
um I
it goes way back I just give some
anecdotes on this
um there's a few different things and
this is where managing traditional
cultural assumptions and the current
framework I'll just give three small
examples the first of all is right from
say the 50s and on there's about a 50
representation of women and men in
engineering
and disco this is a very practical
realization of what's going on one of
the other unexpected consequences of the
one child policy
is that it
in many respects as an analyst point out
in many respects has been one of the
most effective ways of ensuring when
there was a single
um
uh that the child was actually a girl a
woman that that became in equal status
among men this was an unwanted
consequence if you like off the one
child policy that's another policy
aspect that takes place the third one is
despite all of the ways in which it
represented my experience is that people
are extremely Direct
let's say what's on their mind and say
directly to you and this applies very
much also to men and women at the same
time of course if you look at the CPC
Holland Bureau it's all men and the way
you pick the next gen or secretary is
the one who is about 60. I can tell you
who it is if you want
so um
that's something that is
my senses are not qualified to speak on
it so I won't say much more then it's
something that is very much a work in
progress
great so there's a ton of questions I'm
not sure we'll get to all of them but we
can start here
on the left go ahead and then we'll work
around
I believe you you had a question and you
and
uh I'm forgetting your name right now
remind me yeah
um some questions less about China more
about the west and the chapter you've
had a very interesting diagram with two
trees where you compare like the Chinese
system and the Western system and you
put identity Politics on the top of the
western tree
you know there's detrimental uh thing of
the West and I was wondering uh
um just what do you mean by that it
wasn't fully clear to me
okay and then I think was it Lawrence I
know there were some hands back there or
go ahead go ahead
uh yeah Chris thank you so much for your
for your wonderful work I really

um I actually had a question going back
to the let's say superstructure which is
my special field and the question of
cultural products or cultural production
at large
um I mean the the early Soviet Union as
you mentioned Luna chovsky a couple of
times uh we developed this as a very
there's a fundamental element of of
itself internal
um building internal coherence of
cohesion uh fuel cultural production
um Cinema literature the Arts and and
everything is part of this
it was but it was also part of external
visibility this is the early Soviet
Cinema of the 20s and 30s was a massive
sort of uh export uh

commodity that uh that um that improved
or raised the attractiveness of the
Soviet Socialist model abroad the
cultural revolution you have this
stranger we've talked about this a bit
with the canal because we have this a
strange level of attractiveness almost
complete exaggerated
fetishization of of the cultural
revolution and its solids artistic
usually not film and that's inspired but
but it's artistic uh sort of output
which then develops in especially France
and other countries to create sort of
weird hybrid reforms and with
contemporary China even though of course
Chinese artists produce
massively important works on the on the
global stage uh they win the writers
with Nobel prizes like oyan
filmmakers win prices all over the world
and festivals the like or or
on being very important eventually
filmmaker or or TLD I think one of the
golden bear in Berlin but it always
seems to me that they they are not taken
as a representation of China they get
these prices despite being Chinese
despite being
working and living in in a socialist
society so this there seems to be hardly
this strange disconnect between cultural
production coming out of China which
which receives lots of attention in in
in the west and across the world but
it's it's always disconnected from
what's actually going on in China none
of these filmmakers is actually
considered as a
somewhat contribute into a certain
socialist culture or
political culture or having any ideology
they seem to be there seems to be an
imperative or a condition for Chinese
artists to reach the sex with successful
or visible abroad to be sort of as
distinctly a political or a or
non-ideological as possible a case of
one being the documentaries is a
specific example is usually read as sort
of at least uh providing a perspective
on the marginalized species of the
spaces of China as with the counter
narrative group of China agreed and so
on so but this this these are
closed not not properly dissident I mean
different
that's a different story the entire
Chinese dissident artist movement but
but how how does this where does this
come from like is it is it pure
censorship and then just accessibility
to Western markets that's reduce to a
political artists or or do you see any
Tendencies any parents that would that
would be actually affirmatively
socialist affirmatively revolutionary
artists with certain
you are from God emerging within China
that actually also shifts the
perspective on on the uh current Chinese
situation
great and there's another gecko I could
always be an amazing question I agree
um like I said it goes back to the issue
of translation I appreciate your being
here because you end up combining with
less
than the way that people you know hope
to do
um from the translation was also brought
up earlier about even within European
languages we had to deal with the very
frustrating ventilations that were at
the end maybe we should all begin to
unless they will if we ever to
understand okay so there's this problem
of the illusion of transparency that I
think is missed when translations are
just accepted and that when you're
talking about Chinese characteristics in
particular there's a sense in which
we've all went and got a sense that oh
we're talking about something we now
have to just label it and your
particular text that we looked at today
was really interesting because so much
of it was bringing out
rather subtle uh
Chinese terms that were quite debatable
about how to apply them and another
question into a particular the question
of whether you defined it in terms of
these particularly real life communities
and groups and individuals whether you
define them in nationality terms
ethnicity trips and then you have a
footnote saying a problem with both
ethnicity root is it brings up questions
of race and we want to avoid that but I
wonder even at that simple question
about minsu whether attempting to
explain the Chinese characteristics in
this particular case through Western
Historical
um
uh what is it Paradise do you want to
call it that whether that in fact is
really allowing us to get to understand
what was happening in China what is
happening especially when you started
discussing the difference between Japan
and the Hui I don't know if I pronounce
it right because that was a description
if I understood your analysis where
there was no Geographic centrality there
was dispersions throughout China and yet
we still want to call it something and
nationality I realized was defined in
your text which you see a social group
geographic location and certainly
understand that with the European
history but does China really offer a
good model for that or does China have
its own unique past that maybe we have
to find out what does it mean to make
that distinction and that maybe even the
term nationality it doesn't even come
closer
yeah that's uh thank you once again I'll
move through them uh sequentially again
so the question about is the on the two
trees with identity politics
um I think I could answer that very
briefly it's the aspect of individual
choice
that is tied up in Western countries so
much with that that is so much part of
the liberal framework that is seen as
problematic it's not the lived concrete
experience of people that's in question
here so that's that's just on that one
um
the question of the superstructure one
and I think there's three points I'd
like to make on that one the disconnect
you mentioned is actually quite common
uh you find in in Western countries
Synology
um
simply it was Chinese Marxism which to
my mind just provides completely
distorted uh view of what's what's going
on there's a certain Dimension it seems
to me of the reception within uh um
Frameworks and those were expert on this
that it is the individual Creator who is
in some sense a political so even if
someone comes out of a much more uh
conscious framework of that it will be
sort of deep politicized or sort of
washed out of it in some way but there's
there's other aspects to this that are
worth considering in
in answering this the first one is
there's always a sense and the term used
here is spiritual life
and spiritual life is not a religious
sense it refers to the role the whole
cultural framework of developing a
collective and individual identity
and that this is absolutely crucial for
what's called a better life it's not
just economic it's not just social but
it's a spiritual life which includes
artistic production literary production
and the importance of those
a second part of my answer concerns
debates uh really five or ten years ago
on the question of cultural confidence
and there was a growing sense that
China's obvious economic prowess
and increasingly stepping onto the
center of the world stage in terms of
global politics but that had a cultural
level that was lagging significantly
behind in that respect and that's what I
mentioned a little bit before there were
some debates as to whether though people
should try to if you like buy into a
sort of Western
discourse framework in order to do that
but the decision more clearly is know
that it was to find a way in in a sense
and this is a translational issue as
well where people can engage with with
Chinese Cultural Frameworks and
discourse Frameworks in a way that can
be understood but also enrich the other
Frameworks in which people operate
philosophers have been looking at this
one of them that I'd rather like from
Fudan universities
talks about the two ontologies and the
way in which they must be able to find
speak to one another even though they
come from very different backgrounds
so that's that's that's something that's
that's still on the way in a sense of
cultural confidence inside China there
is a robust sense of confidence in the
system in the theory in the culture and
so on and I think if I what I tend to
say is I look at the real world and what
I mean by the real world is developing
countries in the world
um Western countries comprise 14 of the
world's population
the rest of the world is 86 percent
and I think you'll find in many of those
contexts there's a much greater
engagement on these questions as an
aside to that sort of well no that's an
aside and I'll leave it because I get
off off the topic the third one is the
strong emphasis on the China model
what works in a Chinese context doesn't
necessarily work elsewhere but what
needs to happen and this is also a
cultural level
what needs to happen is that other
places in the world with distinct
cultural traditions
can find resources within their own
context to develop a model from their
own situation it's not one size fit all
so the very strong emphasis that it's a
model that people can study to see what
went wrong earlier what was successful
and so on in order to develop their own
that's moving on a little bit beyond the
question but I think it flows from your
particular question
the last question the continuing problem
of translation is a very important one
most of us I'm assuming translate all
the time
we know that translation is also in some
sense betrayal of the language
translated
um
you know we can use various ways to do
it on some of these core terms that I
like to consider you know the semantic
fields of key terms overlap but they
never meet and some things are lost in
the translation process and some things
are enhanced but in some cases a whole
new series of connotations arise that
were not expected in the process and you
asked particularly about the question of
minzoo
the technical term for ethnic group is
um now the the history behind means who
actually goes back to the Soviet Union
and the national question
and huge debates in Austria especially
also with the Austrian marxists and in
Russia at the time countries with
significant different groups within them
and it was very much called the national
question and it had different proposals
for how to solve the national question
within a socialist context
the the solution well the proposed
solution in the end of definition of a
nationality was not initially
territorial
but the tradition of developing A
History A language political structures
economic economy and psychological
Storehouse cultural Storehouse and so on
but then later on came to realize that
it doesn't have to be geographically
specific
and so initially in the 1950s a lot of
anthropologists went out into different
parts of China to study based on the
Soviet model and the common program to
identify nationalities and in some areas
it's fairly straightforward but even in
interview there are actually quite a
number of you know groups that are there
but they got into the mountains in
Yunnan and Sichuan and they they found
that in these parts in every Valley
people would identify themselves as
different from the people in the next
family
and they face this problem we're going
in with thousands upon thousands upon
thousands of these groups so in the end
there was a you know a kind of top-down
decision well the people in this area
because they do actually have
commonalities among them will become one
of these particular groups some of the
other groups have a much much longer
history that goes back
think even to the middle industry but
especially the team Dynasty that they
were identified much earlier and then
there was a continuity in that process
that was quite easier
but that translational issue has a
particular history that goes back More
Than A Century of debates and my sense
is that it got diverted in Western
discussions with Benedict Anderson's
useful But ultimately misleading work on
imagine communities
is a curious historical narrative where
nation became equated with State and
then you have Nations State as a
formulation and I remember talking with
some people from Russia and they thought
I was talking nonsense because of this
history of the Soviet Union just one
last comment on that because of the
influence over this Western sense menzu
and China has actually two meetings
primary meaning is a nationality in
terms of
the groups within a state and so the
Constitution
better translation is it's a
multi-national State more recently it's
translated as a multi-ethnic state so it
makes more sense in English to readers
um
so um yeah it's got a particular history
and I
I guess for reasons of that history I
tend to insist on the the translation of
nationality for that term but it needs
to be understood it's not the same as
the way it's obviously in the western
framework so that's
perhaps longer answer than I should have
given to that question but it is a very
interesting one
great we just have five minutes left
maybe there's uh this one last question
from online where it says that in your
piece and lecture you mentioned the wild
90s do you think these problems would
have been avoidable while maintaining
the market reforms and also was there
ever a true risk of the Betrayal of the
line in the 90s
yeah the wild non-g's yeah so give it a
brief summary of them
um
if we look at the development of that's
taken place since 1949 we can identify
two particular moments of profound and
exacerbated contradictions that arose in
the process the first one arose really
or he was arising in late 1960s but
especially in the 1970s and the efforts
of the cultural revolution were trying
to use a voluntary approach to overcome
those contradictions the more
dialectical responses reform and opening
up that was launched in 1978 however the
reform and opening up developed its own
series of profound contradictions which
became evident by the 90s and flowed
onto the early Decades of the 2000s but
what's really really interesting I
remember sort of identifying some of
these problems in a discussion at the
Academy of Marxism in inside the Chinese
Academy of social sciences and then
already the the the comment made to me
well actually the answer to that
question is not to wind back some of the
reforms but that they're not
systemic problems but they're problems
that it can actually be solved by
deepening reform
it's a thoroughly dialectical answer you
deepen reform as a way of solving
problems that are risen from reform
because now after 2012 that's actually
continuity discontinuity is actually not
as a new era so we're now into the third
phase if you like of those things so two
periods really late 60s 70s profound
contradictions wild 90s were they
unavoidable perhaps if you've been able
to go back and start again yes
but they happened
well on that note please join me in
thanking Roland



## Keywords:
