---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oOJ_7iHcORw
---

# Video
Rutger Bregman On The Fifteen Hour Work Week
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oOJ_7iHcORw)

## Transcript:

okay so let me just let me just restate
you've written that the welfare state
despite all the advances had deals with
the symptoms of our discontent as
opposed to the source of our discontent
just expand on that and explain what you
mean by that
sure well if we talk about something
like all Bertie I think the most
important thing we should recognize that
poverty is is not a lack of character
it's just a lack of cash look I go over
all the evidence we have from economics
from all sorts of experiments that
happened since the 70s let's show that
eradicating poverty by just giving
people money you know going at the root
of the problem and solving it with this
medicine called money works really
really well but so often what we're
doing in practice is that were you know
trying to do something about the
symptoms right we we invest in education
you know all these forces that are
supposed to help people make better
decisions that's not really solving the
real issue which is that poverty escape
a lack of cash and in so many cases we
should just hand out the salaries of the
people that are trying to help the poor
because the the relaxed risk on the
fours lives are the poor themselves I
think that they don't have the money
let's talk a little bit about the and
you give a considerable amount of at the
very least I mean data and evidence
let's talk about what you calm income
Canada which I think you know I think
maybe to a certain extent we've we've
talked about a little bit or touched on
in on this program but tell us about the
experiment in Canada and which I don't
think most people realize there was also
experiments in this country with with
simply paying poor people money so they
won't be poor yeah not many people know
that at the end of the sixties in the
United States almost everyone believed
at some form of guaranteed basic income
was going to be implemented you know
everyone was in favor of it from the
left to the right there was a
there was a letter in the New York Times
signed by a thousand economist who all
said you know we gotta end poverty in
this country and then at the in the
early 70s Richard Nixon of all people
said you know what if everyone's in
favor of this let's do it
it's a pretty bizarre history this bill
went through the House of
Representatives twice and it was only
killed in the Senate by Democrats not
because they didn't like the idea of
eradicating poverty but because they
wanted a higher basic income so yeah
this is a pretty fascinating history
it's it was also in this period that in
North America you had as much as five
big basic Incan experiments and indeed
one of them was as you mentioned in this
small town in Canada the minkum
experiment well tell us a little bit
about that experiment okay so this
started in 1974 a big experiment a town
where poverty was just completely
eradicated so as soon as you fell below
the poverty line your income would be
automatically chopped up now there were
lots of anthropologist and he call
economists and sociologists who all
moved into that sound to monitor the
effect and if they gathered a lot of
data you know they did a lot of
interviews for four years but after four
years there was a problem a new
government was voted into power and they
didn't really like the experiment you
know or the idea of just giving people
free money so what they did is they
canceled the whole thing and there was
no money left to analyze the results
there were two thousand boxes full of
data that had to be put away in the
archive and that basically everyone
forgot about it so 25 years pause until
a professor called Evelyn for Jay found
the records get the analysis and found
out that actually it was the future ket
and what I mean by huge success what do
I mean what is it what are the measures
that we're using to determine that okay
couple of things so in the first place a
lot of people worried that if you would
just give people free money that they'll
just stop working now this is simply not
true so in all the experiments you see
hardly any reduction in work hours and
if there's a little bit of a reduction
it is always compensated by people doing
more volunteers work or caring for the
children and things for the elderly so
that's not not something to worry about
and then lead to all the other positive
effects like health care costs went down
so the hospitalization rate in Dalton
they found that I was talking about drop
by as much as 8.5% crime winda it's
doing much better in school and so the
interesting thing here and this is
something that research is actually
found from a similar experiment in North
Carolina is that basic income can be an
investment that pays for itself in the
long run because the reductions in
health care costs and policing costs etc
are bigger than the cash crunch
themselves so yeah it doesn't it doesn't
really matter if you whether you're
left-wing or right-wing I always say
that if you don't have a heart and at
least you have the wallet it makes
financial sense as well and what uh I
mean one of the in and I want to touch
on in just a moment some of the
fascinating history about Nixon because
that the in addition to the Democrats
wanting more there was another narrative
that got developed out of that time
inadvertently by Nixon you right and I
want to touch on that in a moment
but but in terms of the policy itself to
what extent though and and this has been
to the extent that I've heard any
critiques of of a ubi from the left it
has been a concern of the politics that
in some way we saw with dolphine which
is that you could you know folks like
Milton Friedman wanted to institute a
ubi or you know good guaranteed basic
income and as a as a replacement for
other forms of of support for people
living in poverty and the concern is is
that if you put all the eggs in that one
basket the ability of that basket to
shrink depending on the the political
winds is difficult well you know I
really see basic income as a directional
thought
and there are many many different
versions of basic income at are you
exciting and you know hopeful and some
of them are disagree with that idea you
know you have this libertarian version
of basic income which is all about you
know getting rid of the welfare state as
we have it now and just supplanting it
with one small cash grant and they'll
get me wrong I think that would be a
horrible idea I mean I'm from Holland I
know that universal health care is a
pretty great thing and public education
is also a pretty great thing so a
guaranteed basic income would really be
up Lamont you know it would be the
crowning achievement of social democracy
so yeah it said the devil's in the
details there it's important to look at
that okay and so tell us about what
Nixon did I mean it was fascinating the
idea that he wanted to be the
conservative who makes this sort of like
highly progressive leap forward but in
his rhetoric he ended up sort of
creating another monster yeah well it's
a good example but you know if you zoom
out a little bit and look at the broad
back span of history you just realize
that it's really ideas that matter in
the long run right so it's almost it's
really hard to imagine right now that
the early seventies it was this
conservative president almost
implementing this seemingly radical
progressive idea now what happened in
that process in the 70s is that it's a
pretty bizarre and complicated history
but to summarize it quite quickly is
that Nixon hear something about a report
of a sort of base to me basic income is
like experiment that happened in the
early 19th century actually in England
where supposedly they had some kind of
basic income that didn't work at all and
that that sort of convinced him to
change his language so he started used
the language of workfare you know as
opposed to welfare and he started
talking a lot about the lazy poor and
the lazy you know people were out of job
and you know that was later taken up by
Reagan as well and then we moved into a
totally different era what I've learned
from all this is that
history is not governed by big laws and
often it's not governed by you know the
best of interests either but
coincidences matter a lot and I did as
well so he looks at speen Hamlin in in
England in England and thinks that work
fair is going to be the easiest way to
get this guaranteed basic income in and
it ends up it ends up although we get
from that is this notion of the premise
of work fair that you need to motivate
people to work let's talk about your
other your your other proposal and that
comes from in part I guess maybe the
Jetsons in part from Bertrand Russell
the idea of a 15 hour workweek
explain that to us okay so this idea it
basically goes back to the famous
British economist John Maynard Keynes
right so in 1930 he wrote an essay
called economic possibilities for our
grandchildren it's a really a
fascinating reader you can just google
it economic possibilities for our
grandchildren and and their mind may be
long because he made two predictions in
that essay it's just a phase is long um
where he said but the first place we're
going to get be a lot richer right so it
can only grow simply used as it has been
you know as we've seen it since the
1850s
we'll be a lot richer and if we just use
a little bit of that wealth every year
to work a little bit less then the
workweek will keep shrinking and
shrinking and shrinking and we'll be
working less and less on that and if you
don't just extract tonight we'll have
the 15 hour work week in 2030 that was
Keynes prediction one of the great he
call this is the 28th century now you
could say oh I never really liked Eames
anyway he was this crazy guy we actually
almost all the experts or the
sociologist the Philosopher's up until
the seventies they all believed that we
would be working in SL SL s and it's
only since around the 1980s that we
started working in a hell of a lot more
well what I mean what happened i I've
spoken on this program about finding a
an article in a steamer trunk at a yard
sale from a futurist I think it was in
the early 60s addressing a Rotary Club
in Florida talking about how we're all
going to be carrying around little TVs
which was accurate we're gonna get
beamed stuff from the space he thought
at the time they would be powered by
kerosene but you can't get everything
right but he did say the biggest
challenge we're gonna have by the year
2000 is what to do with our leisure time
because of the amount of work that we
would not need to do so what yeah what
happened I mean this is what you call I
mean many respects I think what you call
the great decoupling but what what
happened yeah well here's the thing what
we underestimated capitalism's
extraordinary amount or extraordinary
ability I should say to come up with new
 jobs jobs that simply don't
need to exist to be honest I can already
see this you know as someone from
Holland where workers are better
protected and we've got a higher minimum
wage you see so many jobs in America
that just don't exist in Holland right
greeters at a supermarket so much
security that's not really necessary in
my mind right so capitalism is really
good at inventing all these jobs that
don't really need to exist now if you
don't believe me you can ask people
themselves right we've seen huge polls
in the past couple of years there's now
a scientific study done by two
joyfulness where they ask people the
question do you think your job as
anything of value to society during that
25% of the modern workforce
says no no I don't have anything of
value to society I could go on strike
and no one would care now who are these
people well they're not teachers they're
not nurses they're not care workers
actually there are some people with
wonderful resumes who went to great
universities who work it for banks or
for some golden keys or you name it but
still at the end of the day they have
this feeling like my job doesn't
contribute anything well so what I mean
I mean
what why is it in your estimation is
that capitalism in the context of the
united states develops these these these
you know jobs i mean i think we
had greater on to talk about this
sometimes yeah but but what why do you
think it is
i mean why is has that been the answer
as opposed to like what are the forces
that create that that that dynamic well
I don't think it's about technology or
about economics it's really about
ideology if you have this ideology that
goes back to the 19th century which is
all about you have to work for your
money and where we use a very narrow
definition of what work actually is so
you have to be in a hierarchical
relationship with an employer and you
say you know you get a salary you pay
taxes over that and that's the only
thing we consider work right we do not
include caring for our kids in GDP we do
not include caring for the elderly in
GDP right or all kinds of other
volunteers work now if you have this
ideology this please system about
everyone should do this kind of work and
then there's some lino work left anymore
right because the robots are coming
they're taking more and more jobs then
you get into this crisis this is
ideological and and and you just start
inventing jobs that don't need to exist
I think that is exactly what we've seen
happening in the past couple of decades
and I mean if you want to see what the
future can look like I think you should
go to a country like Japan because Japan
has the most robots per capita right
it's the most technologically advanced
society in the world probably but then
the unemployment rate is the lowest in
the whole rich world as well so how did
it do it well you just walk around in
Tokyo for a couple of hours and you'll
see so many jobs that don't need to
exist right there are wrote works and
they're literally send people standing
next to it waving to you know go to the
left go to the right it's absolutely
useless but that's what happens if you
have this ideology that everyone needs
to have a job
well oh so where does that mean what
what is the ideology is that a is that a
function of of capitalism I mean it's
clearly not just puritanical or maybe it
is and somehow we exported that to Japan
is it just a function of capitalism and
what does communism added as well right
so if you went to the Soviet Union there
was a leader everyone should have a job
right and you would go to I don't know a
bakery or something and you would buy a
piece of bread and there would be
someone to give it to you someone to
hand you over the receipt someone to put
it in a bag right and because there's
this ideology we all need a job I think
we need to get rid of the real goal of
the future to be as one science writer
once said the real goal of this beauty
should be through unemployment so that
we can live the good life right that's
that that should be the promise of
technological program I mean on some
respects there's a there's a failure of
culture too right because there is not
enough of a competition for that time I
mean you mentioned how much people watch
TV I think specifically in this country
and but there it's it's and in certainly
you quote Bertrand Russell the the idea
that we don't really that our leisure
time is really just a way to regenerate
for work as opposed to the development
of of a rich cultural life that makes
pursuing things that aren't for work as
easy as sort of like almost like second
nature as the idea of like entering the
workforce yeah I agree I agree but
here's the interesting thing if you
compare countries internationally and
you look at the countries with the
longest workweek those are also the
countries where people watch the most
amount of television right you can see
if they worked so hard and then at the
end of the day the only thing you can do
is sit back and watch stupid Gabler
cable news right and be brain quiet if
you look at the countries is much
shorter working week you'll see that
they're also the countries where people
go through the theater most all
where they read the most books where
they do most volunteers work etc so my
conviction is that if people have the
time they can also you know live the
good life and actually develop their
their their cultural taste and you name
it
but you need to talk for it if you're if
you're tired and the only thing you can
do is watch stupid television


## Keywords:
