---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4aDelnwNmDQ
---

# Video
Rutger Bregman on Progressive Politics and Economics
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4aDelnwNmDQ)

## Transcript:
well good evening ladies and gentlemen
thank you very much for coming tonight
and I would like you all to join me in
welcoming our guest who I think you all
know the wonderful Rutger breckman
so
there is so much to talk about the first
thing I want to say is that Brooke is
but we have to have just been talking to
about I think it's kind of a manual for
a new generation if you haven't read it
buy it get rugged the Sun it at the end
apps the essential reading will be a lot
of words yeah no no it's amazing it's a
must read yeah I think the easiest thing
to do
there is to start off with a little bit
of by way of preamble a clip of you at a
certain event
Alpina a certain alpine event I think I
know which clip in January and maybe we
can see how that goes you jumped sorry
can we have the
this is my first time at Davos and and I
find it quite a bewildered to be honest
I mean 1,500 private jets flown in here
to hear Sir David Attenborough speak
about you know how we reckoned the
planet and I mean I heard people talking
the language of participation and
justice and equality and transparency
but then I mean almost no one raises the
real issue affects avoidance right and
of the rich just not paying their fair
share I mean it feels like I met a fire
fighters fighters conference and no
one's allowed to speak about water I
mean this is not rocket science I mean
we can talk for a very long time about
all these stupid philanthropy schemes we
can invite Bono once more come on it's
we got to be talking about Texas yeah
that's it taxes taxes taxes all the rest
is in my opinion I actually
came because I do believe we have an
issue here but I have to say honestly
this is a very one-sided panel you know
frankly what people really want would
really want is a dick to be of a job I
like for the panel talk about beyond
taxes which every one of you have talked
about the only thing you've talked about
this whole panel on inequality what can
we really do to solve and it helped
solve inequality over time beyond taxes
let me tell you something we're talking
about choice but the quality of those
jobs with poultry workers in the richest
country in the world the United States
dollar is one woman we work with there
told us that she and her co-workers have
to wear diapers to work because they are
not allowed to edit breaks this isn't
the richest country in the world so
don't tell me about low levels of
unemployment you are counting the wrong
things you're not counting dignity of
people you're counting exploited people

well then so rookie you're not the
Messiah you're a very naughty boy aren't
you can you say a little bit about that
moment which went viral was it in the
truth Oscar Wilde fashion well planned
spontaneity Howard Howard he thought it
through well it was a little bit planned
so I was invited to Davos to obviously
talk about my book right and mainly
about universal basic income which has
become quite a popular ideas in the past
couple of years especially in tech
circles actually it's a lot of people
Silicon Valley are enthusiastic about
basic income as an idea to do something
about the threat of automation you know
robots taking our jobs so my plan was
just to basically promote the book but
then okay next question and then I
became more and more uncomfortable
during the whole conference actually and
I was in a tack off a couple of private
panels you know because a lot of panels
there are not accessible for journalists
and I tried to sort of raise the
elephant in the room
you know taxes tax avoidance and the
response every time was quite aggressive
they didn't really like me talking about
that so it was only the day before
because I knew on the last day on Friday
I was going to do this televised panel
and there's always shops this is your
chance to have to see yeah yeah exactly
so I just went back to my hotel room and
I prepared this speech and actually if
you see the full video you can hear the
moderator asking me a question something
about poverty something about basic
income over and I'm or just ignore the
question and just go I said my speech so
having having done that we move on to
clip 2 which is when Tucker Carlson yeah
of Fox makes the foolish error of
thinking that he can catch ripped her
out let's see how it went you jump the
bandwagon you're all like oh I'm against
a globalist elite blah blah blah it's
not very convincing to be honest
why don't you go yourself you tiny brain
and I hope this gets picked up you can't
handle the criticism Kenya hey we have
Tucker Carlson versus Drucker we got to
be talking about Texas that's it Texas
Texas Texas thing okay now let's let's
let's look at Carlson gate now you must
have known going in that he has tried to
shift his a position yeah and to kind of
colonize some of the things that have
interested progressive thinkers tell me
a little bit about the conversation and
why it ended up with Tucker seriously
losing it well I was surprised by the
invitation to be honest it was on Monday
actually the middle of the night it was
2:00 a.m. in Holland so six-hour type
time difference it was 8:00 p.m. in in
the US and just a Friday before that I
had I had a short brainstorm with a
couple of friends for from the
correspondent the journalism platform
that I work for and we were just you
know drinking beers and thinking about
wouldn't it be fun to call took her
Carlsen a millionaire funded by
billionaires so then over over the
weekend over the weekend i was i was
moving places so i had no time to think
about the whole interview and then on
monday just two hours before it i
realized okay i got to do this interview
and the cab picked me up and here I was
in a you know and basically in a very
quiet city in this studio with one
producer and I said you know what this
is the first and probably only time I'll
be on Fox News I'm gonna I'm gonna throw
a hand grenade in there let's see what
happens he insisted you'd never watched
it on TV it's literally impossible that
you could have watched it that was so
then I said to this producer said can
you possibly record it so that I can
show my friends that I actually called
her house and a millionaire funded by
billionaires you know that's that's
what's really important to me at the
time he said no I can't do that I don't
have the equipment for that I said no
worry isn't just gonna do the interview
let's see what
right so then I did the interview and I
just thought the whole thing was
hilarious you know he was just south
shouting in my ear and I know he just
completely lost it and then this
producer came walking into into the
studio and he's like I recorded the
whole thing and then we started drinking
beer and that lost for like an hour
I think Tucker probably had a drink -
and an hour later I was back in the
indie cab to my home and that was the
first time I watched a video I was like
holy this is something so I mean
one thing that unites the divorce clip
with the TUC except is that they can't
handle it what is it about what you're
saying
that drives a certain kind of
millionaire or billionaire completely
mad that's obviously the place where I'm
saying it sure you know the things
exactly the things I was saying was
support were supported by the vast
majority of American people right
seventy-five percent of Americans are in
favor of higher taxes on the rich you
can find similar figures here in the UK
you know most people want the rich to
pay more in tax and yeah it's just that
normally at those kind of places people
just aren't there and it's not a
coincidence that Fox News decided not to
area right it's just that in this era of
smart phones yeah sometimes and is it
because it's frankly something that in
that context and and lots of other
contexts to just saying it we need to
raise taxes has become almost a meter
article to the point of on say ability
yeah and you you were genuinely saying
something that I think they were not
expected to hear and that is fascinating
it is I think that 10 years ago it would
have been unimaginable for a historian
to go viral there's a speech about taxes
taxes taxes so I think that just shows
you that I'm part of a much wider
movement of many more people and often
young people who have just shifted the
whole you know the whole political
debate and now suddenly we're discussing
ideas that were dismissed is completely
unrealistic not very long ago same is
true for basic income and
I mean that's that's me under through
the book a bit and its arguments because
what I think it's very important to
emphasize of the book a is very readable
also it's about it's not just about
economics and public policy it's also
about psychology and ideas and their
power and one of its central contentions
is that when the crash happened there
was a kind of moment of cognitive
dissonance which you would you talk
about that there was no people at least
didn't think that was a readily
available idea or set of ideas with
which to deal with it yeah exactly and
and to explain this point properly maybe
we should go back all the way to the 50s
yeah because would always fascinates me
about the rise of this thing we call
neoliberalism or the whole Reagan and
Thatcher phenomenon is that it didn't
start in the 70s or the 80s it actually
started in the 50s with people like The
Economist Milton Friedman or the
Austrian philosopher Friedrich von Hayek
who came together in this place called
Montpellier in Switzerland and they
founded this month Pelerin Society and
back then they said where the real
radicals right now you know in the 50s
everyone was basically a socialist or at
least a Keynesian they believed in big
government but we had tax rates of like
80 90 percent for the very rich an
imagined war right now but that worked
pretty well in this Golden Age of
capitalism and so they said to
themselves where the radicals and what
we need to do is start developing idea
our ideas you know building our
institutions or think tanks and this
will take years and years and years but
at some point there will be a crisis in
the current system and then we can take
over this is exactly what happened in
the 70s with the stagflation and the oil
crises and then Reagan and Thatcher came
on the scene but if you want to
understand those politicians you really
got a bit go back all the way to the 50s
now what I think happened in 2008 is
that we had another crash obviously
where it was a great opportunity to you
know to inject new ideas basically in
the bloodstream off of thinking
but they were just weren't there said
the issue with many people on the
so-called
how do you wanna call the left or
progressives was that they knew very
well what they were against against lot
of things right against the stereo t
against homophobia against racism
against growth against climate change
basically against everything but not
what they were for like that they had
sort of discarded the whole idea that
you need some kind of utopian vision
before you actually want to go next so
that was a problem back then but the
exciting thing actually in that respect
the book is already a little bit
outdated than it may be because in the
past couple of years things have changed
so much if you look at a politician like
aoc now in the united states i mean
she's she's the person i've always been
dreaming about the kind of politician
right yes i think so that's very
exciting
yeah but why the lag because it is
interesting that you know oh eight was
such a moment mm-hmm nine and it but
really what it produced was a bundle of
responses yeah fiscal conservatism
quantitative easing a kind of review of
the role of the state an argument about
austerity but it didn't produce an
idealism and i just want to press you a
bit further on why that should be so
because it's not as if that weren't
intelligent progressive politicians and
thinkers around what was i mean as you
said they were getting against things
but what was what was holding them back
psychologically from articulating a
vision of optimism yeah i don't know
maybe maybe it was just that beyond the
thing that they could come up with was
yeah about going back of ideas i mean no
they see it were they still because the
the the the the left or the the
progressive movement parties of the 90s
had been so obsessed by discipline and
message discipline i wonder whether they
were still in my generational thing yeah
right i think so
i was born in 1988 yeah there's one year
before the fall of the berlin wall
my generation is not traumatized by the
cold war yep when they say ooh
that's Venezuela that sounds like
communism yes we say whatever you know
it's just it doesn't work anymore yeah
you know that the defining moments for
us were things like 9/11 obviously and
the financial crash and we came of age
in this era of inequality that was
spiraling out of control and it's it's
really now that you that you especially
see people rallying around issues like
climate change and that more and more
people realize that actually if you want
to be a realist today you need to be
quite radical it's just if you if you
say oh I'm a moderate I'm a centrist and
I just want to tinker a bit around the
edges that is like the most
irresponsible thing when you think about
an issue like climate change if you need
this massive transformation of the
economy and move to zero emissions in it
just a couple of decades you know you we
need to do things that we haven't done
ever before in peacetime and that's the
realist position because the alternative
is much worse so I suppose the beating
heart of the book is is there are many
things in it but the notion of universal
basic income and for me one of the most
interesting aspects of that was your
your exploration of the ancestry of this
idea can you talk a little bit about
that because it's it has some surprising
advocates stuff sure yeah it's actually
a quite old idea goes back like 200
years but maybe the most interesting
moment was at the end of the sixties
when almost everyone believed that some
form of basic income was going to be
implemented in the United States and in
Canada and what happened back then is
that there was actually this guy called
Richard Nixon of all people the
conservative president well-known
progressive and he was like you know if
everyone loves this idea sure let me be
the president that makes history so he
had a bill for a models basic income
that got through the House of
Representatives twice and then it hit
the Senate floor and only there was
actually killed by Democrats not because
they didn't like the idea of completely
eradicating poverty they loved the idea
but they wanted a higher basic income
yes so they had this idea like just
for a little bit and then we'll have a
better basic income couple of years
later it's astonishing history at the
same time will happen back then is that
you have these huge experiments with
basic income you know where they give
thousands of families a basic income and
they had lots of research researchers
studying the effect like the Winnipeg
example you get yeah that was one in
Canada but you also had four major basic
income experiments in the US now there
was one experiment in Seattle where they
you know they found a lot of positive
results health care costs went down
crime went down kids did much better in
school you know it's really an
investment that pays for itself but then
the problem was was that they also
discovered that the divorce rate went up
by 50% so yeah I guess there were a lot
of women saying like you know I don't
want to live with that trick anymore bye
bye Felicia yeah so that was problematic
and many conservative people said at
that point you know we don't want basic
income anymore this is gonna make women
much too independent and then only ten
years later they actually found out that
a statistical mistake had been made so
in reality the divorce rate did not go
up at all yeah and yeah it's sometimes
these bizarre coincidence yes that
matter a lot in history and that that's
what that's what fascinates me there's a
series of objections to di which are
worth going through because you you
knock them down in the book but I think
they're worth sort of some of them are
worth mentioning tonight I mean the
classic argument is giving him a basic
income money for free dissuades work so
let's deal with that one first well the
first thing I should say about this is
that is an empirical statement so let's
see what the evidence yes right you can
just do experiments and there have been
lots of experiments since the seventies
where they have actually given people
free money sometimes quite a lot of it
and just to see what happens and every
single time they found that the work
disincentive effects are very very
limited sometimes they're just not there
sometimes they're very small and they're
compensated by people doing other useful
stuff right more volunteers were caring
for the kids caring for the elderly
that's that's a good thing the more
fundamental thing that I could say here
is that actually basic income helps us
to completely rethink what work actually
is because we have such a simplistic or
old-fashioned definition of work right
we say work is this thing you do for an
employer and they pay you a wage and you
pay taxes over that and that's it
actually there's a lot of paid work that
is not very useful and see what you call
 Joe yeah David Graeber an
American mythologist
it's an academic term now yeah so it's
some people called socially useless jobs
jobs gets there okay it also jobs and so
a couple of months ago there was a
research being published by two Dutch
economists and what they did is they
looked at a huge data set where people
from within I think 30 countries were
being asked this question do you think
your job as anything of value to society
you know are you productive in any
meaningful way and turns out that 25
percent of the workforce in rich country
says not sure maybe no probably not 25
percent so just think about how radical
how bizarre that is that's like five
times the unemployment rate and I'm not
talking about teachers or nurses or care
workers here you know I'm talking about
bankers and corporate lawyers and
accountants people with great salaries
who went to Oxford and Cambridge and we
spend a lot of money educating them and
they're they're often very talented and
smart as well and then they go on and do
these jobs that are completely useless
they do that for 20-30 years then they
have their midlife crisis and then they
use all that money they extracted from
the rest of the population to paint for
the rest for their lives or something
like that
that is this is getting dangerously like
a scene from Fight Club but to bring it
back to policy one Korea again one of
the objections is how how does this
relate to the pre-existent and often
invariably hugely complicated benefit
system in a society I mean you know if
you were to in to introduce a basic
income in Britain
how would it would it replace the
benefit system would it be supplementary
to it how would it work it's important
to emphasize here that there are many
versions of basic income out there so
there are some really bad or even
horrible versions of basic income that
are being advocated so there are some
for example American libertarians who
say let's just abolish the whole well
first aid and just give people one small
cash grant yeah I'm not in favor of that
and in fact I think that will be
disastrous yes and the basic income
would really be a supplement to the
great achievements of the 20th century
right universal health care quality
public education and then a universal
basic income or guaranteed basic income
that's really the way I think about it
now how do you finance it there are
obviously a thousands way to finance it
finance it and I'd like to finance it in
a way that it will reduce inequality
also important to emphasize here there
are ways that you could finance a basic
income that it will actually increase
inequality right so the devil is in the
details here okay well which leads us to
I think what lies at its core which is
an assumption about human nature because
the the traditional assumptions that
underpin a lot of these debates is that
you know if you give people money for
free they will just do nothing
it's a core argument for your book this
is not so and it's not just an assertion
you back it up
I mean tell us about what the your
research is showed about how people
behave when you give them free money
well this is the fascinating thing I've
experienced so many times is that you
ask people what would you do with a
basic income and most people say
I've got dreams have gotten busy don't
worry about me you know I've got
wonderful plans and then you ask them
what what other people do with a base
gink people well they'll probably waste
it and spend it on drugs you know that's
human nature you know conjugate the verb
I I build you do drugs yeah I guess this
is actually this is what my next book is
about because it's such a deeper
fundamental thing that we get wrong all
the time is that we assume that most
people are selfish
why are fact No yeah most people want to
cooperate with other people and want to
contribute something to society and
that's what you find time and time again
if you look at the evidence the thing is
we're just basically being brainwashed
by this product that we call the news
and the news is all about exceptions
about things that go wrong about crises
about terrorism so if you watch a lot of
the news at the end of the day you know
exactly how the world does not work and
you have a completely misguided view of
human nature now even more radical and a
part of the book I personally found
attractive was the the arguments for
open borders but this is so
spectacularly counterintuitive at the
moment I think I'm right that the book
first came out induction in 2014 is that
correct yeah since then there's been you
know a huge surge in right-wing populism
Trump's election brexit building notion
of walls identitarian ism throughout
Europe and nativism so it's you know
fair to say I think that the argument in
favor of open borders is is not actually
winning the day which is not to say it's
wrong and it's what I would really
wanted to ask you is starting from where
we are rather than from in a kind of
intellectual laboratory how do you get
to the point where I'm you you deal with
a lot of the myths about immigration but
they are very entrenched how do you
build a an intellectual and narrative
based rooted in empiricism but also in
ideas and
and emotions that will bring people to
realize that as you say that actually
open borders are a massive generator of
wealth well I really think we need the
historical perspective here so my view
as a historian is that history is the
most subversive of all the sciences the
main message of history is things can be
different there's nothing inevitable
about the way we've structured our
society and economy right now so if you
think about Borders for example or the
nation-state it's a fairly recent
invention you know it's really a product
of the 19th century and for example
passports they hardly existed at the
beginning of the 20th century and
countries that issued them like Russia
and the Ottoman Empire were considered
you know backwards countries so an
interesting question always to ask as a
historian is how will people of the
future look back on us because we can
look back on people in the Middle Ages
right yeah and we look at you know those
witch hunts and and all those variant
things that were going on and we're like
oh these people were terrible we're so
civilized right now but that mean the
question is of course how will they what
are the barbarian things we are doing
right now
you know let's say in the year 2000 200
what will they say about us what's the
most horrible thing we're doing right
now we just consider it common sense and
borders might be one of those things
because borders are responsible for the
biggest you know discrimination that
that's going on like 60% of your income
is dependent on the fact are you where
you were born it's it's apartheid on it
on a global scale basically and most of
the objections we have against
immigration they're all terrorists
they're all criminals they don't work
very they take our jobs etc I go over
all of them yeah they destroy social
cohesion many of them have actually also
been adopted these days by the left but
if you look at the the actual evidence
it's not much there it's really not much
not much data so to put it in its purest
and gaseous topicality how would you if
you were confronted with a dismayed
brexit voter mm hmm explain to them that
open
which is a real good thing that's a
great that's a great question so I would
I would use the language of patriotism
that's the first thing
this is often a problem with many people
on the left and progressive is that they
only use the language of care and of
injustice right and there's a certain
part of the population that is receptive
to that kind of question you say oh it's
so horrible what's happening to these
refugees or it's so horrible it's
happening to these poor people we should
help them but you don't win elections
with that right so you need other things
one thing you could do is to say we're
the best country on Earth Yeah right and
we can handle this like what Angela
Merkel did in Germany like we're
shuffled us because we're Germans right
so the French couldn't shuffle this they
couldn't do it the British certainly
couldn't do it but we're Germans we can
handle this we're good at organizing
stuff that was a very patriotic
statement and many people said that it
would become our downfall well last time
I checked he's still there yeah so
that's that's one of the ways because
it's it seems to me that now it's become
baked into political discourse I mean
would you agree that in a sense in all
of all the things you recommend in the
book including you know the short of
working week and so on this that is
perhaps the one that is going to take
that's the biggest tanker to turn oh
it's definitely by far the most utopian
idea of my book I think basic income we
could easily do that right now we've got
the means we've got the research it's
it's not economics that's holding us
back it's not technology that's holdings
back it's really ideology
yeah and I've dated out you know out of
sort of out of fashion definition of
what work is but with open borders it's
obviously different but I I am trying to
change the conversation there and I'm
trying to use history in a way to open
people's eyes and just to show that
nothing nothing about this is inevitable
and we could have a very different
conversation about around this certainty
the the Davos intervention is it will
one day be cooled I'm sure in a film
starring a Hollywood star
the the the whole question of taxes is
is fascinating because as we said at the
start I mean it for 20-30 years the
assumption of the Laffer curve that
reaches a point where you you know the
more you raise taxes the less revenue
you get has been absolutely sacrosanct
first of all do you take issue with the
Laffer curve and secondly if if you do
what sort of taxes student visit raising
because there's a again there's an
assumption in in British politics at
least that the that although you could
probably squeeze some more out of income
tax from the wealthier that it's high
time we started to tax wealth
particularly as we're an aging society
and so on well the standard argument of
course and this this argument was always
made by Tanner is that if you have
higher taxes the rich will work less
they'll produce less wealth and we'll
all be poor in the end I think that if
you look at the latest evidence that we
have from economics turns out that
actually the opposite is true there is a
good case to be made that if you have
higher taxes on the wealthy that you
make certain things not profitable
anymore because we have got a lot of
very rich people right now who do learn
a lot of money but don't can really
contribute anything right if you zoom in
on their business lot of money well it's
a bit like why did pirate ears in the
17th century earn a lot of money you
know what that's people they were really
exactly yeah but then what happens is
that let's assume we're in the 70
century right and I would say let's
abolish piracy piracy is not productive
these people are just murdering people
and and raping raping people and just
stealing the other people's stuff it's
not productive and then imagine that
someone else would say yeah but then
hundreds of pirates will lose their jobs
that's horrible
but that's basically the debate we're
having right now how can I have written
pirates in two teachers let them do
something you know well yeah teachers of
the Caribbean but again I mean we come
back to a an analysis about human nature
because you say in the book of quoting
higher taxes would get more people to do
work that's useful now that's a huge
statement yeah you actually see it in
the in the there's there's good evidence
from the us here is that economists
argue that the tax cuts in the Reagan
era made it more attractive for Ivy
League graduates you know that the most
talented most smartest people to go to
either Silicon Valley or to Wall Street
and they before that they want to like
to say universities or other government
organizations or research organization
thinking about you know how to get to
Mars or something like that I actually
spoke a couple of months ago I spoke
with Kasparov you know the the great
chess player who was beaten by this
computer deep blue at the end of the 90s
and he was just he was explaining that
when he grew up like smart people his
age we're really all dreaming you know
they wanted to become astronauts yeah
but then something shifted in the 80s in
the 90s and people wanted to become
bankers or and and after that they
wanted to go to Silicon Valley until
they realized as one former employee of
Facebook put it is that the best minds
of my generation are thinking about how
to make people click ads yeah and that's
one of the most depressing things of
today is that there are so many smart
people in the great capitals of this
wall you know in New York and London in
Los Angeles so many smart people utterly
wasting their talents on stupid nonsense
the obvious collision I suppose is if
you have higher tax regimes and open
borders will you have people fleeing to
low tax regimes to carry on doing
useless jobs well here the question is
how how all these ideas will work
together right and I think that the the
purpose of utopian thinking is not to
sketch some kind of blueprint it's not
what I'm trying to do in this book like
here's this perfect world where you have
open borders guarantee basic income and
I thought everything true obviously not
the purpose of utopias is or utopian
thinking is to ask the right questions
right and to make us envision a society
that might be radically better but then
just experiment along the way just a
small one small step after one small
step so I'm obviously not arguing we
should abolish your boarders overnight
but just thinking about borders in that
way you know are they not one of the
most and just the things we have right
now just help so open up conversation I
think and helps open up your mind which
I think leads to very interesting kind
of governing theme in the book which is
that one of the big questions that
emerge from 2016 was why was it that the
brexit ears and Trump were able to
mobilize an emotional narrative and the
remain as and Hillary Clinton's campaign
was so conspicuously not able to and I
think that progressives have wrestled
quickly progressives who are very very
wedded to evidence-based very dry
approaches and you say quite openly in
the book that you know they're there a
lot of what they say is dull and also
that they play on the dog too often
which is a slightly different point so
here we are in 2019 and you've reloaded
- what's going on in America what what's
what's the future narrative taking
you're kind of utopian charge what what
should be the next steps in this well it
seems to me that the issue with Hillary
Clinton was that it's it almost seemed
like her slogan was no we can't write
that's not gonna happen
that's too expensive I looked at it
believe me it's not gonna work you don't
really win elections with yet right
one other frustrating thing was that
just after the elections she did an
interview where she said that actually
her campaign had considered
an idea called Alaska for America turns
out that Alaska has this basic income
already since the early 70s it was
instituted by a Republican governor of J
Hammond and his idea was you know we've
got all this oil in the ground here
that's everyone's property so we're just
gonna sell that oil and then everyone
received it receives a dividend each
year which is around $2,000 per
individual adds up to you know cannot
add up to 8,000 for a family of four
it's quite substantial it's one of the
reasons why Alaska has the lowest
inequality in all of the states in
America so Hillary Clinton's idea was or
her campaigns idea was this is the
perfect marriage between conservative
and progressive thinking right Alaska
for America I thought it was wonderful
but then she yeah she told that three
months after she lost the election so
you can imagine that was quite a
frustrating moment no great
synchronization it's interesting if you
look at the Trump State of the Union
speech there were two things that were
striking one was that there was this
sort of extraordinary presence of white
clad newly elected female
representatives AOC being the most
obvious very joyous moment but also that
Trump said America will never be
socialist which suggests to me that he
thinks that this is now a serious issue
yeah did you I mean what's your
interpretation of the American landscape
post midterms well I think it's a really
interesting thing that what a politician
like Donald Trump in a politician like
aoc have in common
and I know this phrase is weird having
common in this case but that they do
have something in common they talk about
winning so don't run toxic talks about
winning all the time right we're gonna
win win win America has been losing for
a long time we're gonna win again
a a seat talks about that as well she
says this in this country is capable of
such great things we can do so many more
amazing things right we can actually do
this a greenio deal we can do this
massive transformation of the economy if
we bring all you know everyone together
around it and I think that's exactly
what people were yearning for in 2:16
and what they will be yearning
or in 2020 and I think exactly the same
is true in the UK this is one of the
frustrating things around brexit right
so around brexit I have two views the
first view as you know someone from
Holland is I get on with it already
right at some point you just gotta go
right because then we can finally make
this Union into success and Britain has
been a pain in the ass right for for
that case I think that is that's again
to you that's the technical term yeah
yeah exactly
but then the other thing is that if
brexit is happening anyway then
progressives or the left they need to
come up with their very utopian version
of brexit how can you actually make this
into a positive thing because if you do
not come up with something yourself then
this they will come up with something
else and in this country of this whole
network of think tanks I was you know I
was quite astonished to find this out
you know like with with fancy names like
the the Adam Smith Institute or the
Economic Affairs yeah I had a bit of a
rout with him on the radio this week
anyway things got frisky on the dirty
vines and they they have got a plan for
brexit right they want to make this
country into a paradise for billionaires
yes that's what they want to do that's
not inevitable brexit doesn't have to
mean that but then you gotta get your
 together and come up with an
alternative well yes conceded but if you
are coming from the progressive side of
politics on this early labor but just
the general progressive side what would
what would that look like because
clearly one thing it wouldn't include is
open borders so consistent with some of
the things that you're interested in how
would you build a kind of post brexit
ideal just in terms of broad
brushstrokes rather than the detail what
would be your kind yeah what would be
the brick Manian vision well it would
all revolve around climate change I
think everything has to revolve around
that and I think they're more and more
people my generation actually realized
that right now is that we've I mean
you're how old
yes solo 15:51 yeah it's your generation
basic is done nothing right
yeah and what can I say
and we can't afford that yeah but I mean
that is a really interesting observation
because one of the ice ed at the
beginning that I felt this was a amongst
many other things a generational track
mm-hmm you know you've you've talked to
him you must have talked to thousands of
people about this book now thousands
upon thousands do you get a sense of
generational change well sometimes I
there you can be young and still quite
old right in the ocean I'm sure and and
vice versa but absolutely and especially
in the last five years when I first
published this book yeah many of these
things I basic income I really had to
explain that to people I haven't even
given a definition of basic income are
the people who have no idea what it is
please raise your hand because they'll
still give it but you know I just
assumed that people already know that
wouldn't have been the case five years
ago I would have to explain it every
single time
again the first lectures I gave about
the ideas in this book were for you know
small groups of long haired anarchists
you know bit smelly
and that was my audience back then
because that's basically how change
works it always starts on the fringes
with people who are first dismissed as
unreasonable unrealistic crazy radical
and then it starts moving towards the
center and that's what I'm interested
and what has driven that do you think I
mean what what across that period of
four or five years what are the main
governing forces that have driven that
change well partly it's just hard work
its activism it's so people were quite
dismissive for example the Occupy Wall
Street many people still believe oh that
wasn't effective at all well actually
Occupy Wall Street God as Bernie Sanders
Bernie Sanders got is people like to aoc
etc it it it all needs each other right
it all builds on each other
so this is this is the issue I sometimes
have with these
there's been quite a few books recently
about how the world is better than ever
right yes true right I start my book
with that as well is that you've seen
extraordinary declines of poverty and
and people are much healthier today we
are we are basically rich or wealthy or
healthier than ever
you know tremendous progress in the past
to in-ears but then many of these books
like Steven Pinker's books for example
sort of it feels as if they make the
pain stop complain and point stop
complaining
everything is awesome and they have this
very sanitized view of history yes right
we're just some guy in the seventy
century had some great idea like let's
all be rational and then 300 years later
everyone was healthy it's sort of that
history doesn't work like that
you know people actually fought for
those changes and all those people who
for example who first argued for the
abolition of slavery or for democracy or
for equal rights for men and women they
paid a high price for that you know they
were persecuted and and and really
killed and dismissed etc and I think
that's often ironic with these these
writers is that now they talk about all
these social justice warriors and their
rightful for how wonderful everything is
well actually those social justice
warriors where were the ones making all
this progress possible in the past two
three hundred is the interesting thing I
think my last question is is there a bus
miss of the idea of equality which is
that I think again to go back to the end
of the 20th century there was an idea
that there'd been a great battle between
Liberty and command-and-control
egalitarianism and Liberty at one and of
course it would be social amelioration
and welfare state and so on exactly and
but that but the the great drive for a
call equality was now going to be a
subordinate issue and that doesn't seem
to be so anymore I think in 2019 if you
take the temperature of where politics
is going it isn't necessarily in a
libertarian direction mm-hmm right so
but but what again why is it is it just
because people see food banks
people rough sleeping in parts of London
where it costs a million pounds to buy a
basement philately why is that I think
that people do not necessarily want to
live in equal society they want to live
in a fair society that is that is at
least what psychologists now think based
on lots of lots of new evidence coming
in so if you have a meritocracy where
you know that people really believe in
where the people at the top also
contribute the most and pay the most in
taxes etc etc people you know can get
along with that why are they now so
angry because they realise that actually
those people at the top aren't
contributing anything they're not paying
their taxes and they do not deserve all
this well that's the thing people people
can believe in meritocracy if it's a
fair meritocracy
so that's what I'm really trying to do
in this book is that we often say that
you know the strongest shoulder should
carry them you know the most the
heaviest weights and actually the really
strongest shoulders that carries us all
are the teachers are the garbage
collectors are the nurses because if
they would go on strike that'd be a
disaster maybe it may be too you know
one final story that I haven't a book
about this is there were two strikes of
different professions in the 60s you
know one was of garbage collectors
strike losses for six days totally
murdered initially declared in New York
yeah toda emergency turns out we can't
deal without garbage collectors the
other strike was of bankers two years
later in Ireland and the bankers they
were angry that their wages were not
keeping up with inflation and they said
you know what you'll have it we'll go on
strike and all the experts predict a
disaster this was supposed to be like a
heart attack for the economy strike
started nothing much happened
and blossom and lasted for six months
and the ABS turned out to be very
important yeah this is the hilarious
part is that actually so the strike
lasted for six months the economy just
kept growing after six months the
bankers came back and said all right all
right all right we'll get back to work
so and what the iris did is it's really
interesting what they did is they sort
of built their own money system so they
started writing checks to each other
io u--'s on the backs of cigar boxes and
on toilet paper and there were 15,000
pups back then in Ireland and sort of
the pub owners became the new bankers
there's one historian who later wrote
that if you sell liquids to other people
you probably also know something about
the liquidity of your clients so these
pub owners were the perfect new bankers
and the system worked quite well
actually
and yeah just kept operating nowadays if
you ask people who lived through that
period you'll find out that many people
just won't remember yeah because it
didn't make much of an impact that's
amazing
right now let's have some questions
we've got microphones and I want to take
them in groups of three so question here
at the front do we have a roving mic so
let's take them in groups of three um
yeah thanks for very much for a
brilliant talk but I think I love your
ideas but I think change can happen
better virally from the grassroots
rather than through top-down governance
super states and I think that's the
direction of the future with the
blockchain and the Internet I think that
shows that we have a lot of potential
for a networked style of governance and
Finance I think we can have financial
systems based on shared interests rather
than physical location and I think we
can have governance based on shared
ideology rather than physical location
and along the line of what you said to
lefties yes you know let's get on with
it we have opportunities here with
brexit
so there's one over here yep thank you
for the talk without wanting to sort of
ask you to lay out a blueprint you you
sort of noticed the growing movement for
ubi within sort of libertarians and also
within tech workers especially around
Silicon Valley having noticed a sort of
the tendency of the rate of profit to
fall what what sort of steps do you see
to avoid ubi becoming just another means
of transferring wealth to the richest
from from the state and just one there I
can spot was Hill in Toronto stupid
uncle
um I want to ask about climate tax
carbon tax considering the response that
the yellow vests had in France and one
of their possible causes was carbon tax
and I think it's if you're talking about
taxes how viable will the carbon tax
being and why did the yellow vests have
that response to it so to recap the
grass roots nature good question about
ubi and carbon tax well let me start
with the carbon tax because it's
interesting actually
when I was at Davos I was in one private
panel you know talking about the rise of
populism etc and there was one French
CEO who stood up and said what people
don't get is that if you really want to
understand the yellow vest move and you
have to understand that McCraw abolished
the wealth tax in in France and they
people never really forgave him for that
and then after that you had this fuel
tax and it was like but who's paying for
this transition right sure we're all in
favor of of a more sustainable economy
but who's actually paying for this one
of the most promising idea out there
ideas out there that actually has
bipartisan support is the idea of
implementing a carbon tax and then using
or just giving back that money directly
to the population right in the form of a
dividend it's a bit similar to to what
they have in Alaska if we sleeve with
this oil money but then you use a carbon
tax for that there are a lot of people
from both the left and the right in
favor of something like that I think
that's really important when you talk
about this huge transition that we need
to have people gotta have the feeling
that everyone's contributing right the
question about how do we make sure that
you know we aim for a version of basic
income that is that would actually
improve life for the vast majority of
people well here my answer is very
simple
and make sure that you take the idea for
yourself you know I've read quite a lot
of pieces like of authors who say Oh
basic income is a horrible story it's a
neoliberal trillion Trojan horse
look I heard Mark Zuckerberg say that
he's in favor basic income and Elon Musk
is as well so it must be a horrible idea
I don't know that's that's such lazy
thinking isn't it as I said there are
horrible versions and bad versions of
basic income out there that only puts
more pressure on us to properly define
what we're talking about and come up
with the versions that do make a
difference for the vast majority of
people and then final question about
grassroots and actually I think that's
that's what we've seen happening in the
past couple of years right so I mean
you're not you're not a centralist are
you really I mean the book is not a kind
of plea for the massive no Goss plan no
but what I do think is that at some
point you've got to break out of your
bubble right so it's not enough just to
to talk to I actually got a lot of
pushback initially from people who said
oh Rutgers going to Davos you know he's
he's gonna have drinking champagne with
the with the billionaires you know he's
been bought by the billionaire class
quite a few angry emails about that same
with Fox News oh he went on Fox News but
that's the thing I think you at some
point you need to
break out of your bubble and try to
build something that is that is bigger
great let's have some more questions yes
they did the front here
can we bring in microphone for just
coming thank you so much and and
questions at the back as well I can see
right at the back there is afterwards
please yes please go ahead when you talk
about taxes and open borders isn't part
of the problem the world is now so
global that it's not just individual
rich people that aren't paying taxes
it's these global companies who use the
facilities like in this country say
Amazon and all these people they use all
our facilities and don't put back into
it so I'm not sure that it's just about
taxing individuals it seems to me it's
more about taxing companies and we don't
seem to have got the sense of that
certainly in this country at the moment
so you gave the example of Richard Nixon
and how it's kind of surprised in
support for universal basic incredible
back me okay okay and what I'm
interested in that is I do find whether
these changes happen they often come
from people who have ulterior motives
that lead them to do something that in
fact is quite good and part of that is a
lot of the decision makers tend to be in
positions of power naturally and so I'm
interested what are the separate
motivators do you think would lead
people that don't really have anything
to gain from these ideas to change to
support these ideas you know what would
make them see the value in the idea of
universal basic income if you're a
millionaire or a billionaire one more
anyone over here yeah
hi there brick I thinks for the speech
and great book I wanted to ask you your
thoughts on a recent exchange between
AOC and Bill Gates
so OCLC knows become very popular for
range of reasons one reasons
raises to tax and Bill Gates
you know points out that sure you know
taxing raising taxes will create some
increases in revenue for the government
however the real way to attack it would
be to make more taxes on wealth and on
games so obviously a lot of rich people
you know they can find very clever ways
to make their income low bracket but the
real income that they're getting is
either because their monies and stocks
which will come up as zero a lot of time
when it comes to income or it will be in
corporate taxes which obviously taxed a
lot less so I suppose my question is it
seems like with politicians generally
there's a lot hyperbole got people in
one side like Donald Trump you know a
lot of hyperbole but then I think you've
also equally got people on the left side
who will say stuff like we need to tax
some super high where it's hyperbole and
not necessarily the most effective means
I wonder what your thoughts were on that
so for a long question so hyperbole OSI
versus Gates renting question about
harnessing ulterior motives and a
question here about corporations and
open borders and tax well let me again
start with with the last question
there's this really interesting arms
race going on right now it seems in the
in the Democratic Party like who which
candidate can have the most radical
proposal like Bernie Sanders I want an
estate tax no Elizabeth Warren or wealth
tax and then a we see now when a top
marginal tax rate of 70 percent and you
know what I love all of those taxes I
think I think we should have all of them
right and when we talk about a top
marginal tax rate it's important to
remember that a very high top marginal
tax rate on income right of around 70
percent is not meant to take in a lot of
revenue because let's I mean in in the
UK was at some point he was like
90% but almost no one actually paid that
tax why not
because it just becomes pointless to
give someone such a high salary right
but if you have to give everything away
immediately in tax so the purpose of a
very high top marginal tax rate is to
have a maximum salary in your country
and I think that's a quite a sensible
thing I think that Bill Gates is
actually right that a more pressing
issue now is to talk about wealth
inequality which indeed is it's a lot
bigger in many countries and the
exciting thing is that Elizabeth Warren
has come up with a plan that was
actually made by Emmanuel says and
Gabrielle zucman and two colleagues of
Thomas Piketty you know that the French
economist is you've probably all owned a
book but didn't read it I hope I won't
be that kind of we'll see with a very
good plan and that will take bring in a
lot more revenue and then obviously yeah
inheritance X is also seemed like a
pretty good idea my my favorite version
would be an inheritance tax where you
can just like inherence a a thousand
pounds over your lifetime tax-free and
if you have like seven or eight small
inheritances you know there can be like
ten thousand a piece or something and
you don't pay any taxes over that but
then once you get above that threshold
you start paying taxes over it well the
great thing about a system like that
what it would mean is that people would
have an incentive when they die to
spread their wealth right they'll not
only give it to their to their lazy son
or something like that that's what we
really should call it we should call an
inherent insects attacks on laziness and
then they would also give it to you know
to another friend and that person they
met that was so nice etcetera so you
have an incentive to to spread it around
I love all of these taxes to be honest
and also the interesting question about
how you can harness ulterior motives to
social socially desirable and yeah
so there's one book that I really really
love and and and would recommend to
anyone it's a it's a book by Rebecca
Solnit it's called hope in the dark and
she wrote it during the Bush years
actually when the country just started a
war with Iraq and there's one line in
the book that I'll never forget it's
maybe I don't get get it exactly right
but at some point she says there's a
certain kind of activism that cares more
about being right than about actually
achieving results and throughout my you
know very short career so far I've
always tried not to be that kind of
activist you know I really care about
also achieving results and not only
staying in the level my bubble so that
means that you have to reach out and
sometimes use a different kind of
language use different kind of arguments
this is what psychologists call moral
reframing so if we talk about already
for example a lot of people in this
audience will probably buy the argument
that we should do something about
poverty because it's just immoral right
people deserve a certain minimum of
money in their lives but then you could
also make a very different argument you
could say well actually if you don't
have a heart you still have a wallet all
right and there's a lot of evidence that
shows that if you eradicate poverty you
actually spend a lot less on health care
on policing services and judicial
service you'll save money in the long
run it's good for you you know even if
you're if you're very rich so that's
what I'm interested in in in defending
these progressive ideas in in many
different ways and then the last
question you're absolutely right yeah we
should you should definitely also talk
about this massive tax avoidance that
going that's going on by by corporations
in that case in that you know since you
might want to reconsider this brexit
thing
I think not many people know actually
that the country where I am from Holland
is one of the main text paradises in the
world you know we've had hundreds and
hundreds of billions of euros and
dollars from American companies and
people don't even know it that's hardly
a conversation around it so I guess
that's where it needs to start is that
we actually start having this
conversation because is it easy to
demolish tax paradises yes
it's very easy very very easy we saw it
happening in Switzerland they had this
Bank Secrecy for years and years until
the FBI said stop don't do that anymore
and it was gone basically so let's have
another final round of yes I see
gentlemen they're just there no no
that's it hi thanks for everything
tonight and I was just wondering you've
said that you are kind of represent a
movement what would your advice be to
everyone here on how to kind of take
your ideas forward and she kind of and
that's them in the world chaos that one
immediately yeah go for it yeah okay so
the first thing is if you're a moderate
stop that
yeah
because you really can't afford to be
one right now if you're young in this
day and age the challenges that lie
ahead of us are so immense the
transformation of the economy that we
need is so radical that just tinkering
around the edges just won't do it and it
doesn't matter if you see yourself as
the left wing or a right wing person it
really doesn't matter because the
timetable for climate change it's just
being set by reality we need to act and
we need to act quickly that's that's one
and probably the most important thing
the other thing is if you have a
television throw it out the window
because if you keep on that now if you
keep on consuming the news and and and
all this the the relentless bad news
media you'll be so cynical or so
depressed and you'll believe that no you
know it's never going to change anything
right and that everything is hopeless
and you can't afford that because we
need hope to expect to be billed and
crowed this movement and then the last
thing is don't be an individual organize
you know join a group be part of
something bigger because that's exactly
what we've seen happening in the past
couple of years right people are now
very enthusiastic about someone like AOC
I mean I'm a groupie as well but she's
actually the product of a group called
the Justice Democrats not many people
know that but she wouldn't be there
where she is right now without her I'm a
product of journalism platform called
the correspondent which actually started
five years ago and gave me a place to
work and it's supported by 60,000
members don't you know this country in
September oh yeah in English in
September of this year so that's really
important to remember history is not
change is it by individuals it's it's we
move forward with by groups by
organizations so join one of them
sneaking two more there's one over there
yep hi thanks very much yeah I just want
to ask a question about the open borders
argument so I agree with you in general
that immigration is
generally a good thing and the the
downsides are overplayed but to what
extent do you think liberal societies
should work to sort of eradicate a
liberal views in certain immigrant
communities and in what ways should they
do that I'm thinking in cases for
example disagreements in the education
system for example so yeah basically I
wanted to to your your opinions on that
and and what your perspectives are in
how to deal with a liberal immigrants
for example just just here at the in the
third row just being round thank you
very much thanks for waiting
thank you
just thinking about another book that's
come out quite recently it's called
winners tackle and that author actually
talks about foxes at one point and how
there's only one thing them better than
being a fox and that's being a fox
that's responsible for looking after all
the hens and so I'm interested to find
out what your perspective is on cross
sector collaboration to address social
inequality do you think there is a place
for private sector and NGOs partnerships
to address poverty
okay so cross sector collaboration and
the whole question of a liberalism in
egalitarianism small questions yeah -
them off so I think the the issue and
anon who wrote the book when it takes
off I think he rightly points out that
often this these philanthropy schemes
are being used as sort of corporate
branding right sort of pretend we're
doing something about the world while
our actual business model is basically
to destroy the world or pollute the
world or extract wealth right so yeah in
that case I'm very skeptical of all
these private initiatives maybe just
change your business model first and
then start talking about philanthropy
apart from that I have nothing against
any kind of private initiative or
philanthropy I think that's all
wonderful and great and lots of
different organizations or whatever role
to play but this is I think one of the
reasons why the Davos thing became such
a big thing right because people just
can't stand the hypocrisy of
billionaires who were talking about
their wonderful philanthropy schemes
well at the same time at the same time
people know what's going on the massive
tax avoidance the exploitation of
workers not paying them a living wage
etc etc there was a question about
inequality in liberalism as well yeah so
that's a very old theory that I've
delved into a couple of months ago in
psychology which is called contact
theory now the idea is very simple
that people tend to be distrustful of
other people that they haven't met yet
but once you actually meet people in
most cases they're pretty nice right so
there is a huge body of evidence
actually a couple of years ago there was
a what they call a meta-analysis of more
than 500 studies since that this is
actually one of the most robust the
theories that we have in psychology it
really works if you bring people
together of different ages of different
ethnicities of different kind of
educational backgrounds it works you
know they actually like each other
so you can build your institutions and
your democracies around that I'm very
much in favor of mixing schools of
participatory democracy where people
actually get around you know and and and
and try and make compromises I think
that's sort of the basic insight that we
always need to return to make sure that
you actually meet people in real life
because in real life most people are
pretty nice I also will still achieve it
to immigrants tends to be greatest in
areas where there are no immigrants
exactly exactly
well that's a lovely note to end on I
think it's been an inspiring evening
thanks to recur would you join me in
thank you very much



## Keywords:
