---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t-N5nBQYbhA
---

# Video
Sam Harris: Nazis 'BENIGN' Compared To Islamic Extremists
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t-N5nBQYbhA)

## Transcript:
all right guys so uh this is going to be
an interesting one so Sam Harris a
prominent atheist author and commentator
debater podcaster whatever else you want
to call him recently came out and had
some interesting comments on Nazism on
Hamas on Islamic fundamentalism on
Palestinians Etc so we're going to watch
this about 2- minute long clip here from
one of his recent podcasts um and and
there's just so much to say about this
okay now before we get into this I just
want to say real quick that I I used to
be a big fan of Sam Harris I also used
to be a big fan of uh Richard Dawkins
who actually recently came out and uh
said that Christianity is a
fundamentally decent religion but Islam
is not and then he went on to call
himself a uh cultural Christian so there
seems to be a weird through line here
with many prominent atheists who I used
to be big a big fan of um whether it's
Dawkins or Christopher Hitchens or uh
Sam Harris i' I've also been a big fan
of you know Daniel Dennett and and Matt
dillah Hunty and several others as well
but there seems to be for some of them
this weird through line of islamophobia
to a large extent and um you know before
anybody gets in my comments and starts
uh raging about how this clip was taken
out of context and Sam Harris actually
wrote a whole book about his views on
Islam and he he did a 10-hour podcast
about his his views on this I don't give
a flying okay I'm not here to talk
about Sam Harris I'm here to talk about
the actual content of what he's saying
here so let's go ahead and jump into
this and see if we can try to form some
sort of an analysis from it the
overwhelming majority of people who are
this confused about how to live good
lives are Islamic extremists and the
worst of these are
jihadists now Hamas is a jihadist
organization in my view that's all we
need to know about it the question of
how it got that way is fundamentally
uninteresting as is the question of why
so many Palestinians have come to
support it it would be like asking in
1941 how the SS became so radicalized
and why do so many millions of Germans
support it that's an interesting
question now right now that Nazism has
been defeated but in
1941 there was nothing to do but kill
Nazis I feel exactly the same way about
jihadists in fact jihadists are worse
than Nazis in my view they don't have
the same power the Nazis had in the 30s
and 40s which is a very good thing and
we should keep it that way but their
ideology is actually
worse jihadism is essentially Nazism
plus an expectation of paradise it's
Nazism plus religious
fanaticism Nazism plus an eagerness to
be martyred and to see their children
martyred there are many differences
between Nazism and jihadism of course
but they only make the Nazis look
comparatively benign Nazism was a quasi
religious phenomenon these people were
not
rationalists it was basically racist
mysticism anchored to a cult of
personality but the Nazis didn't use
their own women and children as human
Shields
okay so
um there's a lot to unpack there I I
guess first of all if you ever find
yourself in a situation where you are
saying that comparatively the Nazis look
benign to really anything I think you've
already up at that point the
Nazis were not benign relative to
anything throughout human history I mean
seriously
what we're talking about one of the
worst atrocities in the history of
humanity now there are things you can
make comparisons to in terms of the
destruction the death that the Holocaust
brought on to the world there are other
comparisons you can make there are other
comparisons you can also make to ideolog
ideological comparisons right many
people right now are actually comparing
the fascist ideology the racial and and
sort of supremacist uh uh ideology of
the na to the modern state of Israel and
how they are treating the Palestinian
population so there there are definitely
some interesting comparisons to be drawn
on ideology on on other things as well
to the Nazis I don't think that that's
necessarily unfair and let me also say
that you know fundamentalist religious
ideology is something I disagree with at
a core level regardless of whatever
religion is okay whether it's Islamic
fundamentalism or Christian
fundamentalism or Jewish fundamentalism
any sort of theocracy any sort of
religious fanaticism I completely
disagree with I'm an atheist right um
and so I agree with him on that one
point but
again we're really going to try to make
the argument that uh Islam that uh you
know even fundamentalist Islam is
responsible for even remotely close to
As Much Death and destruction over the
last number of centuries as
fundamentalist Christianity or given
what we're seeing in right now which is
incredibly ironic given what he said at
the top of that clip that um you know
significant portion or a majority of the
people who are struggling to figure out
how to be good right now in the world
seem to be uh radical jihadists or
whatever the case may be we're currently
witnessing a genocide in Gaza we are
currently witnessing the supposedly
moral Superior the government the
military of Israel wipe out a majority
innocent men women and children a
majority actually women and children
make up the proportion of those who have
been killed in Gaza over the last 6
months this is a historic example of the
targeting of journalists the targeting
of Aid workers the deadliest conflict in
recorded history for both of those
categories you know we have seen 15,000
children who have been killed so far a
vast majority 2 million or more out of a
2.3 million population are displaced are
homeless are living in refugee camps
right now okay there is a an ongoing
famine inside of Gaza people are already
dying especially in the northern portion
of the strip of starvation right now and
he's having a conversation with himself
about what what a moral good is and how
fundamentalist Islam is somehow a
greater threat than anything else I mean
listen we we could have a conversation
about you know going back centuries and
centuries of massacres of of you know
absolutely Ric war crimes and and wars
that have been waged using religion
specifically Christianity as a
justification we could have that kind of
a conversation we could do the
comparison we could try to get a body
count comparison between various given
religions and if we were to do that I I
I guarantee you it's not Islam that's at
the top of that list in terms of a body
count it's in all likelihood
Christianity by by far in a way but I
don't even think that that's necessarily
useful because because what's happening
in Gaza right now is not the outcome of
a religious conflict this is the outcome
of a settler Colonial project that has
been going on for decades and decades
and decades and that's the real
criticism that I would have of Sam
Harris's uh analysis here if you want to
call it that and and the which is that
the most egregious part of what he said
was towards the beginning of that clip
that trying to understand how Hamas came
to power or why a substantial portion of
Palestinians support Hamas or have a
favorable view of Hamas that trying to
understand why that's the case he says
is not useful is not useful in the same
way that he says trying to understand
the rise of Nazism is not useful or how
so many Germans came to support the Nazi
project is not useful that to me a a at
this point what are we even having a
conversation about then what are you
actually interested in having a
conversation about various religious
texts that you and I would probably both
agree are largely
fictional is that really a better
conversation than to have a conversation
about the material conditions that lead
to the rise of a group like Hamas I mean
this is a history that is vitally
vitally important to understand if we
want to get an idea of for example how
October 7th happened
okay how Hamas came to be in control of
the Gaza Strip right how Palestinians
you know came to support Hamas to a
large extent you have to understand the
history of occupation of an ongoing
ethnic cleansing of apartheid of
structural oppression that Palestinians
have been subjected to for decades and
decades and decades and then a failed
peace process over that same period
where Israel in many instances
specifically went out of their way to
try to destroy more secular elements of
a Palestinian nationalist movement in
order to try to divide and conquer the
Palestinians so that they can continue
with their settler Colonial project and
their illegal expansionism you have to
understand every single element of that
in order to understand how we got to
where we are right now but also to
understand what needs to be done in the
future I mean listening to this short
little excerpt here granted right again
I'm not even attacking Sam Harris I
don't give a about Sam Harris but
listening to that short little excerpt
here it's it is a an encapsulation of
how I think a lot of people view this
conflict especially in the establishment
of of us politics and the media
Etc to try to have this conversation as
if the issue between Israel and
Palestine as a conflict is a religious
one the issue is that Hamas are are
fundamentalist radicalists right and
that's the main issue is that Islam
breeds violence right even though there
are billions of Muslims around the world
a vast majority of which are entirely
peaceful okay and don't want anything to
do with terrorism or War whatever the
case may be but to have that
conversation man is to ignore the actual
history of how we got to this point
right Hamas did not come out of nowhere
October 7th did not come out of nowhere
this conflict was never about religion
it was always about land it was always
about the ongoing settler Colonial
project and dispossession of
Palestinians and occupation and
apartheid and ethnic cleansing that's
what this was about from the start so to
try to reframe it in a religious
conflict it's it's not only wrong but it
also is incredibly
unproductive in terms of trying to
figure out what the we're going to
do from here what I I don't know because
I don't listen to Sam Harris what he
thinks should be done right now in Gaza
but if you want to have a conversation
about moral superiority and you're going
to somehow Place Israel and the United
States of
America above
anybody you probably need to do a little
bit more historical research or or
self-reflection or I don't know what
whatever is needed in this kind of a
circumstance but I I find this kind of a
conversation to be incredibly
frustrating because it seems like it's
almost
intentionally disingenuous it seems like
it's almost intentionally going out of
your way to ignore the his history of
all this to ignore the material
conditions in which people grow up in in
favor of just relying on a simple good
versus bad this religion is less violent
this religion is more
violent and and that's the conclusion
that you walk away with I mean it's just
so incredibly frustrating the other
thing that I'll finish off here with is
if you want to look at the history and I
mentioned this earlier in regards to
Israel trying to crush more secular
nationalist movements of Palestinians
but it it's not just Israel the United
States has done this as well right I'm
sure Sam Harris despises the Iranian
government for example and I'm not a fan
of the Iranian government government by
any stretch of the imagination either
but with with the clip that we just
watched it seems like he would look at
the Modern state of Iran and and would
just come to the conclusion that well
this is an inevitable result of Islam
this is an inevitable result of of jihad
or whatever the case may be and wouldn't
look at historical factors like hey did
you know that the the United States of
America and and the British at the time
uh helped to topple the more secular
democratically elected government of
Iran which then later through a series
of events and a sort of butterfly effect
led to the revolution that that you know
put in place the current government of
Iran that the United States despises so
much I mean you could look at so many
different examp examples especially in
the Middle East of the United States in
many instances actually outright backing
the more radical jihadists or
fundamentalist factions in any given
country in order to try to exert our own
geopolitical interests in the region so
again listen I don't want to get ahead
of myself here I don't know anything
about what Sam Harris has been talking
about recently but you hear things like
this and it's just it's so incredibly
frustrating and again I'm somebody who's
read several different Sam Harris books
I've read Richard Dawkins books I've
read Christopher Hitchens books all of
the rest of that and um I I genuinely I
don't know what the it is I mean
you guys tell me what is the issue with
so many Western atheists I mean that
that would apply that moniker would
apply to me as well but so many of these
high-profile Western atheists just have
this massive bent against Islam that
seems to be totally detached from
history totally detached from a material
analysis and I I I don't know why that's
the case so give me your thoughts down
below again will not be entertaining any
sort of uh you know raging comments
about how I need to go listen to a
10-hour Sam Harris podcast further
explaining his position I don't care
about Sam Harris I don't care about
Richard Dawkins uh do your thing but um
again this kind of analysis is is deeply
frustrating as as somebody who does want
to do an actual you know or have an
actual conversation about how we got to
this point and what would be the most
productive path forward trying to divide
religion against religion or pretending
as if this is a religious conflict that
we're talking about here at a
fundamental level is um is again
completely detached from reality at
least from my point of view politic guy
has the best politics believe me no one
does it

like believe
me
everyone is
sing


## Keywords:
