---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q7LJiTv_dhY
---

# Video
Seven Deadly Innocent Frauds of Economic Policy - Prologue - Warren Mosler
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q7LJiTv_dhY)

## Transcript:
seven deadly innocent frauds of economic
policy by Warren Mosler prologue the
term innocent fraud was introduced by
Professor John Kenneth Galbraith in his
last book the economics of innocent
fraud which he wrote at the age of 94 in
2004 just two years before he died
professor Galbraith coined the term to
describe a variety of incorrect
assumptions embraced by mainstream
economist the media and most of all
politicians the presumption of innocence
yet another example of Galbraith
elegant and biting wit implies those
Pepperidge waiting the fraud are not
only wrong but also not clever enough to
understand what they are actually doing
and any claim of prior understanding
becomes an admission of deliberate fraud
and unthinkable self-incrimination
Galbreath
economic views gained a wide audience
during the 1950s and 1960s with his
best-selling books the affluent society
and the new industrial state he was
well-connected to both the Kennedy and
Johnson administration's serving as the
United States ambassador to India from
1961 until 1963 when he returned to his
post as Harvard's most renowned
professor of economics Galbraith was
largely a Keynesian who believed that
only fiscal policy can restore spending
power fiscal policy is what economists
call tax cuts and spending increases and
spending in general is what they call
aggregate demand Galbreath
academic antagonist Milton Friedman led
another school of thought known as the
monetarist
the monetarist believe the federal
government should always keep the budget
imbalance and use what they called
monetary policy to regulate the economy
initially that meant keeping the money
supply growing slowly and steadily to
control inflation
letting the economy do what it may
however they never could come up with a
measure of money supply that did the
trick
nor could the Federal Reserve ever find
a way to actually control the measures
of money they experimented with Paul
Volcker was the last Fed Chairman to
attempt to directly control the money
supply after a prolonged period of
actions that merely demonstrated what
most central bankers had known for a
very long time that there was no such
thing as controlling the money supply
Volcker abandoned the effort monetary
policy was quickly redefined as a policy
of using interest rates as the
instrument of monetary policy rather
than any measures of the quantity of
money and inflation expectations moved
to the top of the list as the cause of
inflation as the money supply no longer
played an active role interestingly
money doesn't appear anywhere in the
latest monetarist mathematical models
that advocate the use of interest rates
to regulate the economy whenever there
are severe economic slumps politicians
need results in the form of more jobs to
stay in office first they watch as the
Federal Reserve cuts interest rates
waiting patiently for the low rates to
somehow kick in unfortunately interest
rates never seem to kick in then as
rising unemployment threatens the
reelection of members of Congress and
the president the politicians turn to
Keynesian policies of tax cuts and
spending increases these policies are
implemented over the intense objections
in dire predictions of the majority of
central bankers and mainstream
economists it was Richard Nixon who
famously declared during the double-dip
economic slump of 1973 we are all
Keynesian now despite Nixon's statement
Galbraith's Keynesian views lost out to
the monetarist when the Great Inflation
of the 1970s sent shockwaves through the
American psyche public policy turned to
the Federal Reserve and its manipulation
of interest rates as the most effective
way to deal with what was coined
stagflation the combination of a
stagnant economy and high inflation
I entered banking in 1973 with a job
collecting delinquent loans at the
Savings Bank of Manchester in my
hometown of Manchester Connecticut I was
the bank's portfolio manager by 1975
which led to Wall Street in 1976 where I
worked on the trading floor until 1978
then I was hired by William Blair &
Company in Chicago to add fixed income
arbitrage to the corporate bonds
department it was from there that I
started my own fund in 1982 I saw the
Great Inflation as cost-push phenomena
driven by OPEX pricing power it had
every appearance of a cartel setting
ever higher prices which cost the Great
Inflation and a simple supply response
that broke it as OPEC raised the nominal
price of crude oil from $2 per barrel in
the early 1970s to a peak of about $40
per barrel approximately ten years later
I could see two possible outcomes the
first was for it to somehow be kept to a
relative value story where US inflation
remained fairly low in paying more for
oil and gasoline simply meant less
demand and weaker prices for most
everything else with wages and salaries
staying relatively constant this would
have meant a drastic reduction in real
terms of trade and standard of living
and an even larger increase in the real
terms of trade and standard of living
for the oil exporters the second outcome
which is what happened was for a general
inflation to ensue
so while OPEC did get higher prices for
its oil they also had to pay higher
prices for what they wanted to by
leaving real terms of trade not
all that different after the price of
oil finally settled between $10 and $5
per barrel where it remained for over a
decade um from where I sat I didn't see
any deflationary consequences from the
tight monetary policy instead it was the
deregulation of natural gas in 1978 that
allowed natural gas prices to rise and
therefore natural gas wells to be
uncapped u.s. electric utility companies
then switched fuels from high-priced oil
to what was still lower priced natural
gas
OPEC reacted to this supply response by
rapidly cutting production in an attempt
to keep prices from falling below $30
per oil barrel production was cut by
over 15 million barrels a day but it
wasn't enough and they drowned in this
sea of excess world oil production as
electric utilities continue to move to
other fuels this book is divided into
three sections part one immediately
reveals the seven innocent frauds that I
submit are the most embedded obstacles
to natural - national prosperity they
are presented in a manner that does not
require any prior knowledge or
understanding of the monetary system
economics or accounting the first three
concerned the federal government's
budget deficit the fourth addresses
Social Security the fifth international
trade the sixth savings and investment
and the seventh returns to the federal
budget deficit the last chapter is the
core message its purpose is to promote a
universal understanding of these
critical issues facing our nation part
two is the evolution of my awareness of
these seven deadly innocent frauds
during my more than three decades of
experience in the world of finance in
part three I apply the knowledge of the
seven deadly innocent frauds to the
leading issues of the day
in part four I set forth a specific
action plan for our country to realize
our economic potential and restore the
American dream


## Keywords:
