---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YwttiZekP8w
---

# Video
"Sorry To Bother You' & Cinematic Socialism (TMBS 50 ft. Briahna Gray)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YwttiZekP8w)

## Transcript:

you have seen sorry to bother you you
wrote a very good piece about it thank
you
tell me about it it's a film written and
produced by boots Riley who I am NOT
cool enough to really have a lot of
awareness of him before this film I I'm
just finding out my boyfriend trying to
hit me two things
relevant I literally misunderstood what
you said there that's like whoa your
boyfriend he hit you because boots Riley
Wow I mean I really love that just
getting serious about their content you
never heard the coup he informed me
about the coup but you know it's a film
doing just to talk about briefly what
it's about
yeah it's a film about no but give us
brief synopsis for sure this young guy
he is millennial he doesn't have a lot
of financial opportunities he seems to
be unemployed he's been living in his
uncle's garage for some unspecified
period of time he isn't able to pay his
own rent the uncle himself is about to
get his house foreclosed on it's kind of
dire straits when his friend gets him a
job at telemarketing company it's a you
know a minimum wage type job the
basement of a building that's pretty
bleak his girlfriend also gets a job
there until one day and other coworker
teaches them how to use a quote-unquote
white voice which enables him to be
incredibly successful in skyrocket to
the top of the company at which point he
has an exceptionally good way for gray
and the white boys isn't about you know
this kind of 90s can't be to comicview
caricature or white boys it's supposed
to be this this voice that expresses
this kind of aspirational kind of
contentment this isn't that you don't
actually have a care in the world that
you're worried free if you will they say
your bills are paid or something bills
are paid it's right it's a very it's a
very class mediated definition of race
yeah
like yeah it isn't exactly what's going
on here yeah it does it does it well
that was actually what I was gonna say I
it's David Cross I had a minor quibble
about that actually because they they I
love the distinction the Danny Glover
character drew and then David Cross
started talking I was like maybe it
sounded like army hammer
you mean actually yeah I mean it right
who plays at the Miller later but I mean
that actually right he did have that
voice yeah David Cross his voice was it
was great it's definitely it was like
this sounds very Martin Lawrence II to
me yeah okay so so he does the voice he
skyrockets to the top yeah and at the
top no spoilers but he realizes that
there are ethical significant huge
effort whelming ethical implications for
the products he's being asked to sell
and meet and meanwhile all of his
friends down in the basement level have
organized with the help of this
organizer played by Steven Yeun from
Walking Dead and they've gone on strike
so he's got both the ethics ethical
concerns of the things being asked to
sell up top and also the ethics of
crossing the picket line every day to go
into work and earn all this money but
the money enables him to help out his
uncle pay off his house and move into a
new apartment and have some kind of
personal dignity get a new car you know
things they wasn't able to do before you
know take his girlfriend out feel like a
valued and productive member of society
and that's one of the things that I
really liked about the movie but it
wasn't just that he made the money and
got material things he made the money
and he was good at his job and that
mattered to him psychological dignity
yeah because we when you live in a world
where that tells more that your personal
value is so tied to your professional
value there is it's more than just being
able to earn an income
it's that satisfaction you get by it
being about from being told you that you
matter and so that that meant that for a
period of time in the movie I mean you
you don't begrudge him immediately when
he chooses to persist in this job
because he really was depressed I never
saying at all I think it was
very good thing across the board in that
movie was that it was very and it did
reflect I mean boots Riley is a
communist and it reflect like that movie
was not about individual sort of
perfection or heroism persisting against
circumstances at all yeah including down
to like whatever I don't I'm very I
don't I think if people get upset about
spoilers they have to deal with that so
we will try to not give you all the
spoilers yeah we can do it whatever way
you want well I don't need to like tell
them the twist but like we're gonna talk
about it and yeah so and this isn't like
you know this isn't a you know a
I don't know Agatha Christie novel like
this is not like oh man you discovered
capitalism was bad the whole mystery was
blown right but I think that the fact
that they as an example labor organizer
you know I was talking about this on
champagne sharks with tea and I've had
this conversation a couple other people
and I was always came up like why was it
that he had this kind of like sort of I
don't even I don't even know if I would
say honestly I don't think we think it
was sleazy but he had this like other
angle like this other sexual um like
interest in the guy's girlfriend right
and for me my interpretation was just
really simple it was like he's a good
organizer he's right about what they
need to do and he's also like a dude
okay and that's it like that that that
they just reflected lack of I mean and
and frankly conversely even the real
evil guy had a story of self
justification I thought the movie very
much across the board was pretty good at
like it's about systems not people that
really is the emphasis I my only calm
with the Steven Yeun character was that
he didn't end up with her perfectly at
the end I was like look Audrey was
robbed of a cookie
whoa literally was a cocky why doesn't
that I don't know her test at Thompson's
point I'm sorry I forgot the names
abilities real these characters in the
movie
but perd Tessa Thompson's point they
broke up they weren't on a break it
wasn't ambiguous you know cash look he's
a Greenfield his name yeah character he
his character acted up he was a great
actor he did I want that to be true I
don't know really do you think he's just
acting it as himself because I watched
on a bunch of interviews for to write
this review I mean presumably he as
himself is like an extremely successful
actor is probably a little bit more I
don't want to do that thing where a lot
of people that allow people do with
black actors where they're you know
they'll be like in the wire I'm like oh
that's not an acting they're just that
way but they're like a Juilliard trained
actor playing like a gangster I don't
want to do that thing but also I read
this long and interesting profile of him
and how his acting career emerged and
how it was very spontaneous and didn't
involve a lot of training and he kind of
just kept getting typecast and the
characters the three characters that I
know him from you know like it's get out
Atlanta and now this right we're all
kind of muted I'm kind of low-key
you know kind of laid-back do a lot more
in this I mean just because he was Lee
he was it was the main draw but I the
one thing I will concede to you is I
think a lot of why he works as an actor
is honestly you just empathize with him
like in the system not even asleep or
actually maybe not as positively he has
like you don't want hit bad things to
befall him because he seems like a very
nice guy I don't know that makes sense
but there's a lot of like he leaps out
in all of these different roles and
you're just like oh please could you
like give him a break because he just
seems like the last person that deserves
it
well in this review they were saying
this article about his life or whatever
it was saying that he's very he's
emotive eyes and all of it I think it's
true but he's very authentic and even in
the um there was an anecdote where he
a casting director or somebody was said
to him you know I'm just gonna save your
picture because you had this look you
have that like down-and-out look you
have this like struggle buster about you
type and that's not his fault fault
maybe he has even more his next role he
needs to play like a gangster or
like a animated perky I I don't I said
you do animated perky please like I know
that ma'am animated perky I haven't seen
his you know wait I have a question I
wanna get back to the bigger picture of
the movie but I but I'm just wanna not
we're not gonna get personal but I just
want to establish a brief standard here
because I have to be honest a lot of
women and I am NOT gonna say how I know
this I don't think they take like the
tight technically you've been broken up
with for three hours rule quite as
literally as you do first of all we
don't know how much time pass we're
short period of time like he was the bad
actor in the relationship she if she had
been around in a nice car and taking her
out for dinner is what a terrible guy
what an strike breaker that's
the politics she was mad at him for his
pounced you can't be mad at her she well
no but she wasn't conversely the the
paradox and actually tea made this point
to me which I agreed with like when you
go to her art space world where she's
doing this like frankly silly
performance and like there's like this
idea that it's really very elevated and
it's not she's just kind of being
debased he's the only one like even when
he's the strikebreaker who's giving in
to all his indulgences he's still the
only one in that more elevated
environment who can kind of make the
obvious moral call because he cares
about her I think that scene was very
difficult to read if I were going to
with my finger on what I thought was the
weakest part of the movie it would be
that scene now I've heard boots Reilly
say that he thought that her character
was the closest to representing
him and I've heard him talk about and I
read about this in my piece about the
limits of kind of political art and how
it's not connected to a movement then
it's useless but like literally and
figuratively performative and so I don't
know what to do with that scene but it
could be read as I don't know
paternalistically I don't I don't know
how to read his intervention on her
behalf in that room because the movie
didn't come back and prove him right
that he should have intervened you know
she never had some big wake-up call
where she was like you're right I didn't
like how that went down or I didn't feel
like I got what I wanted to get out of
that performance for all we know that's
exactly how she wanted to happen she got
a lot of money she sold a lot of pieces
you know advanced her political agenda
and everything was cool so it's just I
didn't thought that was a loose end yeah
that's fair I mean I had a different
kind of read on it but I think it's
totally fair to say it wasn't it wasn't
that wasn't a closed loop at all yeah
wasn't a closed loop at all but I just
but just to be clear first couple of
hours were good to go
if if you are the person who was broken
up with break up with him didn't she
break up with him well because of trash
behavior on his part yeah so you're
basically just it's always the man's
fault
that's right yeah it's just a
strikebreaker what kind of politics are
on the Michael Brooke show or we're
defending this strikebreaker I'm not I'm
just trying to make the rules really
clear that's what I'm trying to do I
have totally been of the eye I have
always I have he wasn't that cool
I have always practiced the policy of
whenever that has technically gone down
oh yeah absolutely I totally agree with
that I just wanted to make I just wanted
frankly Brie joy buy-in on that I look I
think as soon as the text goes out you
me frowny face you're good to go
that's what I think you can do what you
want to do in any circumstances in any
circumstances
but you just have to live with the
consequences of what you do it's like
when people say like are you allowed to
hook up with their friends ex mmm
sure but you have to be like you have to
accept the fact that maybe you're not
ever gonna be friends with that friend
again my board doesn't work yeah no
that's true well okay and I agree she
should have went with the organizer
totally she should have stayed with him
I thought they'd let them kiss and let
that have sex because they were making
up for that Romeo Must Die Oh sucks they
totally did she in the work I think she
said no she said she did everything but
everything but like like like I think
the kitchens I don't think she went in I
don't think you I don't think they
technically I by Bill Clinton his
reaction was that they did I don't think
they want sex I think I think well no no
weird our definitely depends it was I
the only person who went Bill Clinton
said it depends on what is is was like
that exactly think about it you didn't
see you later I was I didn't come back
to the country - mm oh one her is a
different scandal a foot right there was
other stuff there was a little more
heavy stuff than determining with
constitutes thank you but yeah I
do think that that what that scene was
like payback for alia the the the non
kiss and Romeo Must Die which I've never
actually seen male characters be the
love interest actually interact so that
was the great like blasian love moment
of cinematic history well if that's the
case then it really wasn't nearly enough
then and that was the boy cuz then then
you're in that limited case you're
totally right because if the point was
was to be like here's an Asian guy who
gets to like like the girl then
they should have given him a lot it
should have yeah and it girl who gets to
the super woke sign slinging union
organizer what's this Oh sign sling I
don't know how cool we might beginning a
little bit of me and my X chromosomes
over here we're gonna or or my
in fact I am loved all right I'm the
only one in the room I believe who likes
men anyway I'm gonna weigh it on this
okay no that's the all territory I just
wanted to know the technical definite on
a more serious note you think this film
synthesized capital and race in a really
smart way the best part no I actually I
agree I think I almost don't even care
how good the movie is or how funny it is
or how like it is all of those things
but what made me sit there with my mouth
a gape was the fact that I was watching
a movie where the central plot point was
about organizing and collective action
and that it wasn't a movie about you
know poverty and people in dire straits
where one individual by their wit's
and personal intelligence manages to
make their way out and trust will smith
movie yeah pursuit of happiness from
like ten years ago or so where it's a
biopic about a man who was homeless for
a period of time sleeping and the BART
train station and in San Francisco also
sat in San Francisco and then in the Bay
Area and who managed to get this
internship at a hedge fund or something
and work his way to the top and you know
save his whole family which is great it
was a moving movie I enjoyed it but this
is a movie in which you saw it didn't
matter that the protagonist was really
really good at what he did but he was
his genius he was able to get himself
out because he was exceptional he did
everybody one at the end of the movie
because everybody banded together and it
wasn't just that he escaped a system and
got himself into another worse but
better compensated system they were able
to actually change their conditions in
sorry to bother
I'm sorry to bother you I think that
that's very open-ended how it ended I
mean it's no they were taking the right
step why don't we don't know if they're
going to win that's true but I think the
big question part out of them
movie really is like I left it as this
is how it is you can if you get real
about it maybe you have a chance but
definitely not like there was any type
of inevitability of like I'm actually
are you kill monger is writing this and
saying that because there was like a
five-minute scene at the end where there
was at the community organizing Center
below yeah like you know T does the
thing or because there's just the end of
the movie there's a little clip where
he's talking literally about the end of
the movie it's open-ended we don't know
that's literally the case I think that
what's what I'm talking about it's about
that we know that they want the strike
and there was a conversation about them
all going back to work because they want
whatever conditions they had asked for
like that's that's my point and you can
call that a minor victory but in the
grand scheme of the world in which labor
has gets no attention from Democrats in
the public sphere where the idea that
there's anything that you could actually
do to change your conditions people
people feel like they're completely
without tools as to how to change their
conditions other than making it big
because there are gonna be a musician or
a basketball star or a lawyer or
something ridiculous
you know something ridiculous yes
nothing ridiculous this it was felt so
empowering that you could do something
just attainable and get yourself out of
a bind and that you didn't have to do it
alone and this wasn't sugar-coated this
was treated as a natural ordinarily
ordinary thing and it happened in the
course of this movie and that at certain
point you were rooting for the strike
almost as a protagonist more than you
were rooting for any individual person
let's definitely definitely achieve that
I mean literally this would be a plot
you know definitely a plot this would be
an actual plot spoiler and I will spare
people this even though I really don't
care but the very last part of the movie
does not deal with that it deals with
the next layer of what no no literally
it does so I mean there's a lot of
question marks in terms of like where
we're gonna go from here because at
least in his case he already had been
defeated in a pretty significant way so
what's the end ends with them it does it
always flips back it's the duality it's
not like I wouldn't I wouldn't leave I
didn't leave the movie with a
pessimistic read at all and I think that
was very
crushing and very much in contrast
actually to a lot of movies that get a
rap of being socially conscious they're
usually just various forms of poverty
porn that leave you being like oh my god
I should just do as many you know just
have as much fun as possible here
because that's it yeah but I think that
but but no I actually I actually in fact
I'm saying as a compliment I think it
really pulled off really underscoring
how disgusting things are how corrupted
how much of a serious uphill battle it
is and also was like and it's totally
achievable and it can be achieved in
these specific ways and here's a taste
of it I think it actually did that very
well but I didn't leave thinking like oh
cool we got this I thought like maybe
that was a good step in the right
direction yeah I don't think that I'm
saying that either what I'm saying is
that it showed that organizing works yes
and everything that's definitely true
and he said as much in interviews well
filled with afro pessimism which relates
back to this ridiculous Twitter spat
that I'm in right now it's like we're in
in a world where people have this
deterministic view of race and racism
and struggle and there's this weird
investment that people seem to have in
the perpetual nature of the struggle be
inevitable and unending nature of racism
and I find a classic malice I think part
of why I'm drawn to it so much in
conjunction obviously with a racial
analysis is because I find that there is
an optimism there that just doesn't
exist in a racial essentialized
framework and that's been my ongoing
critique of a number of prominent
black intellectuals in the white public
intellectuals that echo them I can't
explain the black intellectuals but I'm
my strong suspicion of white
intellectuals who echo that in such a
limited way I think in some cases look
it's not a bad thing for white people to
take racism seriously so that's very
defensible and
I also just get a sneaking suspicion I
mean I said this to tea because we were
contrasting it with get out I also think
I think get out it's a great movie get
out is actually technically probably a
much better oh yeah yes right like if
we're talking on that level it's a very
very yes just every part of it
smart yes perfectly together precisely
so if we're talking on that technical
level but the thing about get out one
that always struck me when I when I
first saw get out I was like this movie
is so good and so funny that like the
Bradley Whitford character in real life
would love this movie which is why it's
so devastating but I also think that
there is a way in which the
essentialized inevitability analysis of
anything by the way allows you know it
allows really very relatively frankly
racially and financially privileged
people to perform secular Christian
penance without putting any material
risk on the table and that is really to
me like I think just the unending you
know mark life and it's funny doing
conversations with him because he's it's
not like a significant Gulf but I mean
he's from Scotland like there's a
certain there is just like a certain
kind of change in frame and growing up
under Thatcherism and being blue-collar
and escaping economically but having a
much broader structural understanding
and he's joked that he always says to me
he's like he's like okay like I'm a
50-something white guy I'm an econ
professor
I'm upper-middle class I'm straight all
you know all the categories he's like
I'm super privileged I acknowledge that
I can keep all my money right and he's
like an e-zine he was saying like it's
the extent to which in his in his
experience that the implicit answer to
that is yes is a very big problem so
that's my read on the white side it's
like who doesn't want to simultaneously
have a certain ethos of ethics and
sacrifice without any of the actual
follow-through of you know cuz again
that's an sorry
bother you also think did a good job of
being like yeah you know like going on
strike is scary like I didn't
you know and and and especially frankly
I think it caught him really perfectly
in in an individual sense he had an
absolute right to be like look you guys
don't have much to lose I do that's it
daddy having neoliberal my on it that's
the trap but we it's exactly trap and we
and we precisely shouldn't pretend that
the you know the trap isn't very real
right but like but of course it needs to
be overcome and is the golden handcuffs
but I think that there is a big market
for the feeling of subversion without
the activate yes now I like I do I do
think that there are people that don't
kind of realize but that's what's going
on who our errant are really in good
faith oh yeah yeah I think I'll make all
of them by the way I think I missed all
of them I think it's a subconscious
thing but I think when you watch a film
like this and it just feels so different
sitting in your chair like my emotional
reaction I had this big goofy smile on
my whole face the whole time like I was
watching a superhero movie because I
thought that someone was about to like
win big like I was looking at like up a
hero about to take on him evil and win
and as soon as I saw how it was gonna
frame up I had like I could not believe
my eyes and it feels it just after after
like 32 years of just just all the
genuine but so negative discourse around
race it just feels like a light at the
tunnel which is also why it was so funny
to see so many people struggle to
articulate the class narrative of the
movie and who could only kind of process
it through the lens of race like I saw a
lot of people who really loved the movie
online who who were saying things like
yeah it's just a really great movie
about how you know like black people can
make it and race them and they were they
were kind of normally did a very very
good job of actually movies yeah no I
mean like a strikingly good job of even
just the technical distinction which I
keep hammering now of
the distinction between exploitation and
oppression yeah like exploitation as a
pure economic function that applies to
even the most privileged members of the
labor force but literally talks about
stolen labor as transferred to profit
and oppression as systems of literal
oppression and obviously they connect an
overlap but I thought they did an
amazing job of of tearing that out and
showing how they intersect showing how
they're distinct I thought that was to
me that was most commendable part of the
movie yeah I think so too but it's the
fact that so many people I don't mean
this in a judging way I just mean it's
it's a it's a commentary on where the
discourse is that so many of us don't
have the language to talk about things
in class terms even when we sit and
watch a movie that's so obviously about
class I mean even I included a quote
from Terry Crews interview about the
movie where he said a lot of really
great things and it was really moving he
was connecting it to his experiences
growing up in Flint Michigan and how he
recognized himself on the screen it was
a it was a group cast interview and I I
noticed that even among members at the
cast with the exception I think Tessa
Thompson got it the most but people
apart from boots were kind of struggling
like they weren't quite they weren't
talking in explicit class terms they
talked about kind of like a oppression
and how hard it is to make it and
there's a lot of explicit references to
race it weren't even actually often from
the movie like they were kind of putting
that on to the movie because the
characters in the movie were largely
black right but it was just it's
interesting to watch and to me like I'm
glad this movie is here because I think
it's forcing people to learn their right
to learn the language and learn how to
think of their circumstances in ways
that are different and in addition to
kind of the the racial oppression
frameworks that were at this point as
live as liberals more familiar with
right and and like I think it's also
really important time I have a project
I'm working on now where I'm like I'm
it's also dealing with the distinction
that like there's so many big arguments
and problems right now that just frankly
need like a systemic material Marxist
perspective or you're not gonna get out
of predicaments just and not even
there's like a moral perspective just
like literally that's the path that's
gonna be available to deal with some of
these things and then when you go into
the sort of still the broad debate it's
like it still matters significant like
you know as a client very limited
thinker he's you know debunking racism
and sam harris is promoting it like in
that conversation i have a lot more
things that i would bring to the table
in that conversation they're much more
structural but in the relative sense i
mean we have a guy with that well of
course of course and i think that's the
that's the dialectic that we have to
pursue and also even noticing the
distinctions between like the people
that you know are holding a position in
good faith that diagnoses a lot of
things correctly and has limits and then
at the same time this whole other you
know like i've been noticing the phrase
afro optimism pop up recently yeah and
and very much in line with what we're
talking about it is it is in your lane
and it is also in they like newest
version of the Moynihan report Bill
Cosby
pull up your pants Coleman use garbage
Lane and it's a very Amin it's our job
across a whole variety of fields to
explain like a pre and post critique
intervene where these arguments really
matter and also enlarge the perspective
and there's a lot for us to do and I do
think the movie helps us do that I do
too I would love to talk about the film
I think in a predominantly black forum
with some of the people who I know have
pushed back against me for making class
analyses online and because I've seen
this trend
there's people who really liked the
movie but resist the class analysis or
really like LoCascio cortez but want to
see her purely as an i do any politics
candidate right and it's difficult to
have those conversations online but the
the movie i'll christ uh cortez figures
like this i feel like they open a door
to breaking down people's kind of like
preconceived notions about what it means
to value a class analysis and it it the
the movie like that or a person who is
both you know a person of color and
genuine leftist Masana phi you know
the contradiction that they think exists
between those two things and is enables
some walls to be broken down I'm working
on it we're doing it join us for a lot
more all actually really quick for you
the postgame you think do you consider
Terry Crews to be a good actor yes okay
good I just wanted to make American here
I do too but I just wanted to make sure
cuz we're just setting a lot of clear
boundaries so I'm gonna just say if
you're broken up you're broken up it
doesn't matter who broke up with who or
what whatever the on the break I
will deal with what are the consequences
I choose to deal with free excuse you if
I choose to not take responsibility for
things that's my choice I'll choose that
responsibility Terry Crews a great actor
um a little bit of smoke for the main
actor even though he seems like a really
wealthy guy but if he doesn't play so
you ready in order to prove his worth to
you
the next role he plays should be
animated
right there opposed the other word you
use like animated and what plucky I
think look lucky Johnny an Oscar I think
and he just plays the same character
over and over again that's not a life
I feel like the best actors play the
same character I mean I basically I
listen to him on comedy bang bang and he
basically yeah that's him
he's that dude alright then I take back
what I said he's not that great of an
actor sorry to say but Brie convinced me
I thought you were great
if you're watching this all on her I
thought you were super talented and but
you know what here's what I would say I
think you're incredibly likeable and
talented dude and in your next role if
you play somebody who is plucky and
animated you can bring us over


## Keywords:
