---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CQeljWanQhY
---

# Video
Stephen Wolfram on Omni AI, Computational Irreducibility, GÃ¶del and Rule of Law
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CQeljWanQhY)

## Transcript:
let's say we had the omnipotent AI so to
speak that was able to you know where we
turn over the control of the central
bank to the AI we turn over all these
other things to the AI then the question
is we say to the AI now do the right
thing and then the problem with that is
and this is why I talk about you know
creating AI constitutions and so on we
have absolutely no idea what do the
right thing is supposed to mean and
philosophers have been arguing about
that you know utilitarianism is an
example of that of one of the answers to
that although it's not a complete answer
by any means it's not not really an
answer it's just a way of posing the
question and so I think that the you
know one of one of the features of so I
think it's a really hard problem to you
know you think to yourself what should
the AI Constitution actually say so
first thing you might think is oh
there's going to be you know something
like Asimov's laws of robotics there's
gonna be one
you know golden rule for a eyes and if
we just follow that golden rule all well
okay I think that that is absolutely
impossible and in fact I think you can
even sort of mathematically prove that
that's impossible because I think as
soon as you have a system that you know
essentially what you're trying to do is
you're trying to put in constraints that
okay basically as soon as you have a
system that shows computational
irreducibility I think it is inevitable
that you have ace of have unintended
consequences of things which means that
you never get to just say put everything
in this one very nice box you always
have to say let's put in a patch here
let's put in a patch there and so on a
version of this much more abstract
version of this of girdles theorem so
girdles theorem is you know it starts
off by taking the you know it's a girl's
theorem is trying to talk about integers
it says start off with piano's axioms
Turner's axioms you might say in piano
thought describe the integers and
nothing but the integers okay
so anything that's provable from Kiana's
axioms will be true about integers and
vice-versa
okay what Goethals theorem shows is that
you can that will never work that there
are an infinite hierarchy of patches
that you have to put on two pianos
axioms
if you want to describe the integers and
nothing about the integers and I think
the same is true if you want to have a
legal system effectively that has no
bizarre unintended consequences so I
don't think it's possible to just say
you know if you when you're describing
something in the world that's
complicated like I don't think it's
possible to just have a small set of
rules that will always do what we want
so to speak


## Keywords:
