---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=et10If-Xbj4
---

# Video
Stephen Wolfram on Reimagining Education, And Computational Thinking
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=et10If-Xbj4)

## Transcript:



Stephen I always start my podcast
interviews by asking what were you like
growing up and what would you say were
maybe some childhood experiences which
shaped you
boy what was I like growing up I think
um uh I noticed a school report from
when I was seven years old um which said
he is full of spirit and determination
he should go far which I thought was
actually quite uh quite a good uh um so
full of spirit and determination was at
least somebody else's uh uh version of
what what I was like um I
think you know I got to I was was always
a person who was interested in got
interested in different kinds of things
and did all sorts of different kinds of
projects and so at any given time it was
always like I'm going to do this I'm
interested in this I'm interested in
that um that uh back in the you know I
was growing up in the 1960s when space
was sort of a big thing and I got
interest in that and followed that and
sort of every deep space probe became a
personal friend type thing and that kind
of uh segwayed into being interested in
physics and Science and so when I was
probably 10 11 years old I kind of got
sort of seriously interested in learning
about those kinds of things and
discovered this amazing fact that you
can learn stuff just by reading books
you don't need to listen to some teacher
telling you things you can just learn it
by reading books and uh sort of that I
think at that time I was um
um you know I I my my self-image was
that I was a sort of average kid if you
actually look back I was probably sort
of the because there were all these
ranks of you know in in British schools
you know I was usually the the top kid
or close to the top kid in in all these
different metrics in sort of the the
fanciest schools and so on but that
wasn't my self-image at the time the the
the thing that if you'd ask me you know
what what is the thing that you do that
you actually care most about it's I was
doing physics and things and I was doing
quite quickly doing physics research and
so on and that was kind of a a separate
track for me from the learning Latin and
Greek and all those kinds of things um
that uh one did in those days as a kid
absolutely I was going to actually talk
about education but I'll save that for
later one thing I wanted to ask you
about you said there about your
self-image what was your self-image
because I understand that you were going
through all these different topics that
were interest to you and possibly not
learning all about the topic at school
you were going off on your own going to
libraries and doing the work yourself
what would you have thought of yourself
as in you said that you were amongst
other bright children did you not feel
or sense you were different to anyone
else when you consider the fact that you
were I think publishing science papers
at
14 yeah look I I I wasn't uh I had the
Good Fortune even in you know
kindergarten whatever to be around a
bunch of bright kids so it was you know
in fact it took me a long time before I
found a place where there was a group of
kids as bright as the ones that I knew
in kindergarten or group of people as
bright as the kids I knew in
kindergarten so it it that was a that
was a good start so to speak I mean I I
think I I wasn't really thinking about
myself that much from the outside so to
speak it's just like I'm doing the stuff
I you know the physics things that I did
I mostly did just as a sort of
personally I'm doing this because I'm
interested in it yes I started
publishing papers because that's what
one does if one's doing physics kinds of
things but it wasn't like I was telling
people look at all this amazing stuff
I'm doing in fact there's a lot of
things that I wrote at that at time that
uh I didn't show to anybody for 30 years
I finally put them on the web a few
years ago but um uh but you know they
were kind of it was done for for kind of
internal purposes um that uh I would I
think I would just say well I'm
interested in this stuff and that's why
I'm studying it absolutely and obviously
it's a theme throughout your life that
you continue to go down these rabbit
holes can I just ask one more thing
about childhood what were your parents
like in terms of encouraging you because
there'd be some kids whose parents would
probably say you know you don't need to
be bothering about this you're far too
young I assume your parents were very
encouraging no I mean they were my
parents uh I would say I would
characterize them as not knowing very
much about kids and so you know I was I
was sort of an only child for the first
10 years of my life and um it's like
well what a kid supposed to do you know
our kids supposed to go off and you know
study Physics and things like that they
didn't know it was um and I think uh uh
you know they were and the things I was
doing were things that they knew little
about I mean my my my father ran a
business for many years and uh also
wrote novels um as kind of a a side
thing my mother was a philosophy
professor in Oxford and um I think you
know the things that I did um and
somehow I think this is the thing
children sometimes do sometimes they
don't is you do things that are
different from what your parents do and
uh for example I always used to say you
know if there's one thing I'll never do
it's philosophy um and it's kind of
funny now because uh like I was just
doing a podcast yesterday about
philosophy with somebody so it's um it
turns out the Apple perhaps didn't fall
as far from the tree as as the young me
would have claimed it did um but uh uh
that that
um uh but no I I I don't think most of
the things I did I don't think I ever
really talked to my parents about and
since they didn't know sort of what kids
were supposed to do there wasn't really
a um uh you know there was there was
nothing much to um uh you know no
particular interaction about it I think
what's interesting is when there isn't a
model for something so you were like you
said an only child for 10 years it had
you had an older sibling perhaps they
would have had more different rules but
I mean I've got a child who's an only
child I've actually just started
homeschooling him as well and I feel
like when something hasn't been modeled
then the world is your oyster because
you can go and be free and pick up
topics and areas that normally at school
would be constrained to certain age
groups yes um technology is obviously
another massive passion of yours and I
wanted to ask you when did you first get
excited about
technology I think I was excited about
the future before I was excited about
technology and you know I think that
somehow the kind of as I say I was
interested in you know space and
spacecraft and things which is sort of
Technology but it's more kind of what's
the world going to be like in the future
you know there are things are going to
be sort of more interesting in the
future I thought um and uh I got um you
know I I suppose I'm a pragmatic user of
Technology um and you know I was got my
first kind of exposure to an actual
computer which in those days was the
size of a large desk
in when I was 12 years old and um that
uh you know I I was not it was not like
uh it's so cool that it's this big
machine and so on it's more I can do
interesting things with it and that's
kind of been my my attitude I think to
technology ever since now it isn't to
say that when a new piece of technology
comes out you know I'll be an early
person in line to buy the latest gadget
because I do like to understand what
technology can do but I would say it's
more the what it can do than and and you
know I understand the the workings of
the technology because I want to do
things with it not because it's sort of
an end in itself so to speak absolutely
so what's a light bulb moment for you
when you realized that perhaps the
computer was going to be a a massive
part of your career path I know that you
were um looking at computational uh
languages and everything like that from
an early age well as early as you could
but when did did you start using
computers seriously well I was 12 13
years old I mean I I was uh actually my
my very my most serious early effort was
studying a physics problem that uh was
tipped off to by the cover of a book
that I bought I know exactly when I
bought it because in those days I
actually wrote the dates when I bought
books in them so was June of 1972 so
when I was 12 years old um and uh it had
this particular illustration of a
physical process of uh gas molecules
bouncing around in a box and becoming
more random and so on and I was
interested in that and I thought you
know I'm going to reproduce the picture
in this book and understand more about
it on a computer and that was sort of my
first serious uh kind of um computer
effort it didn't work actually in
subsequent years I realized that I
actually did discover something that
later I would find out was really really
interesting but I didn't know what to
look for at the time and so at that time
it just looked like it didn't work um
but uh that was that was kind of my
earliest um serious effort it's kind of
a a funny thing about life that I
finally 50 years after that moment I
finally kind of finished understanding
that phenomenon I even wrote a book
about it this last year about the second
world of thermodynamics um and so that
that's my that's my longest running uh
you know project that I started and
didn't yet finish um is that 50-year
span it's kind of satisfying to to be
able to finish it after after that 50e
sort of span of time but but that was
the that was the first um sort of big
computer effort then I started using
computers to do calculations in physics
and so on and uh you know I discovered
that it sort of it gives you a kind of
superpower to be able to think about
things then have the computer help you
then you see what it did and you think
about it some more and so on the I
suppose if there was wasn't really a
light bulb moment but a a uh a light
bulb period it was that I was probably
what 15 16 years old or something and um
was using computers a bunch do physics
was managing to achieve all kinds of
interesting things with that and I kind
of didn't really internalize the
question of why were other people not
doing the same thing because these tools
were not I mean they were a little bit
different difficult to use and to
Wrangle and so on but but that they
weren't I mean could have been done by
other people but for some reason they
weren't doing it and so I had this kind
of unreasonable Advantage so to speak
and I think at the time I just would
have said well just it's an obvious
thing to do and uh you know I didn't
really internalize so much this wait a
minute why are other people not doing
this but so then what happened was I I
was using a bunch of tools that have
been developed out in the world and in
1979 which was uh when I was 20 years
old I guess I just got my PhD and it was
like okay I'm going to make this plan
for what I'm going to do uh sort of
later in life so to speak part of the
plan was look I need to be using
computational tools and i' kind of
outgrown the tools that other people
have built and so that was the moment
when I decided very definite time in
November of 1979 that um uh it's like
I've got to build my own system for
doing this and that was probably a the
moment at which I got much more serious
about these kinds of things and uh said
I've got to figure out how to make this
work then after that I
um uh it's funny how these things happen
because the few years after that I was
back to doing basic science trying to
solve these problems about sort of how
do complex things happen in the world
and that um was uh the thing that I
ended up doing was sort of using a bunch
of ideas about computation which I now
realize many years later I thought of
using because of the experience that IID
had in building a practical computer
system I you know at the time it was
just like well this is the obvious thing
to do but later on when you say you know
why hadn't this been done zillions of
years earlier it's because one had to
have had that experience alongside
experience of doing physics and things
like this to think of that and you know
it's it's not something I I mean in in
more recent years partly because I've uh
sort of been interested in planning
things partly because I've studied
history quite a bit I I asked more the
question why did other people not see to
do this but I wasn't asking it back in
those days I don't think looking back at
your history that there's ever a time
where you've been constrained by rules
or regulations or people you know it's
like you take your own path you forged
your own path and I think that's part of
your success but talking about Edge
there I wanted to ask you you've talked
before I think is it called thinking
apparatus the system I don't know no I I
sometimes refer to thinking apparatus as
telling people keep the thinking
apparatus engaged when you're studying
different kinds of things because people
tend not to they tend to say I'm a
physicist okay I'm going to run a
business wait a minute I don't have to
to you know the things that I know to
ways of thinking that I have in let's
say physics that's not something I'm
going to engage when I think about
running a business which I think is a
mistake but uh uh you know for me the
the thing you're right I've I've tried
to figure out what to do for myself and
then go see how to do it so to speak um
and I've been lucky I suppose that the
things that I've chosen to do are things
that I sort of have platform to be able
to do um but it's not wholly luck
because there are things where I say
look I could in principle do that but I
have I don't have the the platform to be
able to do it let me not do that let me
do something different because there's
quite a lot of things that I want to do
but the thing that's been sort of
surprising to me in in my life is that
I've sort of alternated between doing
basic science and doing technology
development and so on probably about
five times in my life so far and you
know if I look at what I've been a able
to do it's kind of this Tower that's
ended up being built where the things
that I can do now happen because of the
things that I did in the past it wasn't
particularly planned that way it's kind
of an opportunism of there are things
which I kind of you know vaguely thought
about doing and then I realized gosh
I've now got the ability to actually
actually go ahead and do this and it's
you know particularly some things
recently in basic science in our efforts
to understand fundamental Theory physics
and so on it's uh it's a very strange
feeling because I realized that if you
move almost any brick in this Tower one
wouldn't have got to that point and it's
very strange that um it's kind of a a
strange you know an accident just missed
so to speak that it was actually
possible to to get there and that it
didn't get derailed by by many things
that could have been different it's also
really interesting I mean I think it was
Steve Jobs that said you can only
connect the dots looking back but you're
right about this kind of tab block and
it's always interesting because some
people will be distracted from projects
like some of the projects you do you
know ridiculous amounts of time in the
sense that you've put so much effort and
time in you know a decade if we talk
about new kind of Science and things
like that what is it do you think what
are the traits that allow you to keep
focused because I've interviewed other
scientists and that's one of the things
they talk about that when you're looking
at a new concept or Paradigm there's
often a lot of naysayers and these
people can cause a few headaches if you
listen to them what would you say gives
you the edge in terms of allowing you to
keep going a certain amount of
confidence arrogance and not really
caring what other people have to say um
which is you know I I
sometimes it it I've been lucky that I
did a bunch of projects early in my life
that worked out pretty well and so that
meant that I thought okay I can do
projects even if they're pretty
difficult they're probably going to work
out well in fact I don't think I've ever
sort of seriously embarked on a project
project that didn't work out and
sometimes the definition of the project
changed but the project in sort of if
you look at it did that project work out
the answer is yes and after you know you
keep doing that you become more
confident for the next project so to
speak and in terms of you know any
sufficiently Innovative project people
are not going to understand it you're
the one who's going to understand it not
uh you know pretty much everything I've
done if I'd said to people wait a minute
should I do this is this a good idea
people would have said no that's crazy
but I didn't ask them most of the time
and you know I don't know I'm sure there
are you know I'm sure you can find on
the web people saying this is going to
fail this is a terrible thing I don't
need those things not um U it's it's a
thing where you know there are more
extreme versions like like when we built
this uh our wolf malfa system um back in
the mid ORS so to speak um I had the
issue you I have a company with you know
hundreds of people in it and we have
successful products and then I'm going
to do this thing that to most people
even within my own company are like this
is not going to work and so there was I
think at the at the peak I was sort of
hiding about 200 people working on this
kind of uh Skunk Works project so to
speak that um I didn't see the point in
engaging with you know the main team at
the company because they were just going
to tell me it's not going to work
and no to their credit once we'd gotten
it to the point where it did work you
know it was you know it took about an
hour demoing it for people to say wow
this is really cool you know this is how
we can use it in other places etc etc
etc which and it was definitely the
right decision to not sort of as it was
being built engage with people and have
them say it's not going to work this
thing doesn't work etc etc etc it's the
same thing when I wrote A New Kind of
Science which was a decade long project
at the very beginning of that I I was
sort of talking to people a bit about it
and you know part of it was oh I don't
know what the point of this is or
actually more harmful still was this is
really cool what about this whether this
was something that wasn't in my path and
actually the things that I'd figured out
I should do were a nice coherent set and
that those were the things that were
only going to take a decade to do so to
speak if I chased down you know chased
every rabbit down its hole so to speak
for all the things other people said I
should do I wouldn't have finished it in
a lifetime I was going to say about that
book I ordered it just before Christmas
and I was quite surprised to get this
huge 1,000 Page Plus book turn up you
put so much into it like we said you you
know 10-year project with all your work
there are lengthy periods of time where
you're going deep into it what is the
kind of result once it's out there
because I find that you know I've
written a couple of books Nothing by the
way nothing compared to yours but I'm
just curious like once it's out there in
the world does it take a toll because I
imagine while you're in the project like
you said you get these incremental wins
which keep you going and I'm sure it's
invigorating writing about this stuff
but once it's out in the world does it
do you kind of crush and burn or you
just on to the next thing I'm on to the
next thing I mean in fact in the case of
that book I you know one of the things
that was uh sort of I spent a bunch of
time interacting with the world about
that book you know traveling around
talking to people people you know and I
and I built certain systems like a
summer school and things which still
goes on today for people who want to
learn about what's in that book and how
to do things based on it and so on
because it wasn't you know it wasn't
feasible for me to go and sort of
personally do all those interactions but
I think the uh I mean in in doing a
project like a 10year project for
example there's a certain kind of
dogged tenacity that one has to have to
get the thing done and I think you know
in a sense I I consider with that
project the biggest achievement of that
project was getting it done because in
addition to doing that you know I was
ceoing a company and things like that
while I was working on that project and
it took you know continual Focus every
single day you know lots of time and I
think I don't know I suppose that that a
thing that know happens to me is that I
get these projects I'm going to do this
I'm a sufficiently kind of determined
character that I'm just once I've
started it I'm going to finish it um and
uh it's and I found and that's it you
know is it locally if you ask me are you
having fun doing it sometimes I am
sometimes I'm not sometimes I'm just you
know doggedly doing it so to speak um I
think in terms of books are funny
because when a book is done it's done um
apart from maybe going and promoting it
and talking to people about it software
for example doesn't have that
characteristic I mean the things that
you know we started building in what's
now wol from language back in 1986 you
know we just brought out version 14 a
couple of weeks ago and it's a thing you
know that's a thing you live with kind
of every day so to speak it's it's not a
a uh it's over with type of thing same
is true with building companies and so
on it's something where you know you I
mean I I know that i' long ago signed up
for I never get to take a vacation ever
I mean in other words it's you know I've
been running my company for what 36
years now um and uh every time I even
think about wait a minute let me take a
day off something will happen which
doesn't usually most days nothing
happens that's so dramatic have to deal
with it but somehow there's there was
this phenomenon where every every time I
would consider like let me maybe think
about taking this day off it's like
something happens that I have to deal
with and it's like well I can't do that
now so I gave up and so it's kind of
like once once signed up for this kind
of uh lifetime commitment so to speak
which is uh uh you know which as far as
I'm concerned is okay it wouldn't be you
know I can see there are you know for
example for somebody like me it's much
easier to be in charge of a thing
responsible for the thing and you know
having to make all kinds of decisions
where you know oh there's a risk for
this decision blah blah blah that's much
less stressful for me than being in a
situation where there's some you know
group of people who are supposed to be
coming to some kind of consensus about
what to do and I'm trying to persuade
other people I I I hate that not very
good at it I hate it it's um you know
for me it's much easier to just be let
me decide what I want to do for myself
and then try and make it happen so to
speak um knowing that you know sometimes
I'll make mistakes and you know minor
disasters will happen but it's uh I much
prefer it that way when you were saying
there about the holiday I just remember
a story from Elon Musk not to compare
you to him at all but I think he said he
once went on holiday and got malaria and
almost died and that was like all the
lesson he needed never to take a break
again so I don't think he's had a
holiday either I'm going to jump around
a bit because I think there's so many
interesting topics that we could talk
about but I did mention earlier on about
education as someone who has as I said
earlier forged your own path you've also
got four kids and you've gone into these
deeply technical fields and obviously a
lot of it you've said from the start you
kind of pursued yourself what do you
think of school education in terms of
how do we create more polymaths I'm
always wondering why we don't have more
polymaths and I thought well maybe it's
the way the school system is set up so
as someone who has set up I know you've
done this summer school I think you got
wolf Institute and you've got these live
q&as for kids which are fantastic if you
could reimagine education what would it
look like what subjects would you get
rid of what ones would you keep right I
think one thing to realize about
education is you know all people are all
different and what's a great education
plan for one person might not be for
somebody else I mean the structure of
the world you know the kind of uh sort
of streamlined education that has
existed for the last what 100 50 years
in most places um doesn't really have
the freedom to be sort of you know
customized for each individual kid that
isn't um so you know if you ask I don't
know for for you know my kids did a
bunch of homeschooling they did a bunch
of some of them did other things that
you know it's been different for
different kids um and I think the uh um
you know it it um in terms of one of the
things that has tended to happen right
as the as education gets more kind of
streamlined and
industrialized so the thing turns into
you know oh we got to have these
standardized tests we've got to teach
things where we can kind of put them on
a production line so to speak and they
can you know it's much easier to teach
something mechanical than it is to teach
something less well- defined something
that involves you know actual sort of
creative thinking and so on and
unfortunately people will say well we're
going to teach you know creative
thinking and then they're going to but
they try and put that on industrial
production line and it becomes quite
silly um because it's like you know to
be creative you do one two three four um
yeah which uh you know is is kind of
defeats the um the the idea of being
created so you know I think the
um uh I did an exercise once with one of
my kids actually who was uh you know you
look at the encyclopedia and you ask
what fraction of the encyclopedia is
taught in you know would you learn about
if you just went through standard school
I think the answer is between a quarter
and a third okay of things you would
sort of touch on in some way or another
topic areas there's a lot you wouldn't
um that has the feature that um uh for
example you know people those areas of
the world are completely unknown to kids
and I think one one of the things that
I've been interested in is sort of how
do kids know what's out there in the
world how do they figure out what they
might be really excited about because
the thing that for me for example I'm a
person who learns when I have an
objective if you say to me just learn
the subject for the sake of learning the
subject I really I you know even now I
basically can't do that um you know it
it um uh it's you know so I'm kind of a
a a project driven person I'm also not
really a competitor person that is if
you say to me you know you should do
this because you're going to be able to
win the you know be the top of the
leaderboard I'm like I don't care um
that's my particular thing I mean
because my particular egotistical you
know twist or something is the things
I'm most interested in doing the things
that I think I can uniquely do and by
the time I'm sort of competing with you
know 100 other people to do it I kind of
know it's got unique to me because you
know everybody's in the same race type
thing and you know I I tend to avoid
those things so for me that's not a
motivator but for some people that is a
good motivator so you know I I think uh
this this um this question about sort of
you know can you find something that you
know really resonates with you I think
the sooner people do that in their lives
even if maybe they get the first thing
they they come up with isn't the thing
that ends up being the final thing even
having something where you say I really
care about this and I'm going to you
know try to pursue this is very helpful
and I think a lot of kind of um you know
in the way that school is set up it's
it's not it's just like there's this
giant production line there's many
pieces to it by the time you get into
sort of elite type schooling it's like
and not only do you have the main
production line you also have all these
side production lines of all the extra
activities and pretty soon everybody is
so unbelievably busy that they have no
moment to sort of think about anything
that isn't part of the production line
so to speak so I mean I think that
that's you know at the level of sort of
the the big picture it's
uh El I should say that a lot of a lot
of what's being done is teaching
mechanism not teaching sort of how to
think about things it's teaching how do
I mechanically do a piece of math or
something like this now you know there
is one you know in terms of content the
big area that is I think sort of the
critical area is this kind of
computational thinking thing and you
know the way I like to think about it
it's it's really kind of a big deal in
the history of sort of intellectual
development of our species I mean first
you know the first thing we had to sort
of formalize what's going on in the
world is human language which you know
has been the big win for our species
relative to all others I think and then
you know then we got logic then we got
mathematics and now sort of the new way
to sort of formalize thinking about the
world is computational thinking and by
the way computers help you do that so
you kind of get this extra sort of Boost
from if you think about things
computationally if you formulate your
thinking computationally then the
computer can help you do it um and can
sort of take you give you sort of the
superpower um Beyond you know once you
once you can think about things
computationally you can control this
kind of superpower that takes you a long
way and you know it's pretty clear that
the future of pretty much every domain
you know call it X X is kind of a
computational x and if there was one
thing that kids should learn it's how to
do kind of computational thinking now
you might say how should they do that
well you know I built a bunch of tools
that uh kind of one can think of as
being the main tools that kind of
provide kind of the the the notation and
language for thinking about things
computationally but if you ask the
question well you know is there a
textbook you can read about
computational thinking the answer sadly
is not really which is why in fact a
project that I'm currently doing is
trying to write such a thing which I'm
I'm sort of frustrated to have to do
myself because I figure that that
there's just you know kind of there's a
lot of people who know this is important
and it's kind of one of these uh but as
as I get into doing it I actually
realize it's not quite as easy as one
might have thought there are a lot of
kinds of things that you know one's
basically building a way of teaching a
thing that is never systematically been
taught and so there's a lot to invent in
how that works and so that makes it
interesting for me um even though I'm a
little frustrated to have to do this
project um but uh you know in terms of
what people should be learning
computational thinking is a is the thing
that is going to let people sort of
attach to the superpower of computation
now in uh uh it is sort of structurally
in education it's very difficult thing
because computational thinking is
probably the first sort of really major
new paradigm for thinking about things
that has come into existence during the
time that sort of streamlined education
has existed there's never before been
something really big that uh sort of you
know there have been tools like you know
the web or computers in general and so
on but in terms of the core sort of how
do people think about things this is the
first really new thing that's come into
existence during that period of time and
how should one then deal with it well I
think it's a long complicated problem
because you know there's there's this
giant machine of Education that exists
and sort of turning turning the
operation of that is really hard and and
for example that is not my expertise I
mean you know it it in in you know this
is my sort of the things I tend to do
are you know Define what can be done and
go and do it not you know sort of get
the world to turn all this kind of
complicated Machinery in the direction
of of doing those kinds of things but I
think in terms of content that is
clearly the uh you know that's the big
thing in terms of content that um uh is
important going forward I think that by
the way I mean as I uh even write about
sort of computational thinking kinds of
things I think there is sort of the
opportunity to actually inject the idea
of thinking into uh sort of the the
process of Education partly because
given that sort of the computer is
helping you the Mach the mechanism the
the sort of mechanical stuff becomes
very obviously irrelevant and uh uh what
doesn't become irrelevant by the way is
learning actual facts and content I mean
one of the things that I realize even in
in writing about sort of computational
thinking is you know this this book
course whatever it'll turn into lots of
different things um you know is going to
have all kinds of sections about actual
stuff like molecular biology or you know
systems engineering or whatever else
these actual content areas which by the
way are vastly easier to explain in a
computational thinking framework than
they would be without that I mean just
incredibly much easier to explain I one
of my exercises is can I have a small
section that basically teaches calculus
um which people usually think of this is
a big Challenge and you got to learn
these different things I don't think
that's true I mean i' I've tried it
obviously on lots of kids it seems to
work out fairly well once you have the
the bigger ideas of computational
thinking then going in and saying hey
there's this application and it's
calculus for example seems to become
fairly easy now what you're what you're
learning there is sort of how to what
calculus is how to use it and so on
you're not necessarily learning all the
tricks that a human might be able to use
to be able to solve this integral which
by the way a computer can do in a
thousandth of a second um the uh and and
doesn't use the same tricks that humans
use does it in a much less interesting
in some sense uh mechanical kind of way
but um so I mean I I think the uh the
thing that you know one of the things to
emphasize is you know the fact that
one's teaching something that has the
word thinking in its name does not mean
that there aren't lots of facts I think
that the the sort of anchoring what
one's learning to sort of just knowing a
lot of stuff about the world I mean you
talk about polymaths and so on you know
part of the way you get there is just by
knowing a bunch of stuff which amounts
to a bunch of facts I mean what I always
notice is there are facts you can learn
and then there's kind of a way of
thinking about things and every
different field has a somewhat different
way of thinking about things and that's
the the you already get quite a long way
by just knowing the facts then to know
the way of thinking you know if you're
going to be a pure mathematician there's
a certain way of thinking about things
if you're going to be an economist
there's a certain way of thinking about
things those are harder to learn and but
you can't learn them at all if you don't
have you have no hope if you don't have
the underlying facts um and I think sort
of the computational thinking thing
allows one I think to to span a lot of
areas but to sort of be able to have you
know you need to base it on the facts of
those areas so those are those are
really worth worth learning when when
are you going to have this ready this is
something I want to see out in the world
well yes I don't know I just started I'm
on chapter three it's probably going to
be 40 or 50 chapters so oh my God okay
um I mean I it's see this is one thing
about being doing big projects is if you
ask me I mean my internal view of this
project is I'm just going to work on it
every day and it'll get done when it
gets done if I started to think to
myself oh my gosh you know this is going
to take me a year year two years
whatever else I might start freaking out
much better that I just am like I'm
taking it you know one day at a time I'm
going to just keep keep writing it I
don't know I I I am I I don't think it's
going to take that long but I don't
really know time tell yeah right I mean
I think that uh it's and I might I'm
trying to figure out whether I should
release incremental pieces of it which I
may um the the the the only constraint
on that is the thing about if you
release incremental pieces and people
keep telling you you should change that
you should change this you should change
this you'll never get the whole thing
done you have to ignore them Stephen
like like you said before absolutely
right I know I mean that that's uh no I
think but but uh it's um uh yeah so so
it's sort of an interesting process to
think through this field of
computational thinking it it's sort of a
humbling thing and it usually is with
the kinds of projects I do that um uh
you know this is a field I've been
thinking about what nearly 50 years now
you would think I could just sit and you
know i' know exactly what to say turns
out it's not true because I've never
quite introspected some of the kinds of
things that one needs to talk about and
um so that makes it interesting for me
you know I think one thing to say about
projects and the projects one does is
there's there's the question of you know
the next project how does it Stack Up
relative to all previous projects one's
done and you know there's I know you
know one of the things that can be a
trap in people's careers is you do a
successful project then you say okay
every project I do from here on out has
to be bigger better stronger than the
successful project I did uh I you know
that is not a trap that I tend to have
just because each project I get excited
about I'm going to do it I have no idea
whether this you know for example last
year I wrote this thing that took me a
couple of weeks that was a explainer
about chat PBT okay which is um which is
probably the the the thing of mine which
has the highest ratio of number of times
it's been read to the effort that I put
into writing it okay but it was not you
know the fact that I even did it is was
a comparatively easy thing for me to do
and um uh it was you know I wasn't
thinking to myself I'm doing this
because it's the the next great thing
I'm doing it's just I'm doing this
because I'm I'm fed up with people
asking me how does chat gbt work I think
I should just write it down and um it
turned out that that was a more unique
effort remains a completely unique
effort of trying to explain what's going
on so to speak at a at a reasonably high
level while still being grounded in sort
of the technical details and again I I
you know when I started doing that I was
not I was neither thinking about look
are other people going to do similar
things nor was I thinking about is this
the the the sort of the the very bestest
thing I could do at this um at this
moment I think what's great about you
and and for most of your career is
obviously there's a lot of kind of
working in public that goes on with you
and and even more so today there's so
many things that you've done and
meetings that you've had that are now
available for the public I want to ask
you what are the benefits to the
business of working like this I'm not
sure I mean in uh I think that
well there are some sort of small scale
benefits the uh it's great you know if
you're designing doing product design
for example and you have a live stream
and a bunch of sort of world experts in
that topic tune in and give you comments
that's useful uh it's great that you
meet people from around the world so to
speak who have weird incomprehensible
handles and you realize that's a really
talented person we should try and hire
them I wonder you know where they are
who they are what they're is we have no
idea what we know is the handle um and
that's that's been a successful thing I
think in terms of our uh certainly for
our internal teams um having just the
the kind of clean records of all these
things that we figured out and decisions
we made that's useful I mean we could do
that without having them be streamed in
public but I think that the uh the
streaming in public thing kind of makes
sure that people are sort of staying on
topic through the whole meeting and so
on and uh you know one only gets to tell
I mean I don't think the meetings that I
do in public are really any different
from meetings that I do not in public
the ones that I do not in public are
usually kind of they're probably less
interesting because they're mostly you
know what's the status of this project
you know what you know has this team
delivered this thing which I think the
public would find boring and uh you know
it's it's that there are there are
dynamics of that don't really make sense
in public but in terms of the kind of
the intellectual side of product design
that's uh that's been I would say a good
thing there I think in um things like my
uh sort of Q&A Science and Technology
Q&A for kids and others and my various
other uh live stream efforts of that
kind I started doing those at the
beginning of the pandemic because I
thought you know let me do this public
service there are all these kids who are
not in school and you know I've done in
person a bunch of times you know q&as
for for kids about science and they seem
to have fun let me just provide this as
a public service and then I realized
it's really interesting for me to do
this I I find it actually uh kind of
relaxing it's kind of like it's it's
it's a bizarre process because you know
you're just sitting down you're looking
at a camera and you're yakking for an
hour or so um and uh but for me it's the
I can tell that I have become a
measurably better explainer of things as
a result of doing that and it's in a
sense it's a very exacting thing because
you know as you know from these things
you you know you're looking at the
camera you can't just you're doing it
live you can't just stop and say uh you
know and and it's I think it's it's been
uh as I say it's it's helped me to be
better explaining things quite often
when I start explaining something in
response to some question somebody else
that i' never thought about before I
figure out something new in fact one of
the challenges which I haven't figured
figur out how to solve and I really
should solve is that occasionally I'm
doing these live streams and I realize I
just had a new idea that you know I'm
I'm now telling people about and because
I'm just you know doing this live stream
I'm not like taking a note to myself
that's an idea I should uh I should pay
more attention to so that that's that's
that remains one of the bugs in that
kind of uh live streaming is because
you're kind of live to the audience all
the time you're not like let me take a
note of that type thing and I also I I
find it sort of amusing that people will
ask questions that range in terms of
what's needed to answer them from kind
of high school level knowledge to you
know I just talked to the world expert
in that a couple of weeks ago and that's
how I know the answer to this to I don't
think that's ever been figured out
before but I just had an idea about how
to figure it out right here and now so
to speak and you know I suppose it's
it's a piece of perhaps internal
Amusement to me I don't really make any
distinction between those those things
in terms of what I'm explaining to
people I sometimes I'll mention that you
know people don't know about this or
this is a newly discovered thing but
it's uh uh it's kind of a u I suppose
for for me it's sort of I think it's
sort of interesting that one to have
that kind of span of things which are
well known and and not I feel like it's
it's a you know I could say to the
audience gosh if you you know paid
attention in you know high school math
you would know this but that's not my
you know I'm not interested in doing
that it's just like let me try and
explain it I don't know what your
background is but let me let me try and
do the best I can in explaining it
that's fantastic I always think you know
at school we usually have if if we're
lucky we have one teacher that inspires
Us in some way or another and it's
usually the the more intellectual of the
teachers and I think for you because
you're able to reach so many people you
know through the live dreams all over
the world you know you're you're giving
that to them you're the kind of
inspiring teacher that hope hopefully
will spark an interest because you've
got this unwavering passion for the
fields and you've had it for so long and
it's really contagious so I must say
thank you on behalf of the public for
that I've got a couple more left field
kind of questions for you um is there
something that you worry about in terms
of technology or the way the kind of
field of technology is going is there
something that worries you that you
don't think other people are talking
about
gosh I mean
you know in one of the general things in
technology is there are great things
that can be done but the world kind of
doesn't care and it does a totally
mediocre thing that's something that
happens and sometimes the fact that the
mediocre thing got done kind of crowds
out the really good thing that could get
done and for decades if not longer the
world is stuck with something kind of
mediocre and you know I think there
there are there's certainly lots of
dynamics of that kind that go on which
people you know it's always there's a
certain I would say there can be a
belief
that sort of that the world doesn't
really care about good stuff it just
wants kind of okay stuff and that means
and and often there are things you can
reach from the really good stuff that
really you can't reach from the okay
stuff and lots of things that would be I
think good in the world just won't
happen if it's sort of crowded out by
the the just okay stuff so I suppose
that's one uh one kind of thing I I
think I mean in terms of uh there's
another another uh type of type of issue
I suppose is okay so the AIS are coming
and they're going to do more and more
stuff and people uh think about kind of
what uh how do we make sure that the AIS
do things we want them to do and not
things we don't want them to do and so
on there's a a very basic kind of
dilemma which is sort of something
that's come out of science that I've
done from the 1980s on and it has to do
with this phenomenon I call
computational irreducibility which on
sort of when first described it seems
like this abstract thing why is it
relevant to society and sort of the
future and so on but turns out that it
is and the the thing is this if you say
I'm defining bunch of computational
Rules by which some system will operate
you might say once I know the rules by
which the system will operate then I
know everything about the system but
it's not true because the the you might
have to just run the rules and see what
happens there might be no way to jump
ahead and say so I know what the thing
is going to do in fact one can show that
that will often be the case that the
system shows this phenomenon of
computational irreducibility you just
have to explicitly do the computation to
see what will happen Okay so so when if
you're going to have a computer
computational system kind of do the
things that it can do then you want it
to do things where you can't just jump
ahead and see what will happen because
if you could jump ahead and see what
would happen why is it bothering to to
do what it's doing and so but this
phenomenon when you can't jump ahead and
see what's going to happen you also
can't say so I know the system will
never do anything wrong and so that
means that you've got this choice you
either say let's constrain our AI
systems our computational systems to be
ones that can't do the best they can but
can be constrained in some way or
another or let's let these systems do
the best they can in which case they
will do unexpected things that we can't
foresee and that we can't constrain them
about so this is kind of a a decision
the world has to make do we want to say
we only want Machinery whose operation
we can understand or do we want
Machinery that does the most
sophisticated things it can do and I
think people have not yet come to terms
with that dichotomy and and by the way
it's in a sense it's uh you know this
idea that there are things going on that
we can't understand if we look at the
natural world it's full of things going
on that we can't understand and we
choose to try and make sort of slice off
pieces of the natural world that whose
operation we do understand and sort of
live in connection with those pieces and
sort of ignore try to ignore the pieces
that we don't understand and so there's
sort of a similar issue coming with with
technology in general of do we do we let
the technology be as sophisticated as it
can be or do we insist that it's
technology that we can understand and
constrain and I think you know that will
be a thing in in coming decades that
will be a thing that in different forms
keeps on manifesting and people
eventually realize that's the key
question and you know in the end you
have to think about it like you think
about nature it's a thing that does what
it does and you have to kind of exist
alongside it and figure out sort of in
what Niche you exist rather than saying
let's just let's just sort of C try and
constrain the whole thing that's really
interesting I was going to ask you
actually what side you fall on but I
think you made it clear I have got one
last question which I ask everyone I
always ask people because I start at the
very beginning and I always like to go
back there I want to ask you if there's
one piece of advice that you could offer
a younger Steven and I know by the way
that your career like you said you built
this Tower block there's nothing I know
that you you'd want to change about your
career but if there was one particular
time when you were younger that maybe
things were difficult what's one piece
of advice looking back you would offer
him
H it's so complicated because a lot of
things were first of all I wouldn't have
listened that's the first that's the
first statement to make um but uh
uh you
know some kinds of advice that one might
listen
to kind of I'll give you an an analogy
here so there was a time in the history
of our company when uh we developed
really good methodology for predicting
how long projects would
take and we started telling people you
you know you're working on this project
it's going to be finished in x amount of
time it was a disaster because as soon
as you told people this project is going
to take 18 months it didn't take 18
months anymore it was uh so I mean I
think
in I think there's there's you know
there there are things
like
you know it's very hard to answer that
because it's kind of a time travel like
question um and it's kind of you know
you could say well I should have kind of
uh sort of had more fun doing this or
that thing but at the time I wouldn't
have been interested in that in
retrospect maybe it's uh uh I'm not sure
I mean I I think that um
um one thing that certainly is notable
to me in retrospect is I learned all
these different subjects and things and
some of them at the time I'm like why am
I learning this like Latin and Greek are
two great examples of this and then I
find you know years later that it turns
out that um well you know the things
that I learned about Latin grammar and
so on are pretty useful to me later on
and even knowing those languages is
useful when you have to make up names
for things later in life and I suppose
so one of the things would be
uh sort of don't complain so much about
the things you're having to learn right
now because actually they will turn out
to be useful later but I wouldn't have
listened to that and in some sense um
the uh uh you know had I sort of paid
more attention to those things and less
attention to the things that I was sort
of passionately interested in um I might
never have gotten to the point where
those things turned out to be useful so
I'm uh uh I'm bad at this sort of time
travel type type question um I think
um it's
uh you know I suppose if I look at I
certainly do like to examine decisions
I've made and which ones were a mistake
and which ones weren't a mistake um I
think
the the one that was sort of you know I
was an academic fairly successful
academic um but I did not fit in that
world in many ways much too
entrepreneurial for that world much too
kind of I have this objective it I don't
care that it you know doesn't fit into
this whole structure I'm just going to
go after that objective um I think that
uh uh had I understood that point
earlier um that might have been helpful
to me actually I will give you one okay
one one piece of uh yes okay this is
this is one sort of uh uh so back when I
was 20 years old or so I sort of was
getting back into starting my first
company and at the time my self-image
was I'm a kind of Science Kid type
person what do I know about running
companies and so on what do I know about
organizing things etc etc etc so you
know I brought in a CEO to run that
company big mistake the the fact is it
was in retrospect it was already sort of
pretty evident that I was not totally
inept at like running things because if
I looked at what I'd actually done I'd
organize many things in my life with
with other people and so on and but my
self-image was you know I'm so sort of
heavily invested in the kind of science
academic thing that that meant you know
I couldn't be sort of usefully capable
on the kind of business organizational
side and that was a mistake and I think
it is something where somebody could
probably have pointed out to me um but
it would have taken a degree of
sophistication and sort of knowledge of
me that I'm not sure I mean I didn't
have it for myself so to speak I'm not
sure anybody else could reasonably have
had it um I mean I always find as I you
know I end up giving all sorts of advice
to other people and I I like to learn
from the the sort of the the the things
that where I didn't see something about
myself it's useful when you're sort of
trying to get give advice to other
people to sort of push them into the
things which they haven't seen about
themselves so to speak and and I think
the um I mean of course the whole uh the
whole business about giving advice to
people it's always a and it relates even
to the you know older me to younger me
story is the uh it's often the case that
advice given is more about the person
giving the advice than it is about the
person to whom the advice is being given
because one has a a tremendous habit of
kind of thinking this is what's worked
for me it's you know it's the way to do
things so to speak um and uh I would say
you know again the older to younger
story there are things that work for me
today that um uh well I'll give you give
you an example of that the whole thing
about being interested in education
which I am now being interested in
history which I am now the younger me
wasn't interested in either of those
things if I had told the younger me you
should be interested in these things I
just would have said well I'm not um you
know it it's like both of those things
are things for which probably uh you
know I I I have some you know I have
some capability and some orientation
towards those things which but you know
when I was younger even though that
might have nently
existed I certainly would have ignored
any advice in that
direction it's funny how it all turns
out
Stephen thank you so much for your time
today I've really enjoyed talking to you
thanks was fun brilliant all right take
care Stephen oh this was this was fun
you ask question


## Keywords:
