---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWpHFpy3bC0
---

# Video
Sympathy for the Centrists? Lessons From Obama (TMBS 48)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWpHFpy3bC0)

## Transcript:

so president a former President Barack
Obama was in South Africa today where he
which is Tuesday where he delivered a
the Memorial Lecture for Nelson Mandela
tomorrow Wednesday July 18th would be
Nelson Mandela's 100th birthday if he
were in a better words world still
walking with us and this is the first
major address that Barack Obama has
given in his post-presidency and first
let's play this clip where he talks
about the vision and the tradition that
he claims for himself
I believe in Nelson Mandela's vision I
believe in a vision shared by Gandhi and
King and Abraham Lincoln I believe in a
vision of equality and justice and
freedom and multiracial democracy built
on the premise that all people are
created equal and they're endowed by our
creator with certain inalienable rights
and I believe that a world governed by
such principles is possible and that it
can achieve more peace and more
cooperation in pursuit of a common good
that's what I believe and I believe we
have no choice but to move forward that
those of us who believe in democracy and
civil rights and a common humanity have
a better story to tell and I believe
this not just based on sentiment and I
believe it based on hard evidence the
fact that the world's most prosperous
and successful societies the ones with
the highest living standards and the
highest levels of satisfaction among
their people happen to be those which
have most closely approximated the
liberal progressive ideal that we talked
about and have nurtured the talents and
contributions of all their citizens
so let's first acknowledge the obvious
it is nice to have a leader in happening
the world stage from the United States
who possesses intelligence humanities
sophistication articulation and a
commitment to values that frankly should
be so basic and established at this
point we don't need to keep relitigated
but we are relitigated them in an age of
far-right barbarism across the globe but
it's also an opportunity to both
acknowledge some space where the left in
the center can Co Co inhabit together in
terms of very basic things understanding
that racism is a poison understanding
that we need societies built on
mutuality rights respects all of the
things that Obama has always been so
brilliant at articulating but here's the
deal for liberals the only way you can
get the society that you want is by
first of all a forthright and serious
fight against the forces of bigotry
which will not be achieved by civility
it's gonna be achieved by confrontation
and secondly by a radical commitment to
democratizing the economy and
socializing and D commodifying Nass
parts of economic activity to align
democracy in the economic sphere with in
the with the civil and social sphere as
long as those spheres are misaligned and
as long as such an unbelievable amount
of inequality abuse oppression and
exploitation exists there is always
gonna be a ripe spot in the immune
system for the barbarism of our moment
as Bill Fletcher jr. says right-wing
populism is the herpes of capitalism and
we're living in that disgusting image
right now and if you can't confront
those fundamental conditions you're not
gonna solve the problem so the challenge
is ok let's acknowledge where we share
some common values with the center but
the center is gonna need to be real
about how we preserve those common
values that is the fundamental task and
President Obama went on to at least
rhetorically acknowledge some of these
problems here he is talking about
inequality an explosion in economic
inequality it's meant that a few dozen
individuals controlled the same amount
of wealth as the poorest half of
humanity
that's not an exaggeration that's a
statistic think about that he's
absolutely right and this is the moment
where even those of us who can like and
appreciate President Obama should sit
back and say I wonder who was president
for eight of those years where this
skyrocketing inequality developed
I wonder what recovery had over 90% of
the gains go to the top one percent now
this is not about scoring points this is
about setting the table so we solve the
problem so we move forward so we get out
of the crisis and the predicament we're
in because wall of course these forces
reflect moral failings the roots of
systems of oppression and bigotry go to
material forces the wickedness and
disgustingness of systemic racism
especially we can use South Africa's
example is rooted in systems first of
colonial occupation and exploitation and
then a white settler colonial class
which wanted to preside over and protect
an economic income distribution for
itself and even in post apartheid South
Africa with the achievements of
democracy which are of course so vital
and we have the statistic right here in
terms of wealth concentration the
political liberation happened under the
ANC but as Ronnie Kasrils who I've
interviewed for patrons former South
African intelligence minister and
revolutionary said the economic
liberation has not happened the land
redistribution has not happened and
we're gonna talk more about land
redistribution on this show because it's
gonna be a new hobbyhorse of the
alt-right and racist forces to not only
lie about what's happening in South
Africa but feed into racial anxiety here
but fundamentally we're not talking
about moral failings we're talking about
economic systems that drive moral
failings and that's a fundamental
distinction of understanding of a
socialist analysis and a material
analysis and a more ethereal one and
that does make President Obama's voice
so important but it also makes the fact
that
his presidential libraries gentrifying a
neighborhood in Chicago also extremely
important and still part of the problem
so we can inline and run off of the
great leadership displayed in this
speech but we have to ask how do we
actually safeguard those values how do
we actually truly have a shared humanity
a world that works for everyone it's
impossible without a mass
democratization of resources and economy
guys please jump in Griscom was crying
at the speech so I just want to say
Griscom gets very emotional because he
really loves president OPA I mean I
think that the point that you make
Michael is a good one in that uh you
know it is really important for us to
recognize that a lot of the values that
are sort of put forward by centrist and
a lot of very successful politicians you
know from the Democratic Party
throughout history are these kind of
universal human values but it's a lot of
times you know it gets muddled in and
how it gets presented I mean later on
the speech you know Obama's talks about
how you know it's still okay to be rich
you know you could be rich you can still
rich and you said let go of those
talking points yeah exactly and it's
like right that's a huge problem it's
like yeah he's talking about increasing
taxes on the wealthy but there's still
that that structural quality that's
missing which is sort of fundamental at
least to my politics and to a lot of
people you know in the socialist left
it's not only fundamental to our
politics I'm arguing that it's
fundamental to what they want to
preserve yeah we're not going to have a
liberal civil open society in the
positive sense and we should remember
that because as much as we dunk on these
people let's live in reality here we do
want and rely on a lot of those things
but you're not gonna be able to
safeguard that without a socialized
economy yeah and I mean that's sort of
it's like the the ultimate question
about the entire us rhetoric from the
beginning it's you know all men are
created equal and then you know the
first thing is well what about you know
slavery you know what about women what
about working people what about Native
American genocide 100% it's like and we
recognize that but it's like here's
where these kind of formal freedoms
matter and where these kind of formal
ideas matter that terrain has been sort
of shaped already and you could say this
is a land
equality now I'm don't I wouldn't write
a academic paper making that argument
but like we understand the rhetoric and
it's sort of ingrained I'm in as
politically and you can take that and
then you can expand on that idea and
that can have a very powerful effect and
it's something that you know we should
be able to to do so that you can say if
you want to live up to those ideals
what's your five-step plan to
nationalize the banks and the fossil
fuel industry because ultimately know
those two things are intimately
connected because you cannot have the
systems of exploitation or wealth
stratification and any type of actual
Democratic experience Matt yeah I agree
with basically all that's been said so
far the only point I'd add is I
generally think you know we have to
defeat both centrist liberalism and
neoliberalism and fascism but I don't
think we defeat them both at the exact
same time there's also order of
operations as we always say I think I
think Silicon Valley like regardless I
think well number one we have to beat
fascism and I don't think that's a
foregone conclusion at this point but
even so like I fully expect the next
eight years after Hillary won to be
basically versus the banks in Silicon
Valley yep and that's gonna be a fight
we're still gonna have to fight after
this but in the like I do think in the
meantime you know you have guys like
Obama advisors it's interesting we
always rag on them but it's also notable
to me when they come out in support of
like yeah we just need to add more
Supreme Court justices and also good on
punching Richard Spencer right like and
that's and that's it that's perfect
because those are the pots save America
guys right and credit where credit's due
and that's and this actually is a
perfect illustration some of the pots
save America guys don't worry I'll still
do the routine don't worry about it I'll
still do the impression they're coming
out for expanding the Supreme Court
which is a must they understood that
punching Richard Spencer was cool and
fun to watch and Tim Geithner is among
other things making a killing off of
debt collection and terrorizing people
in that process which in a way actually
distills the two polls even in the
moment were in now the prime enemy is
fascism and there are definitely people
in the center right now that we can much
more readily work
can align with and other people whose
Prime allegiance really is just to their
greed and to those broken systems and
the kind of POD savers tim geithner
example I think distills that pretty
well with regards to what's come out of
the Obama world you know you talk we
talking to harvey k last week and the
way sort of George Washington the crisis
papers and the pamphlets Tom Thomas
paying around George Washington was a
big parties like he saw the usefulness
of that right he doesn't necessarily
agree with Thomas Paine's egalitarianism
in a lot of ways and I do think that's
something we have to guard against and
that's what people are concerned about
like when Ocasio cortez changes
something on our website or something
like that right there's definitely
people are going to find it useful but
that's because it is useful right now
right and ya have power and we don't we
can't trust them to like funnel our
energies into the right directions but
our energies need to be funneled into
certain productive areas and also their
energies to centrist areas there are
plenty of people who like bought the
whole Obama thing that are awakening at
this moment and then and to be sort of
dismissive I think about this a lot is
just broadcasters like let's say I just
listen to pod save and I come across our
show and they just hear a sneering at
those guys right right that's not what I
want to be either right i I want to I
want those people to be I wouldn't be I
don't want to be like oh you're just
hearing of the class yeah yeah well I
mean that's really what it is right
it's hipster ism of politics I and
that's the thing is being ruthless on
the merits and incredibly welcoming on
you know the broadening the tent
yeah I mean just just a couple things I
just want to add that it is important
though while we do kind of embrace some
kind of historical rhetoric of the u.s.
to understand that a lot of the security
that we have in this country is based
upon like the of imperialism of other
nations like the United States has been
an incredibly violent force so when I
say I just wanted to make this clear
like so when I say understand that one
if you're if you're an Americans like to
understand that there's a kind of
tradition and a history and there's a
rhetoric that you can uphold to but to
not also become you know a chauvinist or
to forget or to forgive or to be silent
about the history
Sears colonialism genocide of Native
Americans etc so just putting that out
there but I'd like to say to what Matt
was saying about or about this order of
operations you know defeat fascism come
after neoliberalism centrism I think
that that's definitely true and probably
the order of events as that will occur I
think it's really important
strategically though that that doesn't
become a call for refusing to build the
institutions that will challenge that I
think the best thing we can do to create
the defeat fascism in a lot of ways is
sort of what's been going on over the
past two years with left organizing I
mean the fact that the DSA is as large
as it is today you know the fact that we
had a Ossie Wynn death um here in the
Bronx Julia Salazar's campaign all
across the country people are becoming
really mobilized and there but they're
not just becoming mobilized in Bern kind
of random way they're becoming mobilized
in a very specific socialist loved way
and we can have strategies for how we
can build coalitions and and work to
defeat Trump etc but I think that we do
it in our own words we do it with their
own people and we build the movement to
incorporate those that we are sort of
breaking down and because we have to do
it all together eventually so it's
really important that while we're coming
out you're saying people to bend the
knee bent behind a stupid old Internet
yeah I remember that but serious like
this is what's so exciting about our
time is that we have our own rhetoric we
have our own language and we have
traditions that we can incorporate into
that and I think that you know this is a
really exciting moment it's a really
creative time and I think for so long we
had so little strategy we had so little
imagination so many left is so you
talked to order leftist they were so
secret they would never talk to publicly
about being a socialist right sort of
the kind of thing that's when you left
and the five of you got together we're
like over secret social so we've been
arguing for this one thing publicly now
I feel like more and more people are
very open and saying this is what I
believe I can make some compromises here
strategically for a certain moment but I
don't even like this kind of like this
kind of of being prepared to compromise
before we've even negotiated strategy I
just you know but of course you never do
that I'm not saying we're doing that
I've been the personality of who
President Obama is and what he
represents specifically is so much
larger in some ways than any of these
like did some of these questions frankly
not on the merits of policy and ideology
but in terms of like
I guess what I'm saying is when there
are endless I don't have to keep saying
this I critique the Obama on the merits
when he was in office I did shows like
this where I talked about everything
from drones to banks to his border
policies to offering cuts on Social
Security and Medicare
absolutely and at the same time this guy
first of all has really unique
leadership capacity and he's also
somebody who has an enormous amount of
popularity and in the same spirit of
taking things and bringing it to our
ends it's not like oh that's a great
speech let's go back to well branded
centrist Democrat politics no it's
that's a great speech we share some of
those values and as I say the only way
you want a safeguard and expand those
values is with some type of democratic
socialist orientation and that's been
proven we see that I think that what's
disorienting now is the popular gravity
is definitely on the side of the left so
when I talk about working with centrist
I'm talking about centers that
acknowledge that to some express ice and
have respect for that precise ones I
think that that's all quixotic or maybe
like a storm that's gonna pass yeah
those guys
no they're delusional and if they vote
the right way great but we're not gonna
do much together because they're nuts


## Keywords:
