---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Er6uOoeWI-A
---

# Video
T39.4: Of mouses and mans: The role of production and feedback in language learning
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Er6uOoeWI-A)

## Transcript:
you
someone is up here as well thank you
I'm ready
all right hi everyone uh my name's Megan
and I'm going to be presenting work I've
done with Bonnie nazari and Dan yorovsky
about the role of production and
feedback in language learning
so children aren't directly taught how
to speak but somehow they learn the
patterns and rules of their native
language and developmental research is
often focused on this question of how
children make statistical inferences
based on parent input in order to learn
their language
however parent utterances are not the
only input children here
from the time they start to babble
children hear their own utterances and
interpret how others react to them
so my project attempts to understand how
children's own utterances and the
responses they hear to those utterances
might shape their learning
for example our language is filled with
patterns about what sounds occur at
certain parts of a word so for example
in English the NG sound at the end of
King hardly ever appears at the start of
a word
and while being asked to produce a novel
language with rules like this children
learn these rules faster and more
robustly than adults do
so as children are speaking they might
use their utterance as examples of the
rules of language and that might help
them remember these rules perhaps even
better than only hearing their parent
produce it
however children's production is often
filled with lots of mistakes more so
than the utterances they hear
so if children learn from their own
utterances how do the mistakes they make
affect their language understanding
for example in English when a child
makes in a regular plural error such as
over generalizing the add s to plural
nouns saying look at our snowmans how
does that affect learning well there are
two theories about how production errors
like these might affect Children's
Learning given that they pay attention
to their own speech
errorless learning theories which
suggest that preventing children from
making errors in the first place is the
best way to help them learn because when
they make errors they learn that error
as the target of production in this
scenario snowmans would be learned as
the correct label here
however other research suggests errors
may be extra helpful for learning
because feedback to these errors helps
children identify their mistake and
learn the correct form instead of their
error by saying snowmans and getting
feedback they update their
representations to reflect the correct
forms snowmen
however do children get sufficient
feedback to learn the correct form
while grammatical errors like irregular
plurals often get different responses
than semantic errors so when the child
calls a horse a dog a parent is likely
to respond no that's a horse or try to
clarify they've understood the child
tell them they were wrong and provide
the correct label
however when a child makes a grammatical
error
the parents are less likely to make any
kind of explicit correction because the
meaning behind what the child said was
correct
so instead in response their child
saying something like snowmans they
might respond wow what cool snowmen and
this type of feedback is called a
reformulation because the parent takes
the child's error and fixes it in a new
sentence
but since this feedback is not explicit
it may be unclear whether the parent is
providing a correction therefore making
it hard for the child to learn the
correct form when they make an error so
therefore when making irregular plurals
children may still learn their error as
the target of production
however there is some evidence that
children learn from these reformulations
so shinard and Clark show that parents
are more likely to reform errors than to
repeat correct utterances meaning that
these might be an especially frequent
and Salient cue and there analysis
children appear to acknowledge or even
correct themselves after these
reformulations
and an experimental design children
learn novel irregular verbs better when
they heard reformulations compared to
when an experimenter provided the word
form first before they could attempt the
label
however there are some limitations to
these studies that prevent us from
concluding that children use error-based
learning mechanisms to learn from their
irregular plural mistakes
First Corpus analyzes like these that
show where formulations are frequent and
informative are often based on small
sample sizes as this study only looks at
five children
Additionally the experimental studies
like those of Saxton may not replicate
the naturalistic environment in which
these reformulations occur in particular
these contexts Focus heavily on word
learning children know that they do not
know these novel words and are
repeatedly trying to learn from the
experimenter in more casual
conversational context where caregivers
are talking about familiar items like
mice a geese children may not pick up on
these implicit Corrections
so therefore we want to conduct a series
of studies to improve on these
limitations first we'll conduct a larger
Corpus analysis to access whether parent
reformulations are frequent and clear
learning signal and then we'll conduct a
series of experimental studies we
assessed whether children learn better
from either avoiding errors or by
receiving feedback to their errors and
then we conducted a follow-up study to
address some limitations in that first
study specifically to see whether the
Simplicity of the feedback includes
improves clarity
so together these studies will assess
the effect of children's Productions on
learning and whether their own errors
either reinforce The Irregular forms
through errorless learning mechanisms or
provide an opportunity for learning
through error-based mechanisms
so we sampled from the childish English
North American and UK database and we
looked for any time one of these eight
Target words were spoken by the child
and these were chosen because theirs are
common irregular plurals children
encounter and will be the ones we use in
our experimental study
we searched for any time the child
produced the correct form and two common
over-regularization errors such as
masses and mices
so this led to a sample of 2 394
utterances across 223 children
we then looked at the two utterances
following the child's production to see
whether parents either repeated the
child's production or reformulated their
production to assess how frequently
children receive Corrections and given
prior research we should expect that
reformulations be really common given an
error and that children should
acknowledge and correct their mistake
so this graph shows that given when a
child either produces a correct or
incorrect form what kind of responses
parents gave and we found that parents
repeat both correct and incorrect
utterances while parents only
reformulate errors and we did find a
lower rate of reformulation than chinard
and Clark about 27 and they were not
more common than replace
so if children learn through error-based
mechanisms where formulations are clear
signal but they do appear less often
than previously thought
and at least immediately after children
are not more likely to repeat the
correct form than they are to say the
error again
so could children employ error-based
mechanisms to learn irregular plurals
well if children can pick up on the
implicit Corrections it's a good signal
but they do appear less frequently than
expected maybe making it harder to
interpret
and indeed in this analysis children
don't always take them up immediately
which cast out on whether children can
use this correction in everyday
interaction
therefore we wanted to conduct an
experiment to see whether children's
production improves through air-based
learning or whether air is hinder
learning
so this game was played over Zoom we had
three and four-year-olds were told they
would help me fix my dream machine we
tested them on the eight irregular
plurals that we looked for in study one
and first children of pre-test were
asked to greet pairs of pictures saying
hi geese or high gooses and then
children proceeded to the training phase
where they were told to count the
pictures in the correct dream that the
dream that has the trail of bubbles
they were divided evenly into one of two
conditions the reformulation and
repetition conditions to test how their
errors and feedback to those errors
impact learning
so I'll explain those conditions further
in a moment but then we see it post-test
where children say goodbye to these
pairs of images if their production
changed based on their training
experiences
so in the reformulation condition
children would see the two dreams appear
and are told to count first and then I
respond with the correct form here's a
clip to demonstrate what this trial
looks like and note that the black box
is covering the child's face and we
instructed parents to move my face into
the middle of the bottom middle of the
child screen hopefully the Sound Works
three gooses two snakes and piggies
so here since the child makes the
mistake of saying gooses my response
could be seen as correcting their
mistake if they had said geese I would
just repeat their utterance so there's
no correction there
we compared this to a repetition
condition in which I provide the right
label first without the numbers and then
the child replies with the numbers so
they were not told to explicitly repeat
but they have the correct word model for
them before they produce here's a video
of this condition
I remember some snakes and some geese
excuse me and sweet goose
so here I provide the correct label
before the child could make a mistake
and say Goose instead of geese so my
utterance doesn't give any feedback to
the child's correctness
across both conditions the child hears
the correct plural form the same number
of times each regular plural is used
twice across the two separate blocks
and what's different though is whether
the child hears the correct form before
their own production or whether my
utterance could be seen as feedback to
their production
so given prior literature we would
expect that children in the formulation
condition would show more Improvement at
post-test given that they got
Corrections on their mistakes and can
use error-based mechanisms to improve
however our aim was to design a game
less focused on word learning so it's
possible children either ignore my
corrections or there's conflict with
their errors they make during training
leading to worse performance in the
reformulation condition
so this graph will show our mean error
rates for each condition with
reformulation in dark blue repetition in
Gray divided up into the pretests the
two blocks of training and the post-test
higher bars mean more errors
and so while at pre-tests in each
condition they perform similarly both
during training and at post-test
children made more errors in the
reformulation condition in the
repetition condition children made much
fewer errors likely because they modeled
after the experimenter and not making
errors seem to help their production as
a post-test there was significant
Improvement meanwhile in the formulation
condition they didn't appear to learn
from my implicit Corrections this would
provide evidence for errorless learning
theories and against error-based
theories as children made less errors
during training less errors at post-test
however to test the difference between
these conditions we fitted a general
logistic regression model controlling
for subject and item variability and
this did not predict a significant
difference by condition based on this
data this result is likely due to high
variability across participants and
irregular plural performance so while
there was significant learning and
repetition not in reformulation once you
account for that variability that
difference is obscured
but in the second study we wanted to see
whether learning through error
correction was more helpful than
avoiding errors and here we show that
even with feedback when children make
errors they did not approve
improve the fact that reformulations
provided no improvement was surprising
since but since this correction is
implicit formulations may not be as
clear when there's no clear word
learning goal unlike previous novel word
learning studies
however this task did require children
to provide information on both the
number and the noun and maybe your
formulations were not helpful because
the focus of the task was on the
identifying the correct number not the
correct name so maybe children learn
through Airbase mechanisms but only when
the task is simple and focused on the
item being corrected
and so we will conducted a second study
to address this question of whether the
task was too complicated and focusing
the goal of the task on the error might
help for formulations
so this game follows very similar
methods same dream machine Paradigm
except instead of Counting children are
only providing the labels such as dogs
and mice and so these pairs of pictures
appear outside the cloud and then two
sets of pictures will move in and the
child tells me which ones enter the
cloud given that these are familiar
nouns and the game is not focused it is
focused on communicating the word
learning is still not emphasized here
and so in this study we also shifted to
it within subjects design so for each
participants half the words will receive
for formulations rather than half the
participants
this allows us to better account for
subject variability in a regular plural
knowledge
here's an example of the reformulation
condition for this game
spoons
and moose so if this was the repetition
condition I would say I see books spoons
and mice but which pictures go into my
dream and then the pictures would move
into the cloud and the child would label
and so this time here we see repetition
again shows Improvement however we do
see a decrease in errors in the
reformulation condition it's possible
that reformulations are more helpful
here because the labels are the
informative part of the task and it is a
simpler game
however it still does not seem like
reformulations will be even better than
repetition as previous research
indicated therefore it does not seem
like reformulations provide any extra
corrective benefit above and beyond
hearing the correct word in this type of
context
so therefore we find that both
repetition and reformulation were
helpful in this study it seems that the
Simplicity of the task and the feedback
increased the salience of implicit
feedback
however were formulations were still not
more helpful than repetition as previous
research would suggest it doesn't seem
that error-based mechanisms are more
helpful than learning through input or
errorless production
so given these results from the Corpus
analysis and these two experimental
studies what can we say about the role
of production and feedback on learning
well the results from study 2 would
suggest that children do not learn
through Airbase mechanisms instead learn
through errorless mechanisms as learning
only occurred in the repetition
condition however study 3 shows that
more clear implicit feedback can offset
this effect
considering these results together it
seems that feedback might at best offset
the error's negative impact on future
learning only when it is clear and more
direct but it doesn't lead to Better
Learning than just hearing or saying the
correct forms
it's important to consider though that
reformulations could lead to more
long-term learning as this study only
addresses short-term learning
previous studies that also it feedback
might be more helpful when words are
newer to the child
previous studies that demonstrated the
corrective benefit were about novel
words so future research should
investigate long-term impacts air-based
learning and their effect on novel word
learning in more naturalistic contexts
overall these studies cast some doubt on
the scope of error-based learning
mechanisms for grammar learning these
experimental setups likely more closely
represent the kinds of interactions
parents and children are having together
talking about familiar objects and in
these interactions children only seem to
learn from our formulations in the
simplest tasks whereas avoiding errors
consistently led to improved production
so suggests children may use error based
mechanisms as part of a suite of
learning mechanisms but perhaps not as
their main tool parents can still use
reformulations to counteract the
negative impact from errors but it seems
that modeling the correct form also
leads to Reliable learning
I would like to thank all of you for
listening and the cognitive science
Society for inviting me to speak here
um all the RAS who helped me code all
this data
um both the grad students in Dan's lab
and Bonnie's lab and all the families
who participated and all you for
listening thank you so much
thanks a lot briefly talk
any questions
hi thanks so much yeah and I absolutely
love the dream machine the links that
works spectacularly
um my main question is sort of one of
the differences between the exposure and
the reformulation or the repetitions all
right and the reformulation is the
repetition they hear it and they get to
use the correct form immediately right
um and I'm trying to think about the
like snowmen situation uh and wondering
if a sort of blend of the two might be
better where you make the mistake it's
reformulated and then you actually have
an opportunity sort of immediately to
use that now and again and possibly do
so correctly and if you think that might
offer any advantages above and beyond
your sort of repetition petition yeah I
think that's a really cool idea and I
think based on the fact that you know
when I modeled the right form and then
the child would often repeat it right
after me not always but it prop it might
work as kind of like you do error based
and then errorless learning right
afterward and yeah it would be
interesting to see whether that would
work yeah thanks
there any questions online

all right
not at the moment
hey Claire
um I'm curious and I know you've
actually lived a little bit at this but
I don't know exactly what ended up being
sort of the result
um about whether you think that like
sort of more implicit feedback like the
kind uh future in the last talk would be
uh you know useful in in this process as
well like if you could sort of combine
more
um like implicit timing cues and other
types of cues with these more explicit
sort of like
um you know Corrections perhaps
um that have like uh I guess the where
the content is really informative about
the type of error um yeah and what your
sort of General thoughts are yeah yeah
it's interesting because you know it's
what's funny about this this error is
that you know you still understand what
the child means when they say mouse says
um I did look into the Corpus analysis
whether parents were slower to respond
when a child says mouses versus mice and
we didn't find any evidence of that it
seems like it's still pretty easy for
parents to process they probably already
have some kind of expectation that their
child's going to make mistakes so it's
not super surprising
um yeah I don't know what if there are
any kinds of other signals that might
indicate that there was some type of
surprisal since it seems that parents
are pretty
expecting of that but it would be
interesting
yeah to see if there are other cues
another cue could be
um prosody to see whether parents
respond in kind of a more surprise like
a jokey or like surprised like oh yeah
mouses uh-huh like
um if that could be any kind of signal
so that would also be something cool to
look at
I think would be clarification requests
I don't know oh yeah yeah they're like
oh yeah what are they called yeah like
asking more prompting questions and
trying to get the child to try again
that would also be really interesting
yeah
time for one more question
foreign
well thank you everybody

last talk is going to be virtual by
Alice Kane


## Keywords:
