---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kfyx2FIJtM4
---

# Video
Technology Wonâ€™t Stop the Climate Apocalypse with Dr. Dana Fisher - 259
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kfyx2FIJtM4)

## Transcript:
hello and welcome to factually I'm Adam
Conover thank you so much for joining me
on the show again this week we're
talking once again about climate change
see a couple weeks ago I had Dr Hannah
Richie on the show and she made the case
that if you look at all these different
indices emissions per capita the price
of renewable energy deforestation a lot
of things are moving in the right
direction and that that is caused for
hope now I expressed some skepticism
about this and a lot of you did as well
in the comments below the episode and
that's because you know we have made
some progress but the progress we have
made is clearly insufficient and even
though we've made progress on some
solutions that have leverage the power
of capitalism to say make one kind of
energy cheaper than another sell
electric cars and stuff like that well
that's kind of the easy solution isn't
it to sell clean energy when it's just
as cheap as fossil fuels but getting
people or God forbid massive
corporations to give up fossil fuels is
hard so how do we push powerful
interests in governments to overlook
short term profit for the long-term
benefits of having a planet that's you
know habitable I ask how because clearly
we haven't done it yet climate change is
only partially a problem of Technology
primarily it's a social problem that our
entire Society caused and it's an open
question whether our Collective
decision-making institutions are
Advanced enough to deal with that
problem I mean it's much easier to make
a cheaper solar cell than it is to get
all World governments to agree to
decarbonize but mass decarbonization is
what we actually need right so if we
want to look at how Society can change
we need to look at more than just
technological fixes we have to look at
the science behind what causes social
change in institutional transformation
that is a huge and hard problem and you
can't figure it out just by looking at
the atmosphere or brand new awesome
clean Technologies you need to talk to a
sociologist well guess what on the show
this week we in fact have a sociologist
who has written an incredible new book
about how we can actually create the
massive social change we need to fight
climate change in the face of corporate
opposition to that change I know you are
going to love this interview but before
we get to it I just want to remind you
that if you want to support this show
and all the conversations we bring you
every single week you can do so on
patreon please head to patreon.com adamc
Conover five bucks a month gets you
every episode of the show add free we
got a bunch of other great Community
features we'd love to see you there and
of course if you like standup comedy you
want to see me perform in a city near
you head to adamc con.net for my tickets
and tour dates and now let's get to
today's guest I am so excited to
introduce you to Dr Dana Fischer she's a
sociologist and she's the director of
the center for environment community and
equity and a professor in the School of
International Service at American
University she's been following the
politics and sociology of climate change
for decades and her new book is called
saving ourselves from climate shocks to
climate action please welcome Dr Dana
Fischer
Dana thank you so much for being on the
show thank you for having me Adam so we
talk about climate change a lot on this
show normally I'm talking to climate
scientists technologists people like
that you are a sociologist you have
written a book about the climate crisis
from a social perspective why is that
why is that such an important lens to
use well I mean at this point everybody
recognizes that the climate crisis is
actually a social problem right we
created the problem we society and the
only way to solve it is actually through
us like society's going to have to solve
it it's not like any like it's not like
you know the planet is going to save
itself right we got to do it because we
got to fix the problem we we created so
sociology makes a lot of sense as a
place to look for that because we study
social processes right like we can learn
as much as we want about the atmosphere
or about clean energy technology but if
we don't understand the people who are
actually going to implement those things
or do something about it then we're
going to be up shitak right right I mean
and I mean I think it's worth noting
here that there are a lot of natural
scientists and Atmospheric scientists
who have started talking about policy
have started talking about the social
side because they are social beings and
that's great but um you know there are
those of us who are trained and have PhD
specifically in actually studying the
social processes and how they work and
have spent our lives and our careers
doing that and I'm one of them and so
we're I mean I think that we provide a
lot of opportunity to Think Through
based on Research how social systems
work and what will be opening
opportunities and what will probably not
work great well let's zoom out and start
using that lens uh a lot of people have
a lot of different stances on climate
change people are techno optimists
whatever you told me before we started
recording you would describe yourself as
an apocalyptic Optimist I want to know
what that means and how do you frame the
problem of climate change like most
broadly okay so um I'm an apocalyptic
Optimist that means that I believe that
we are in trouble and that bad things
are coming and that it is bad it's
getting worse and nothing we've done so
far is going to solve the problem yet
but I am optimistic because while it's
bad and it's getting worse I believe
that we have the capacity to save
ourselves and I talk through the book
how we're going to do that but it's all
going to come from us right it is not
going to be like the technology that's
going to fall from the sky and every's
going like Oh I thought that was going
to be bad but it's okay it's not going
to work that way it's rather that it's
going to involve struggle and work and
we're going to have to all get angry to
do it um with regard to understanding
the climate crisis and what it is I mean
basically in the broadest way it is the
fact that the entire world the entire
industrial system is run on burning
fossil fuels which is basically having
the unintended consequence of increasing
concentration of greenhouse gases the
most one that we talk about the most is
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere which
is changing the way that our planet
absorbs heat and also that is then
having an effect on all sorts of
environmental systems and climate
systems and the oceans and the you know
the poles and the ice caps Etc and so
forth so everything's changing thanks to
these concentrations that have built up
over you know decades now stopping
burning fossil fuels basically means
that I mean I don't know if this is
solar but I'm assuming it's not so all
of the electricity that we run our lives
our businesses all of most of our
transportation
all that has to change I mean and then
there's also food I mean carbon comes
from a whole bunch of things yeah but
basically emitted by cow's asses exactly
uh the ruminants all the ruminants emit
methane it's just the cows get most of
the attention you know goats do it too
so there you have well if you're if
you're if you're in goat cheese you if
you're getting beeria tacos like you are
also emitting methane so sorry but
please go on but anyway so um so the
problem is really tricky because we
complet we have to change the entire
system that we are running our economies
on basically I mean there are a couple
of countries that have done relatively
well because they have the capacity for
clean energy some countries like Norway
for example damned their Rivers early on
so that 99% of all their electricity is
actually coming from clean energy
because it's hydropower and there were
very few people except for indigenous
folks who lived up there so they were
able to do it really easily we don't
have that capacity here in the United
States most countries don't have that
capacity isn't Norway also um a huge oil
d driller like don't they have a
gigantic uh Sovereign wealth fund that
comes from uh oil reserves they
absolutely do and in fact one of the
things that's kind of ironic about it is
they are using those resources to
incentivize people within the country to
switch to electric vehicles right but
they're make they're still making money
they're still opening up areas for
extraction but then they're selling the
oil to other countries yeah see this is
a little bit of a tangent but I went to
Norway a couple years ago and uh lovely
country one of those countries where you
go and you're like why can't everything
be like oh they got solar panels they
got wind oh everything's so nice here oh
my everyone's so polite oh the they got
public transportation everything's good
and then I look around for a little
while this kind of feels like I'm going
to my like a rich kid's house you know
like like I live like I'm in a
neighborhood I'm middle class but oh oh
come over from my house got this kid got
a Super Nintendo they got like a fridge
with a ice dispenser what's going on oh
what does this kid dads do for a living
right like this is this is wealth that
I'm looking at and where does the wealth
come from they have a gigantic uh
nationalized oil Reser that they're
selling to other countries so it's a
little bit of like underneath the
surface there is uh a dark participation
in the same system that we're all a part
of absolutely I mean and what's
interesting is that when folks talk
about countries addressing climate
change a lot of them are talking just
about what they're doing within their
borders right but a lot of countries
including the United States has
considered basically addressing climate
change internally but then continuing to
sell fossil fuels abroad right so for
example in the United States there's a
big push to talk about how we could sell
our natural gas to other countries
because you know it's cleaner and and
you know and our labor practices are
better which you know may very well be
somewhat true but it really doesn't
solve the problem so anyway going back
to the question um so the climate crisis
is a is a really tricky one because it
basically involves shifting everything
and all the ways that we have
industrialized and the ways that we live
our lives um and that's one of the
reasons that nothing really has been
done in the past 25 years or years since
the climate regime began which is the
international kind of efforts to address
climate change but I think with regard
to techno optimism the reason I'm no
longer a techno Optimist is because I
have you know I have supported and been
excited by a number of different fanss
in fact I was just had a a friend of
mine who re reached out and was like oh
yeah clean hydrogen green or sorry
they're calling it green hydrogen now
green hydrogen that's the answer right
and the deal is that when I was in
college which was in the
1990s we went through a whole period of
time where we're like woohoo hydrogen is
going to be the future right I mean it's
like and that was a long time ago now I
recognize that it's just that we if we
keep counting on technology that's not
here yet yeah we're running out of time
I mean hey something's five years away
that's going to fix everything yeah
right I know and then and then you have
to you know have diffusion of the
technology I mean it's just it's not
going to solve the problem if you want
to you know save large portions of the
world that are basically I mean some of
them are already going to be lost right
lots of small island states are going to
be lost lots of coastal areas are going
to be lost lots of developing countries
are going to have to shift their
populations to areas that are cooler or
have the resources because a lot of
folks are becoming you know areas are
becoming resource scarce because of the
climate crisis in terms of like water in
terms of food and as a result of all of
that we're going to basically have to to
think about how we address it and
leaning into this idea that don't worry
the technolog is almost here right is
just extremely dangerous and it's not
just dangerous globally but it's
dangerous for here for us here in the
United States I mean look at Arizona I
mean look at some parts of California
this past summer and this coming summer
is going to be even worse yeah so you
said that nothing has been done or very
little has been done for the past few
decades uh number of weeks ago we had a
wonderful guest on named Hannah Richie
who wrote a book called not the end of
the world a lot of the thesis of the and
by listen to the episode if you haven't
it was a wonderful conversation it's a
great conversation I listened to it
yesterday oh okay great so I'd like to
put you in dialogue with that because I
think it'll be really interesting now
her take is you know I think a lot lot
of people uh feel as I did you know I
grew up in the Captain Planet era we
have to save the planet what needs to
happen and then you know here I am 25
years later right I'm like uh we didn't
do it we didn't save the planet sure
things sure seem to be getting worse
what the right and a lot of
Hannah's argument is like actually a lot
of progress has been made if we look at
these charts and look at these graphs we
can see a lot of shocking surprising uh
uh progress has been made and we need to
continue that and increase it she's
often Des Cried by people as a techno
Optimist certainly people were in the
comments of our of our post on YouTube
uh calling her that uh so I'm curious
how you engage with that argument what
do you think that argument gets right
and what do you think it it gets wrong
with all respect yeah I mean so I would
just say that you know uh the analysis
is is legitimate in that it is true that
a number of environmental problems have
improved over the years the problem with
climate change however I mean and
climate change is the the issue that I
have focused basically my whole career
the past 25 years on
um is that climate change is a political
issue in fact it's a social problem in
that we have caused the problem and we
as a society are going to have to solve
it yeah and to date the most valuable
measure of success of our efforts to
address climate change would be
concentrations of carbon dioxide or
other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere
and if you look at every one of those
charts it's like a straight slope right
W so it's not tapering off it's not like
flattening at all no I mean there were
there was a there was a there was a blip
during uh covid and we are back we are
back on track just like we were before
so yes there has been a lot of efforts
there have been efforts globally through
multiple efforts through treaties um I I
actually studied a bunch of them so um I
mean I started out my dissertation was
on the Kyo protocol which was like a
lifetime ago which was one of the
efforts to address climate change um it
did it was not successful for a number
of reasons more recently we have the
Paris agreement where most countries
have not yet met and are not going to
meet their commitments that they made
back in 2015 right yeah so uh the thing
about you know the argument is that we
you know while things are getting better
and we are perers maybe emitting less
we're we're still emitting more right
and concentrations of the atmosphere are
continuing to go up and that is the only
thing that the Earth cares about right
yeah the Earth doesn't care about if
each person is emitting less I mean sure
that's that's better
the population the population's going up
too right so I mean and so for me you
know I'm looking at the bottom line and
I also looking at the politics of it
right the other thing that a lot of
people talk about is how we do have
policies right we have a policy in place
here in the United States now finally
after years and I have studied all of
the failed policies before so I was
delighted to be able to write a paper
about a successful policy in the
inflation reduction act but not you know
still we continue to
more greenhouse gases every year and
temperatures are going up and and we got
a problem so uh uh you know there's been
going on for decad they've been having
these big conferences and everyone's
optimistic right right afterwards I
remember I did an episode of Adam ruins
everything right after the the Paris
agreement and you know we we covered it
as it was covered by basically everyone
at the time this is the largest step
that's ever been taken uh it shows
International cooperation on a scale
we've never seen before it's you know
there's such reason for optimism Etc or
this is the best reason for optimism
that we have and here we are sitting
here you know what seven years eight
years later just sort of casually
describing it as ah well you know they
none of them are going to meet the
targets right uh so what are the
impediments to when when all of the
people at these conferences and all the
people running the most important
countries us European countries China
all agree about the problem right
there're certainly not ignorant about it
why is progress not being made well I
mean before we before we talk about
progress not being made I just want to
say I mean one of the things that's
interesting um is that so they do they
have these meetings every year and
people fly all over the world to go to
them and the uh participation at these
events has exploded over the past few
years wow and I mean this past year they
had this wonderful diagram of all the
people who took private planes in and
came in and I mean including some
well-known folks here in the United
States who showed up in their private
planes they didn't even car
they just they all took their own
private planes showed up and then like
we're like oh climate change bad we have
to do something about climate change but
they're not actually practicing what
they preach now so I just want to make
but these individuals are so important
that of course their travel is worth you
know it's a little extra carbon but you
know Bill Gates he's got to be here and
there right he's got to be if he doesn't
get from lisban to Buenos Aris in
whatever two in 20 minutes then uh
people are going to die right
I mean I would just say like let's just
start with car pooling or whatever you
call it when it's air pooling I don't
know what the word is right I mean I
like's just start there Buffet you want
to hit your ride like we're going the
same way we can save gas and they can
join Taylor right I mean she flies all
over she's flying constantly I me
there's been a big move around her they
should just have the climate conference
where the Taylor Swift concert is
happening right if save a lot of carbon
emissions I mean I would just say that I
mean also would love it if she would
think about maybe cutting down the pyot
Technics little because you know I don't
know if you've been to a a Taylor Swift
concert I have kids I've been to many
Taylor Swift concerts you're there with
uh you're there with like an air quality
sensor going like uh guys we're in the
purple like she said everybody hold your
breath now I mean but it's also it's
just you know it's very consumptive
let's just put it that way but okay
going back to your question yes if I can
remember what your question was oh why
is it not working is that the question
okay so the reason it's not working is
that all of these countries are
symbolically gesturing they care about
climate change I mean everybody
everybody cares about climate change now
except for a very small proportion of
people in the United States but that's
different from actually acting on it
because acting on it is not easy like we
talked about before so to act on it
means basically committing to phase out
fossil fuels and fossil fuels are a huge
part of economies of many industrialized
nations we just talked about Norway uh
the United States number one natural gas
exporter and and oil exporter right now
so yay us but I mean that means that for
us to actually follow through on
commitments to phase out fossil fuels
means there's going to be a lot of folks
who have what we call privileged access
to resources in the form of access to
fossil fuel resources they're subsidized
right so they get subsidized access to
our federal lands to drill and take what
they can yeah they also have um
privileged access to power and they get
that because they basically contribute
to campaigns and it's not just
Republicans it's folks across the aisle
yeah who take that money and research
shows us that when you take money from
the fossil fuel interest even if you run
on a climate sensitive platform where
you say you care about climate change
you want to do something about climate
change when you are asked to vote you
will vote with the people who fund you
uhuh and so that happens all over the
world but we you know United States is a
great example of it so there is a very
very strong uh concentrated interest in
maintaining the status quo and so fossil
fuel interests that run countries run
companies run our Industries they are
basically pushing back I mean I was a
contributing author for the
intergovernmental panel on climate
change for the most recent round the
most recent assessment um and we call
that the ipcc and so I actually I wrote
this section on uh Civic activism and
engagement for working group three which
is on mitigation so that's the folks who
were talking about how to reduce the
carbon that goes into the atmosphere um
and you know I was so excited to be
asked to do this is the first time they
ever asked people to talk about activism
and engagement that's what we
individuals and those people who are not
in the government and not in businesses
what we can do about the problem so I
was very excited to write that I wrote
this you know I contributed I've
contributed like 10 pages they took
three paragraphs which is how these
things work right okay but um when when
they go from you know the contribution
to what ends up going to the countries
uh what goes to the countries is What's
called the summary for policy makers
right where they do it's like the cliff
notes version right so my chapter was
over a 100 pages long I think it ended
up being like 20 Pages Maybe I got two
sentences in there but countries get to
approve what goes in there and they took
out all reference to fossil fuels wow so
I mean and so because countries all
countries get a say and countries that
extract a lot of oil don't want anybody
to know so this was a summary that was
put up by the intergovernmental panel on
climate change yes and they took out
references to fossil fuels when they
were summarizing which is the part that
that's what like Biden everyone else is
reading they're reading the summary they
they're not reading the full version oh
yeah I mean and so what they did we had
to change it from fossil fuel interests
to what they're called vested interests
and the thing is that this was a huge
success that vested interest got in and
so we were supposed to be like Oh yay us
we're so lucky I mean so in if you read
the chapter you'll see the references to
the role of fossil fuel interest play
and it's extremely well documented I
mean nobody at this point recogn like
nobody believes that fossil fuels are
not playing a big role in contributing
to climate change if if you are honest
about like understanding the science
right yeah um but you still can't say it
I mean and also I mean look at what
happened at the most recent round of the
climate negotiations there were there
were a bunch of countries that were
pushing to get the countries to agree to
phase out fossil fuels right and uh it
went ended and it ended up like dragging
on and on and on and a bunch of petrol
states that you know extract a whole
bunch of fossil fuels pushed back
against it so it ended up being this
like meele mouth we should think about
at some point phasing out you know maybe
fossil fuels sh you know I that that was
the end I mean everybody was like Yay I
mean and and all of these all of these
people in policy all these people in the
media were like finally we actually kind
of said the quiet part out loud yeah
kind of but we still didn't I mean
that's the thing that's crazy about and
so that's the same thing with the with
the science is that when you have
politics and science combined the way
you do for this because this is specific
speically like a scientific assessment
that's designed for the policy community
and is coordinated through the different
states when you do that and you have a
bunch of countries that are basically
controlled by fossil fuel
interests you know it's it's not
surprising that we see this kind of
tricky situation but it means I mean and
and the more we know that a systemic
shift away from fossil fuel energy
towards renewable clean energy is what
is needed the more these interests are
going to like claw and just try to
control the dialogue as much as they can
so that everyday people don't recognize
that when fossil fuel companies give
money to candidates who are running for
office like in this election that we
have coming up yeah those people whether
or not they say they care about climate
change are absolutely not going to do
anything about it yeah because their
incentive is not to uh but what you're
what you're talking about what you
talked about like three different pieces
of that story is politics right like you
when uh you are writing and trying to
get the right language into the report
that's part of the political process as
is fossil fuels uh companies giving
money to candidates as is entire
countries who are basically bent to the
will of the fossil fuel makers um but
what do we do about that because a lot
of folks when confronted with the
existence of politics will just say oh
I can't believe politics got in
here oh no there's PE there's corruption
there's people giving money oh the
people are who are given money to do
something do the thing that they're
given the money to do oh the people who
have the most power get to call the
shots right but but unfortunately
politics is just part of the human
condition politics simply is you know
humans in large groups having to make
decisions together and yeah and
unfortunately people with power get more
say and that's just how the
world works and if you want to do
something about it you have to like
reckon with the political social system
that you live in and figure out how to
bend it to your will to do the thing
that needs to be done so uh you know I
don't want this to be one of those
episodes where we sit around go I can't
believe the fossil fuel companies are
like have their finger on the scale they
should stop it because they're not going
to they're not what do we do about that
problem well I mean I just want to say
though that what you're just pointing
out here is exactly why we can't just
say everything's going to get better if
we ignore politics because because
that's the way decision- making happens
and if you ignore the politics and just
assume technology is going to fix
everything well then you're just going
to be really really sad in like 20 years
or even less guess who's going to be in
control of the technology the people
with a political power and if you didn't
ignore politics or if you didn't pay
attention to politics then you're
allowing those people to like continue
steering the ship 100% so what so what's
going to happen now or what do we need
to do right now I mean so I mean this is
what I lay out in the book is that you
know the beginning of the book is all
about how we cannot count on decision
makers to do what is needed even though
they recognize the problem exists and
the reason that that's the case is that
we see these interests that captured
decision-making and have this privileged
access to Resource and power right so
okay so that's not the case and at the
other side of it you know businesses
some of which are really excited about
technological innovation they're not
going to save us either because many
businesses are pushing for a clean
energy transition we have a bunch of
other businesses are clawing their way
into extracting like as much as possible
fossil fuels as they can because they
know that eventually they're going to
have to stop and so there's this like
bipolar pressure between these two so
it's it's not like we have this monolith
of oh business is really excited about
this technological innovation because
they're not so given that that's the
situation the place where we have to go
to get hope is from everyday citizens
you and me and the way that we ourselves
are recognizing how the world is
changing how our lives are changing and
how we have to reclaim power and one of
the beauties of being an American and
being in the United States is we still
do have a democracy at least for now and
we should be taking advantage of it
because a democracy means that we all
have power we have an imperfect
up democracy but occasionally the will
of the people does win the will of the
people can still win and but it's up to
us and that's I mean that's the whole
argument on my book is that as unfair as
it seems because we didn't really cause
the problem and we are like trapped in a
system that is unfair but we can still
take power back and that's absolutely
what we have to do and so that's that's
the optimistic part of my apocalyptic
optimism so how do we do that because uh
again Captain Planet generation right I
grew up with turn the lights off buy the
better thing right maybe feel a little
bit guilty when you when you fly on a
plane or whatever maybe get a Prius
right those sorts of things I've covered
extensively in my work why that sort of
consumer approach to fighting climate
change is uh at the very least not going
to get us out of the problem all by
itself um so yeah what do we what do we
actually do so what we need to do at
this point is we need to lean into
activism and engagement I mean and I
talk about the reason why even though
all of these individual efforts like you
were talking about can play a role in
addressing climate change given that
it's a systemic problem that's not
enough right because anyway you're going
to turn on the lights and unless you are
completely off the grid or you know
you're in a very small proportion of the
United States where you're on clean
energy you're basically then tapping
into the same system right there is a
really interesting study that I talk
about in the book where um some students
at MIT tried to map out you know Carbon
consumption of everyday people and they
ended up mapping out the carbon
consumption of a an unhoused person in
Boston right so somebody who was
homeless who was living on the streets
but was also going to shelters right and
they found this person who has no like
very few Earthly belongings right and
who is living in a shelter actually has
the carbon consumption level of well
above most of the developing World wow
right because because of the system so
it is a systemic problem so this is if
you
were to divest yourself of every single
energy consuming thing that you have as
an American or a Canadian or someone
else living in our you know part of the
world or or our part of the socio
economic ladder um you literally were
living on the street you would still not
be you know able to get your individual
level down to people elsewhere in the
world well you could mean you could live
in a bunker and go like completely off
the grid like you can do that and then
you personally will not contribute to
the climate crisis but the system will
continue right exactly but I mean but if
you just like if you try everything like
for example we at home we went we have
electric cars we have solar panels but
whenever I go to work I turn on the
lights and my computer runs on the
system and so even though the
electricity at home is clean yeah it's
not clean everywhere else you're not in
control of like the cloud servers that
apple is using to store your emails and
like what power they like you're you're
part of a system yeah yeah and my Alexa
that is tracking everything I say not
even go there um and every once in a
while she just speaks up and says I hear
that you are interested in games to play
with your children can I suggest some
and it's like no I don't want you
to suggest she's burning fossil fuels
every time she listens to you well she
at home she's burning solar so at least
so at least I have that yeah but the
servers but when she backs oh she backs
up absolutely with like probably Cole so
you know the dirtiest of them all um
anyway so the question that you asked
was about how we take power back so I
was just saying so individually we can't
do it alone we need to work collectively
and it one of the beautiful things about
the United States is that we have a
really long history of social movements
and activism so one of the things I do
in my book is I basically build off of
some of the things that we learn from
the Civil Rights Movement which is the
most studied movement ever in the
history of the world so we know a lot
about it yeah um but basically what we
can do is join collectives and get
engaged in our communities get engaged
in climate activism climate engagement
to help to push for social change I mean
one of the things that I think is most
important is to push for social change
from our community up so we don't just
decide I mean and this is something that
my students and I are always kind of
discussing I think I've won them over
because like the end of the semester is
in like two weeks which is that um you
can't really do this all by just going
on Tik Tok and I think a lot of young
people and a lot of students learn that
the sad hard way with the decision that
the Biden Administration made around the
willow project which is this huge fossil
fuel infrastructure project that is has
been approved by the administration in
Alaska and all of these young people
went online and went on Tik Tok it was
this huge mobilization on Tik Tok there
was like millions of online signatures
onto a petition on change.org yeah there
was a whole bunch of people posting
videos about stopping the willow project
um but there was no imperson action or
there's very little imperson action and
unfortunately as a result or not as a
result but unfortunately the the willow
project move forward right so they're
building that out and um a lot of young
people are recognizing I hope they're
recognizing and learning that you can't
just go online and do this you need to
work with people and the best way to do
it is to do it in your community well a
lot of people make this argument about
about online activism and I see that
myself as well that you know people
tweet and hope it's going to do
something but I also recognize that the
reason a lot of people resort to that is
they uh do not have other systems in
their lives where they feel like they
can express themselves they're not you
know there isn't a mass mov organization
in their area or they just feel you know
they feel profoundly alienated from
their Community uh a lot of folks you
know are are don't have other outlets so
uh you know that's a real problem that
people face uh how can people get
connected especially because I just want
to add to this that my own experience
you know following the climate movement
is that we have had attempts at mass
movement organizations you know there's
organizations I believe 350.org is that
the name of one um the sunrise movement
um which uh was doing I think incredible
work for a couple years but in the last
couple years sort of gone where are they
you know no offense to my Sunrise
movement people right like there's
people out there carrying the torch but
you know we have not seen uh I mean a
year or two ago there was a giant
climate you know a mass climate March I
think in multiple cities barely covered
in the Press you know um and so there's
been an attempt to build this mass
movement akin to the civil rights
movement and yet it had you know for at
least a decade and yet it has not really
uh paid off uh so why is that and how
can we change that you're like you're
like in my sweet spot right now so thank
you very much oh I'm so happy to set up
a guest thank you so okay so first and
foremost let me just say that this is
completely to be expected um anybody who
remembers the period of the Trump
Administration there was this huge
resistance to the Trump Administration
its policies anybody who's interested I
wrote a book called American resistance
that was all about it it was a mass
mobilization it was the largest
sustained period where people were in
the streets and people were active and
engaged that we have seen since the
Civil Rights period anti- anti sorry and
the anti-war period yeah um so that was
like the 1960s 1970s right so since then
this was like remarkable everybody The
Washington Post did this uh survey and
they said that like what was it uh one
in four people had been to a protest in
you know during the first two years that
was multiple types of protests it was
the women's March it was the the wake of
the murder of George Floyd it was like a
bunch of a bunch of things over a span
of years yeah yeah so was a span of the
whole Trump Administration so the
resistance was amazing and people were
the most civically engaged they have
been in decades right but so what
happens when a Democrat takes office is
frequently we see the left kind of
sitting back and I actually wrote I
wrote few we can take a load off oh boy
Jo I got go what's on TV I gotta you
know finally I can catch up on my
reading where's my new where's my an
patent book read reading okay maybe like
I hope so reading is is a good thing but
um so uh so it was not surprising but I
mean and I actually wrote a piece that
was like uh the you know Biden success
is the death of the resistance and the
resistance the resistance did die so you
mentioned a couple of different
organizations I mean 350.org is still
around they do great work Sunrise is
still around they do great work um but
these groups have a lot less capacity to
mobilize people because the general
public on the left when there's a
democrat in the White House they're like
all right I think we're good I'm going
to take a load off I'm going to pay
attention to my kids I'm going to I'm
going to catch up on my my Netflix maybe
they're going to read I hope they're
going to read but you know I think
they're gonna read your book maybe maybe
they'll read my book um maybe that'll
get them back out in the streets but I
mean so so that's all to be expected and
that's what I talk about my book is that
we know that first of all that activism
is cyclical and people are going to need
something that motivates them to get out
in the streets and to connect
collectively especially because most
people don't have what we call like
organizational infrastructure which is
connections to organizations that are in
their communities that help them get
active and we know that organizations
play a very important role in channeling
people's concerns their anger their
outrage into action so we need that so
how does that then happen and what I
talk about in the book is that it's
going to come from the experience of
climate shocks and I can give you you
know I can give you some evidence around
this is that the largest climate March
that we've seen since Biden took office
so since you know in years now was the
March 10 fossil fuels which happened
last fall in New York City and it was
right before the UN meeting um where the
Secretary General said you have to
actually have some sort of commitment or
you're not allowed to come to my meeting
and so a bunch of countries I believe
the United States even were not invited
so it was a very interest yeah it was
very interesting didn't really do
anything a real Regina George move yeah
but he was trying I mean he was really
trying anyway so so 75,000 people march
in the streets of New York City and uh
one of the things I do is um I survey
protesters so I went out with a team of
researchers students who were working
with me and we did what what we call
like a a field approximation of a random
sample so we basically went through
teams throughout the whole crowd and
surveyed people to get information on
who they were why they were there Etc
and so for you sociology yeah I am a
sociologist yes but this is something
this is like a lens that the climate
crisis is not often looked at through it
is unfortunately the case I mean so it
is increasingly looked at through uh
sociological or social scientific lens
but um one of the things that's really
unfortunate is that while we know a
whole lot about how the world warming
and how a little bit more carbon in the
atmosphere will affect warming and will
affect hurricanes and Etc and so forth I
mean always more accuracy is NE
necessary we know a heck of a lot less
about the people who will respond and
what we will do and how it will matter
yeah and so one of my Hills that I'm
going to die on is saying that we need
more research funding to support that
because social scientists get like
Pennies on the on the dollar right we
spend so much money researching the hard
Sciences we spend so little
on researching the people who need to
implement who we need to implement what
the hard Sciences come up with right I
would say it's even worse than that it's
the people who are causing the problem
right as well as the people who are
going to have to solve the problem right
so we know so little about that and that
was one of the reasons that like when I
wrote for the
ipcc I am you know the rules of the ipcc
are you need to be able to prove how
whatever you're looking at is associated
with carbon right so people march in the
streets well how does that affect carbon
emissions or decisions around carbon
emissions and there's a lot there's not
that much research there's a lot more we
need to know about that yeah so I mean
it would be really great for me to be
able to say okay if you go into a museum
and you throw soup on a covering of a
painting it equals this much carbon
right I mean they want me to be able to
say that I would love to be able to
answer that I mean are you going to are
you going to have better effects in
terms of reducing carbon emissions if
you throw soup on a painting you glue
yourself to a door or you sit in the
middle of the highway right but I mean
it's but it's an important question and
how much I mean so the reason that folks
are doing that kind of activism which is
a lot of what I talk about in the book
is because they're trying to get media
attention so it's really like it's like
a boomerang right it's an indirect
process so you do those things you're
going to be in the media and a bunch of
people are going to say he sucks for
doing it and then other people are going
to say but he has a point I should join
a movement and so they re they will very
rarely be like I'm gonna throw soup no
they're gonna say I'm gonna go work with
like a more you know a more benign a
Kinder gentler you know group so I may
join like uh League of conservation
voters or Sierra clubber or I may do
something around my local elections or
something to do you know to do something
around weatherization in my community
something like that right so you may get
involved in that but the question is all
of that like how does that then end up
with carbon yeah it would be amazing if
we could say so often folks are
presented with a statistic oh if you
switch to an electric car you'll save
this many trees this many tons of carbon
whatever and that's supposedly a hard
calculation even though there's a lot of
assumptions and and all that and all
that within it but you could wouldn't it
be wonderful if you could tell people
hey if you were to join a local chapter
of the sunrise movement in your area and
go to one meeting a month it would save
this many tons of carbon we could do
that yeah we just need to be able to to
develop the models and run them but
those models are let me just say like
those models are a lot simpler than the
models that are being funded right now
to talk about how sandstorms over in
Africa are contributing to hurricanes
and there are people doing that research
and it's important I am not saying it's
not important I think everybody should
be funded but I think that you know
those of us who are trying to answer
these questions we need to understand
that I mean and we need to be able to
think about that right is it if so if I
were talking to like the general public
and you want to do something is it
better for you to support a candidate
who won't take fossil fuel money and is
running for office locally in terms of
your carbon or is it better for you to
get electric School Bus into your
schools M or is it better for you to go
and try to get your local school you
know universities to divest from fossil
fuels or is it better for you to throw
soup on something and or crazy glue your
foot to something and get a bunch of
media attention so that everybody starts
you know complaining about you but
talking about the climate crisis because
it absolutely works that way yeah and I
mean we could do those things and I'm
hoping you know there are a couple of us
who actually wrote a piece for nature
magazine that came out right before for
the last climate negotiation so in the
fall where we basically talked about all
the things that we could study and we
know a little bit about but we need to
know so much more about and
unfortunately so far we haven't gotten
$1 to do that work but we know that work
is necessary eventually eventually we
will do the work but I hope it won't be
too late because people need to know now
what's the best way to get involved but
any but my the take-home message of the
book is that anything that everybody
that anybody is willing to do is what
you should do because we are in all
hands on deck
people need to get involved they need to
get connected they they should do it in
their communities oh I mean one of the
well I won't I was going to like I wish
I had said you know one of the other
things would be really valuable to do is
to like do the modeling to say if you do
something on Tik Tok versus you do
something in your own Community which
what's the carbon there and you and I
both know how that carbon's going to lay
out right because just you know the
question of how much posting on Tik Tok
actually leads to reductions in carbon
or you know more consumption could be
maybe right hey everybody you know how
much I value internet privacy we have
talked about it many times on this show
and that is why I got to give a big
shout out to Surf shark for sponsoring
today's episode in our digital age you
simply got to be online but you also
don't want anybody peeking over your
shoulder while you're browsing right and
that is where surf shark comes in every
time you hop online especially on public
networks you're basically an open book
with surf shark though your data gets
encrypted and your IP address gets
masked keeping hackers and cyber snoops
at Bay plus you can virtually change
your location with surf shark's 3200
servers across 100 countries that means
you can bypass geolock content and
maintain the Comforts of home and access
all your favorite shows even when you're
traveling abroad surf shark also
supports a feature called clean web that
blocks ads trackers mware and fishing
attempts making your online experience
safer and more Serene who couldn't use a
little extra piece of Mind these days
right and get this surf shark doesn't
just keep others out of your business
they keep themselves out too they don't
monitor they don't track and they do not
store your online activity they use no
connection or activity logs of any kind
just pure peace and privacy and I am so
excited to share that surf shark has a
deal for factually listeners get three
months free with a 24mon subscription
just head over to Surf shark. deal adamc
Conover or use the code Adam Conover to
get started with a 30-day moneyback
guarantee you've got nothing to lose
check out surf shark. deals Conover or
use the code Adam Conover and start your
tranquil era of worry-free browsing
right now you know I am all about those
little pickme UPS throughout the day
whether it's conquering work tasks or
doing chores around the house I need a
little treat to reward me it is a must
and you know what gets me smiling every
time Japanese snacks not only are they
bursting with flavor but the cute
packaging and quirky Vibes add an extra
layer of fun that is why teaming up with
Baku a Japanese snack subscription box
has been an absolute Delight and these
aren't your run-of-the-mill grocery
store snacks okay every month bxu brings
you over 20 unique treats that you can
normally find only in Japan plus they
thrw in a Nifty guide packed with info
about each snack and Japanese culture so
you get to snack while you learn are you
kidding this was literally made for me
oh and by the way each box ships
straight from Japan straight to your
door okay so I'm going to try one of the
snacks for you I got my little guide
right here I think this week I'm going
to go for the sooka senbe Uma zarame
this SBE rice cracker boasts a uniquely
irresistibly tart and sweet flavor
combination of um Japanese Plum and
zoram a coarse granulated sugar cool now
this says it contains wheat and soy so
that's good to know for you gluten folks
there are plenty of gluten-free uh
snacks in here here's the cracker o this
looks so good let me give it a
try oh my God you hear that crunch it's
like tart it's a little salty it's a
little sweet M this is delicious and I
never would have gotten to try this if
Baku had in sended straight to my house
and you know my favorite thing about
Baku is that they support small family
run businesses in Japan bxu has sourced
your treats by working with over 245
small makers in Japan helping out their
businesses and helping to preserve their
Traditions so if you love trying new and
interesting things or if you know
somebody who does you have got to try
out bxu and get these snacks shipped
straight from Japan to your door and
right now you can use the code factually
for $15 off your first order on boo.com
that's code factually for $15 off your
first order on box.com that's B
u.com I want to return to this point of
climate shocks you said is going to uh
mobilize people because you said
actually let's return to something even
earlier and I didn't even and I didn't
finish talking about what I found from
people you Dro so many ideas on us we're
going to go through them one by one Dana
okay Co because this is you're an
incredible interviewees so you talked
about organizations organizations are
really important to get people you know
mobilized and make things happen
something I've talked about before in my
work that uh my wonderful research
producer Sam rman is constantly
reminding me the reason the NRA is very
powerful is not actually the gun Lobby's
money it's the fact that it's a mass I
mean the the lobby the money is
important right but is it's a mass
membership organization that like
millions of people are members and they
actually get something out of the
membership they take firearms training
they you know whatever they get a
discount at the local gun store like
it's and they make friends I mean that's
the other thing is it's not just that
they get something out of it but it
creates social bonds and that builds
reciprocity so that if they're like hey
um the library wants to have this you
know book you should do something oh
yeah I'm G to come out because it's a
it's a real membership organization that
people feel like they're a part of
that's also part of why in my own
personal experience unions are so
powerful because it it is it's an
organization that actually matters to
your life it's about your workplace it's
your workplace connections you can you
know exercise power and really feel it
it like is really vital in your life
churches are really important to people
for those reasons the social bonds I I
think some of the problem with
organizations like a 350.org like hey
why don't you join the climate movement
and you know come to a thing is it's
like what immediate relevance does that
have to people um in their lives right
okay I signed up for a mailing list you
know maybe they send me some mailers and
stuff like that but it is lacking that
like immediacy of this is an
organization that I am a part of and
that it interacts with my life in
multiple ways um I was say so so one of
the things that I talk about a lot in my
last book in American resistance is the
way that there has been this shift in
the past like decade or so as social
media and technology has diffused more
where a lot of organizations decided
particularly on the left decided to do
the shortcut where they no longer have
members but they have email lists right
uhuh and as a result individuals will be
you know members or connected to many
different organizations simultaneously
because it's a very easy ask but they
don't get anything out of it they don't
meet in person they don't actually feel
any bonds to anybody else and I actually
in my last book I talked about how I
umum my sister and I went and
volunteered with swing left during the
2018 election that was like the last
chapter of the book where we went out
and we decided we were going to go to
you know an area in Virginia and we were
going to like see I was like let's
experience this how this is working
because this was like a big resistance
group that emerged during the Trump
Administration to try to push back and
to try to help take power back and so I
was like okay so my sister and I decided
we would do it together and we went
there and um while we ended up meeting
Terry molth who was the former Governor
and actually ended up running for
governor but did not win um in Virginia
so we got to meet him and have a
conversation with him we met nobody else
the entire time that we did our work
with this organization and we walked
away having done stuff I got one email
saying hey you guys knocked on this many
doors this day and it was amazing
because it was like it was it was crazy
because people were like blocking the
street parking to do this in this one
area of Virginia to work on this
election but nobody met anybody yeah so
I felt no contact no connection to this
organization afterwards there's no
reciprocity there what if they had at
the end of that said hey let's go up for
beers hey here's PE you know and then
you make friends like which is something
that I've experienced in the labor
movement right that that I have I have
new friends and new colleagues right uh
you know I'm literally going to go to a
labor conference later this year cuz I
want to meet more people etc etc I mean
I would say that it's it's also um
valuable like in a union people are very
connected because it's connected to your
work into to your life me one of the
things that uh a lot of people have
asked me out of the new book is I talk
about how we create social reciprocity
and um how we create resilience in our
communities which is absolutely
necessary right and so when we think
about climate change and I know we're
going to talk about climate shocks in a
minute but when we think about climate
change we know that communities are
going to be hit with extreme events
right which we call which I call climate
shocks but um we need to address them in
terms of thinking about how we
environmentally prepare but we also need
to socially prepare and that's where
these kinds of organizations can also
play a very important role because as
you get hit with an extreme like an
atmospheric River here or a tornado or a
hurricane or a drought or a flood or you
know the list goes on and on and on
unfortunately the communities are going
to have to respond and having those
connections matter a lot and one of
things that I've been thinking about and
a lot of people have been asking me is
where do we get those connections
because we have many fewer of them on
the left which is what you were pointing
out originally and so we we know we know
churches we know other religious groups
um we know schools provide that I mean
certainly one of the ways that Sunrise
was so successful is by building hubs
within schools yeah right but another
place and this is something that I'm
actually starting to do research on and
work with in my team at American
University is we're looking at libraries
libraries are in communities around you
know in all communities right everybody
has a library or almost everybody has a
library thankfully and they provide
information and access to books and
knowledge right and they could also
provide a lot of other things for
example I mean I'm assuming here in
California too libraries helped to
distribute um covid test kits right yep
and they provided a lot of other
resources a lot of Social Services
exactly and they could provide even more
and in fact one of the things that we're
we're looking into is the way that they
might be able to provide information
around climate change that is relevant
for specific communities based on what
the demographics of the community are as
well as the kinds of risk that they're
facing yeah when you talk about these
shocks causing you know okay these these
organizations to grow and maybe you know
have a closer relationship with uh the
public which is what we need we need
climate organizations that people feel
connected to in a more real way um so
that you know they can actually ask
something of people hey show up and do
something people go hold hell yeah I
will cuz I'm a member of this
organization um a a a climate shock I
can see how that might help that happen
uh because you know if your town is
flooding you know it it's suddenly
realer to you and you need the help of
an organization more maybe you'll get
more involved in the same way that when
you know if you're being over at
work and a union comes to your workplace
you'll feel like you're a member of that
Union that's really real however if the
shocks are happening doesn't that mean
it's kind of late no we we it is a very
late hour already for uh for climate
change and for the world and as a result
there's no question that that people are
going to lose lives and people are going
to lose lose homes I mean we've we're
already seeing it I mean insurance
companies are pulling out of parts of
all over the United States and then that
doesn't even consider developing
countries which have contributed the
least to The Climate crisis but they're
being hit even more and they have much
less social support right yeah certain
you know small island nations are
flooding Australia is taking in people
who are climate refugees basically right
and that's going to happen more and more
but so it it is a very late hour but
it's not too late for most of us to save
ourselves and you know that's why I
start in the beginning of the book by
saying I hope to see you all on the
other side because I mean as as much as
it sounds kind of glib I mean it's
absolutely true and we are not taking
seriously the threat and as one of the
reasons that a lot of climate scientists
I know are starting these are like the
natural scientists the atmospheric
scientists are becoming activists
because they're like we're done doing
research we're going to scream at the
top of our lungs because what the hell
else are we going to do you guys have to
listen to us but nobody's listening to
the dire message coming from the
scientists but so with regard to climate
shocks what I think is really important
to recognize is that there's a lot of
research that talks about how after
disasters Windows of opportunity open
and we could see it after Hurricane
Katrina hurricane Maria um Hurricane
Sandy I mean I know a lot of my examples
are hurricanes after the wildfires that
hit here in California there are these
moments where all of a
sudden people can things and policym
shifts a lot and this is what I call an
anthro shift in the book um and in that
moment what we see
is you know the social systems shift to
be able to support people because they
know that the people need the help and
that is when we can um we can see uh the
types of systemic changes that are D you
know are are so needed actually
happening um unfortunately at this point
we don't have examples of that kind of
lasting change and I talk in the book a
lot about the example of the pandemic
and the way that all of a sudden when
people started feeling the risk
themselves like the risk oh my gosh I
could die my kids could die I could pass
on this deadly disease to somebody older
in my family people supported the idea
the world shut down right we stayed home
we homeschooled which you know was
really fun uh we baked bread we we
created Gardens right we gardened we did
all of these things at home we stayed
inside for a long time we wore masks
which and people got mad after a while
but like especially for the first couple
months you know people really on board
people were Vigilant right and our
government changed right it supported us
it gave out more re you know resources
it or gave loans it stopped you know
people from getting evicted right yeah
it did all of these things that was an
anos shift yeah but over time when the
risk level went down and people started
being like Oh I already got it wasn't
that big deal or I got vaccinated or you
know what it's not worth this yeah they
went back out and you know we're
basically back to you know normal and I
frequently when I talk about this and I
I'm giving like I'm doing my book tour
now and I'm talking to crowds and I'm
like and I see Zero people in the
audience wearing a mask even though the
pandemic continues right yeah that shows
that the the shift we went back like
it's multi-directional and we can go
back and that tells us how bad it has to
get before we're really going to
mobilize I mean one of the hopeful
things just going back to my surveying
people in the crowd back to Sociology
for a moment so I surveyed all of these
activists in the streets in New York
City 75,000 people in September last
year and I asked them for the first time
I asked you know one did you experience
a climate shock and I didn't say climate
shock I listed a whole bunch of things
that we know are climate shocks wildfire
and smoke from Wildfire extreme weather
extreme events sea level rise flooding
right and what was amazing is over 85%
of the people in the crowd reported
experiencing at least one climate shock
in the past six months wow I mean in a
lot of it so we were on the East Coast a
lot of it was wildfire and smoke from
Wildfire but also sea level rise
flooding and extreme heat right so this
is I mean so the people who are
mobilizing are experiencing climate
shocks and the other thing that I ask
them is there's been a lot of talk about
emotions and people feeling like climate
anxiety or feeling so despondent from
the crisis that they're not doing
anything and so one of the things I
wanted to do is see what people in the
streets were feeling what is motivating
them to get out in the streets and get
off their sofas right and the top
emotions for people in the crowd were
sadness makes sense right and anger no
hope people in the streets were not
particularly hopeful they were there
because they were pissed off yeah and
there is like historical precedent that
we know that people who join social
movements and like are willing to take a
stand they usually are angry so you know
I come to think of it hope especially in
the Obama era got such a big uh big
reputation oh hope hope that's why we're
out there well hold on a second if you
have hope maybe you'll just sit at home
and be like yeah I hope things will get
better like things things will probably
turn around There's Hope don't worry
about it but if you're pissed off you
might take to the streets and like you
know start shaking your fist and
throwing things absolutely and you might
be willing to glue yourself or get
arrested right I mean a good a good uh
good piece of evidence on that point is
that while we did the survey in the
streets I also worked with a team of
folks who did a nationally
representative sample of people who were
not in the streets at the same time to
see how much they experienced climate
shocks and what emotions they were
feeling and so they had lot a lot less
experience personally with climate
shocks um and they were hopeful about
the climate change huh so people who
were not in the streets are hopeful and
less angry and people who are in the
streets less hopeful angry but they're
there that is so fascinating because I
have taken as a thesis for a long time
that look there's such a Vibe out there
of the world is ending right it's it's
all over if you scroll on Tik Tok you'll
see a lot of people who feel that way
well hey this is the I'm I'm a member of
the last generation so why even bother
and I always sort of took it as a given
that part of you know what I should try
to do is let people know that there's
always going to be a world tomorrow and
you always have the opportunity to make
a better tomorrow and is being done
and you can be a part of that and to try
to fight against defeatism which I think
is part of Hope um and to try to
cultivate a bit of hope things are
really bad I want us to be real realists
but hey if we can do it what you are
maybe saying is that maybe that's the
wrong approach maybe we should just say
nah shit's get mad get out there
I don't think that they're that
different I mean I actually because I
actually think when I hear you talking
about it I mean like you you kind of
sound like an apocalyptic Optimist too
right I mean I mean it's basic that's
the realistic stance right is that I
mean if you want to be realistic about
the climate crisis you need to
acknowledge what the natural scientists
are saying I mean I'm not a natural
scientist I'm not an atmospheric
scientist we got a lot of my colleagues
who are who are saying we are standing
at the precipice and we are looking into
it and some of us are saying who cares
and others of us are saying holy I
mean and those people are doing
something about it and in you know in
the case of the general public I think
it's important to recognize that so that
when we hit like summer 2024 is going to
suck it is going to suck across the
country and who says differently and
then it's going to go into fall 2024 and
they're predicting the worst hurricane
the worst hurricane season ever wow I
mean and the only I mean and if
anybody's wondering about why we know
that look at the temperature ocean
temperatures now ocean temperatures are
statistically significantly off the
charts from any historical record I I've
seen and that and that leads to
hurricanes right energy in the ocean
that leads to energy in the storm system
yeah I mean basically the storms like
suck up the water and then warm mer the
water is the more water they suck up and
so while the Hurricanes the wind may not
be any stronger it is not the wind that
destroys homes and and destroys
communities it is how much rainfalls I
mean you guys know that here right it's
all about rainfall and how much your
land can actually absorb right and that
and that is going to be absolutely
decimating this coming year so we need
to be realistic about that right and I I
mean I don't do that research but I
believe my colleagues who do do that
research and so the question is what do
we do about it and I do think we should
be hopeful I mean I'm hopeful but the
reason I'm hopeful is because I'm angry
and because I know so many people are
angry and I think that people should not
sit with it and be like you know you
should be like wow this sucks and it's
getting worse but they but we should
also think and it I'm going to do
something about it and and that's what
everybody needs to do people need to
rise up and they need to they need to
embrace the ancher and embrace the fact
that this is not fair and it is not fair
that it is our responsibility to do
something about it the only way that our
government will do what is needed is if
we demand it and we force them to
otherwise we will continue on this
incremental path to policymaking that
will do something but absolutely not
enough to address the climate crisis and
basically you may as well kiss like half
a Florida goodbye you may as well kiss
most of the coast you know goodbye and
anybody who lives in areas that get
extreme heat like you know the whole
Southwest yeah anybody who works outside
there anybody who can't afford to have
uh air conditioning they'll be moving
and you know then we're going to be
experiencing not just internal migration
but you know within the United States
but we're going to be seeing all these
people from other parts of the world who
can't you know can't live where they are
who have you know no access to water
it's too hot they can't survive and
they're going to be pushing in and of
course that makes for a really fun story
because as we know we're not doing so
well with migration already now imagine
all the people who are going to be
coming and the political Strife that
will come as a result when people freak
out about that and the humanitarian
crisis that will happen and my God uh
but don't get despondent okay get angry
that's a great message uh I I I no no
seriously that was I'm the angry
sociologist that's no that's a wonderful
It's a Wonderful message and a wonderful
speech that you gave I I I hope you
could speak to my own darkest thought
okay which is that uh you know on some
level Humanity like our social
technology our social ability to
recognize what's happening as a system
of humans um and honestly our individual
ability to do so is sort of outstripped
by what is happening you know I I
something that stuck with me for a long
time I read this maybe a year ago can't
remember whose blog post this was so
apologies to the Blogger who wrote this
but it was that um you know Obama had
bought a uh beachfront home on uh
Martha's Martha's Village Martha's
Vineyard Martha's Vineyard thank you the
island right that he loves a West
coaster no no no I'm not a from no I
grew up in New York godamn it but I I
just forgot what it was oh fck you could
I I have a tan now okay it I mean I
live in California uh anyway so he had
bought a he had bought a house on
Martha's Vineyard and whatever reporter
or blogger this was looked up like you
know the government's uh climate change
predictions and was like this house is
going to be unlivable or unsellable
inside of 20 years right that this is
like a like forget terrible investment
forget livable it's bad investment um
and literally I know people I grew up on
Long Island I know people who have had
that problem where it's like their house
has gone down in value because you know
it's so close to the coast that people
don't want to buy it because they know
about climate change after Hurricane
Sandy there were communities that had to
be relocated I mean yeah ex so so the
point of this piece was that Barack
Obama who certainly should be in a
better position than anyone else to know
about climate change very smart man
reads a giant briefing book every every
weekend you know he's not ignorant of
the problem and yet when it came to his
own personal choice he made a choice
that was ignorant because our own
ability to sort of see the future in
this case and think about how it affects
us is limited right it's like a human
limitation and I could I could list I
don't want to just be like Obama's a
piece of that's not the point the
point is that like all of us do this to
an extent right like we have trouble
thinking about the future in this way
and making adjustments in our lives and
then multiply that by you know uh 8
billion yeah uh and you know you've got
a real of a problem and is
this just going to be something where
200 years from now the remnants of
humanity are looking backo this was just
outstripped our ability to to do
something as a species well okay so
first and foremost yes I think there is
a real risk of that but second I do want
to I want to talk about the Obama issue
an example for a second to just say that
well um well Obama should have known
better however he is I mean he's a super
privileged man right he's a former
president the United States yeah he uh
he has lots of resources his you know
Michelle has made a lot of money on
selling books right so they are not
suffering at all okay so they can afford
it I mean the people who can afford it I
mean they to take a loss they can afford
to take a loss and and at this point I
mean it's unclear what will happen with
insurance on Martha's Vineyard and in
you know in Massachusetts if they were
in Florida they would no longer have
insurance and you know what someone's
going to buy this house even if it's
like floating in the ocean someone's
going to be like you know President
Obama used to live there someone's going
to pay too much for it I mean what what
is maybe but I mean what's happening
right now is that there are certain
communities and there was this really
interesting story that was done in the
Washington Post recently about
communities in the Outer Banks of North
Carolina where um there were these
summer houses that basically had you
know where outer banks are like these
border Islands right and they had been
to so taken over by sea level rise that
they basically were no longer um able to
get access to water sewage or
electricity right because at all came
underground and all got washed away so
the National Park Service paid the
owners and I believe it was $800,000 a
house to take them back and de demolish
them wow and which is but that that's
just like that's not sustainable it's
outrageous a little bit um and you know
they and those people like I KN I know
they took a loss but you know hey that
that's not so bad I mean we we should
all hope that we get that kind of battle
out that's not we should not expect that
to happen yeah but so I mean so I would
just say like I think you know those
people who can afford summer homes and
stuff like that right and are I mean
more and more they're GNA buy homes
without able being able to get insurance
because that's what's happening is the
insurance companies are on the Forefront
or the Vanguard in terms of thinking
about this because it's their pocketbook
that's going in that position of
privilege are the ones who are calling
the shots they're the ones who are
running the oil companies they're the
ones who are who are senators and Etc
right right I mean for now I mean the
nice you know that's one of the things
that's nice about our country is you
could actually run for office and hold
office and not come from like oil
companies but you know people have to
but it's it's much more I saw a stat
recently from I believe more perfect
union that like a very small percentage
of people in office are from
working-class backgrounds most of them
are are well- paid lawyers and things
like that they're from the Upper Crust
yeah yeah yeah so I mean sure so those I
mean and those people are going to have
the least they're the least at risk from
the climate crisis right they are not
part of Frontline communities they are
not most of them don't come from
communities of color either and that
means that they have like some distance
from experiencing this but I mean but I
think that the other point that you made
in this the example around Obama that I
think is really important to think about
is that because of the way climate
change Works which is right right now we
emit CO2 carbon greenhouse gases they go
into the atmosphere and they build up
there and it is the process of them
getting up there and sitting up there
that then affects thermal radiation
coming from the Sun and how much
actually gets back out and that's that's
the greenhouse effect right that's how
it works and that then has this effect
on all these patterns Etc that the
natural scientists are talking about it
is a slow process right we know for
example if tomorrow everybody stopped
burning fossil fuels and everybody you
know everybody just turned off the
lights we would not see an effect in
terms of all of this the effects of
climate change the climate shocks would
not stop immediately wow so given that
delay it makes it even harder not only
is it we've got these folks in positions
of power who are controlling all the
resources that are making decision-
making slow but it's also that it's like
a it's there's a delay there and that
means that this is such a tricky problem
that there is just no question in my
mind that we are going to have to get a
lot more apocalyptic before we're going
to get to the optimistic side because we
need people to experience this firsthand
to get angry enough to make those kinds
of decisions to change their behaviors
and a lot of those decisions and those
changes they're not going to be fun I
mean I mean some people will be able to
buy a rivan congratulations to you right
but most people were talking about
having to take public transit and hope
that it becomes electrified yeah and
that is you know having tried right like
you know having tried to get around in
public transit here in La I can tell you
dos oh well it's it's look if you if you
planned it that way right you planned it
that way I plan it that way i' I've
molded my life around public transit in
LA and go go to a major city in Texas
and tell me the public transit in La
sucks like at least we have it
here I'm I'm serious like like Los
Angeles has second highest public
transit ridership in the country um BEC
because there are buses a lot of cities
in America do not have them at all but
you know I saw speed I know about the
buses well taken that like you it is the
system is simultaneously you know too uh
too spread out buses run too rarely too
uncomfortable not enough shade speaking
of climate change um you know there are
all these problems with the system they
not electric yeah and they're not
electric makes it far more uncomfortable
uh and unpleasant and inconvenient to
ride than it should be despite the fact
that it's a better option than many than
many people you know in this city think
that it is uh but so you but it almost
seems like you end up not rooting for
the shocks but saying like hey things
are going to get worse but in a way
that's a good thing because it may
finally cause the societal response that
we need where people people are really
getting out there and getting
angry and saying protect us because we
are actively dying right I mean and that
but that unfortunately that process is
the only way I see it working right wow
because the government's not going to
step in and save us because they
basically going to lose I mean the folks
in power are going to lose those funders
who fund their campaigns and that's how
our political system works unfortunately
but that is how the system works right
so that's not going to change the
businesses some of the businesses are
going to push for clean energy but a
whole bunch of businesses are going to
say hey we can maybe we can extract uh
more natural gas and send it to other
countries and we'll make money on that
so they're going to do anything they can
to stay stay the course so systemic
change is hard we're going to have to
push for it and it is true that we're
going to need to have I mean I'm not
rooting for climate shocks I am being
just realistic about what's coming yeah
I mean I just hope there are some people
some Scholars who are talking about
these like cascading effects and not
knowing how it's going to have huge you
know effects on you know the in terms of
thinking about how weather patterns will
change how the different um ocean
currents will change and I mean there's
a this is all people who do stuff that I
do not do and I don't you know know a
lot about but I read when I see the
story you know the Pieces come out in
top journals those things could really
change the whole way that you know
weather and temperature and climate
works all over the world and we don't
know I mean it could mean like droughts
happen in places that never were dry
before and floods you know and places
are inundated in ways that were never
before but we should expect that these
kinds of things are coming so I just my
my feeling is we just should take
whatever is predicted and assume that it
could be as bad as that and we can hope
it won't be but that is where people are
going to start to get angry because it's
when you have the personal experience
yeah um of the risk that gets us mad and
gets us motivated and and then we work
through the organizations that exist or
build our own organizations to put
pressure on those in power and it's only
when those in power actually feel at
risk of losing power that they finally
make a difference and they make the
changes that are needed and that mean we
learn this from the Civil Rights
Movement those are perfect example there
I mean you actually are giving me hope
that
uh it's weird you give me a weird kind
of hope that like as things get worse
that creates the conditions for things
to get better that there's there's a
natural sort of counterveiling force and
and that honestly sounds more plausible
to me than like hey you know the price
of Solar is going to get so cheap that
eventually the problem's going to solve
itself like I can I I can hold out a
little bit of Hope there too but also
you know I I'm like I think things are
getting a little bit worse but the idea
that that is going to you know cause
change and cause a mass uprising of the
sort that we need is believable and it
seems to be you know born out by history
that you know it's when people are under
the most intense pressure uh that I mean
look at the look at the labor movement
right that like the labor movement was
born out of the incredible depravity of
the late 19th century the incredible
misery forced people to stand up and
fight back and then you know we the
labor movement worked and you know in
you know starting in the middle part of
the century of the last century we had
you the rise of the middle class and
like safety protections and the the
40-hour work week and all these things
and then everybody got comfy and the
companies started everybody
again and now people are rising up again
like this is kind of how it works a
little bit and so
you know we're starting to have the the
fact that the climate crisis is actually
happening is waking people up perhaps
well yeah certainly that I mean there's
no question that the labor movement is
also reemerging after recognizing how
the extension and expansion of
inequality in our country is basically
leaving so many people behind right yeah
so that that's happening simultaneous
one of the things that um simultaneously
one of the things I talk about in the
book though is that historically labor
and the climate movement have not worked
well together I mean in fact part of
that is because much of the clean energy
transition so far has been peopled by
non-union labor and that means that
folks in unions are like no no no no no
we would like to stick with our fossil
fuel Expansion Project because that is
unionized and there have been some uh I
won't I won't call them out but there's
been a couple unions I know here in
Southern California that have been like
against uh you know different climate
change regulations hey let's Electrify
well hold on a second if you work in the
gas industry maybe you don't like that
so much of course of course and that's
it's understandable but it is you know
it is against it's people following
their incentives as one does but it is
uh bad in the overall the good news is
things are shifting I mean for example
um uh there was one there's one really
interesting case that happened recently
where so for people who build cars that
are um fossil fuel bearing cars most of
those factories are union labor right
yeah the folks who build the batteries
for electric cars historically have not
been union labor right and so if you
want to push for more EVS you're pushing
away from using union labor but there is
there are now efforts and there's some
really good people who are working on
trying to you know work together to
unionize consistently so that that is
not you know that is not the challenge
of the worker because it's not really
fair and because that is really
necessary to help to merge these
movements together a farsighted Union
Leader would need to see that as I think
some in the Auto industry are finally
yeah they're finally starting to do that
and I think that's going to continue I
mean I would just say that you know the
other reason that we don't we shouldn't
a lot of hope so far about the clean
energy transition is that so far we've
seen a an expansion in consumption of
clean energy in the United States thanks
to a lot of federal funding from the
inflation reduction act Etc and the
price of you know renewable and clean
energy has gone down quite a bit but
what's happened is actually our overall
energy consumption has just grown yeah
so we continue to still burn and consume
as much fossil fuels but more there's
more the percentage is better but the
actual uh uh literal amount of fossil
fuels being burned has not gone down and
that's why the carbon concentrations
continue to go up so you said earlier it
was almost a good way to end the podcast
but I had more I wanted to ask you you
remember before when you were like get
angry and get out there right uh how
should people do that like how how
should people you know join the movement
if we would like to make sure we don't
need quite so many climate shocks before
we do something right we want to get
started early so that we have to go
through less of those um that's yeah
that's
yeah that's exactly the argument that I
make is that the more people uh reclaim
their power and mobilize and start
working together the less climate shocks
will happen and the less people will you
know lose life and lose like their
livelihoods right because that's
basically where we're going so I mean
the book ends with three points great um
three things that we can all do to save
ourselves and two of them are for people
who want to be activists and one is for
you know your everyday people so I'll
just talk to the activist first I'm
first inform for most and this is
actually building off of what we were
just talking about uh activists need to
create community and true solidarity and
the solidarity needs to come across
movements across different issues I mean
we need to see more intersectionality we
need to see more people coming from all
different identities and orientations
engaging in climate activism
historically the climate movement which
spun off of the environmental movement
was really quite privileged yeah and as
such we did not see a lot of people of
color or people coming from
working-class backgrounds involved it we
still don't enough but we need to see
that happen more and one of the things
in terms of thinking about creating
community and building Community within
the movement I think is really
interesting um is I I talk about in the
book A Lot lessons from the civil rights
movement and one of the things and I
talk a lot in the book about kind of
this growing radical flank of folks who
are starting to be more aggressive even
though it's like it's like air quote
aggressive at this point in that they're
being you know confrontational why you
know throwing soup on plastic covers and
you know gluing themselves to things or
disrupting the US Open and then getting
CED away and the US Open continues right
so I mean sure it's it's a nuisance but
we're not talking like this isn't
radical like the suffragettes who blew
up like a building a month at the height
of women's suffrage you know the
struggle for women's suffrage so you
know it's still quite tame radical but
when we talk about the radical flank
like everybody doesn't have to be
involved in radical flank when we think
about creating Community one of the
things that's a really interesting
lesson from the Civil Rights Movement is
that during the Civil Rights struggle a
radical flank ALS so emerged right where
people were becoming more
confrontational and they engaged in
sit-ins and they engaged in you know the
blockades and you know that it continued
from there everybody probably knows some
of the stories about that yeah but
what's very interesting about it is that
the as a radical flank which was mostly
young people during the Civil Rights
period emerged a lot of the elders who
were active in the movement were not
happy with this these young people who
were starting to be more radical
breaking laws they were you know risking
themselves also because you know there
was a lot of racism in our country even
then there was racism right um let me
say that differently back then there was
racism but it's worth noting that you
know racism continues today in our
country course um but so even though the
elders were not happy with this the
black churches created a home for these
activists and created a space for them
to organize and created resources to
bail people out of jail Etc and it is
that kind of community that created
support and this kind of organizational
infrastructure for activists no matter
matter whether they were being you know
doing more legally oriented work and
focusing on trying to get the vote
through institutional channels or they
were out in the streets causing you know
good trouble right it's what people call
A diversity of tactics right and there
was solidarity between all the people
who were pursuing that hey I don't know
if I like you what you were doing but
you know what I'll bail you out of jail
or I'll make sure we're on the same side
still they were on the same side I mean
they were still like the solidarity was
there was solidarity but they they
argued I mean certainly and there were
factions and they didn't agree all the
time and you know and they didn't you
know everybody had their opinion right
so it was it was an uncomfortable
coalition to some degree but it was also
all rooted in the black community and
within the black churches and so they
really had a lot more organiz
organizational infrastructure than the
groups do today and as we were talking
about that is really necessary and
important so building that through
community and solidarity is valuable
that was number one number two is taking
advantage of moral shocks and
capitalizing on violence against
activists and this is really we haven't
talked that much about Civil
Disobedience civil disobedience is
becoming a more common tactic amongst
activists I mean uh I well I'm going to
just say like everybody has heard of
Greta tunberg and Greta just got
arrested again in um the Netherlands
last week she is a perfect example and I
talk about her quite a bit in the book
because she started out doing this very
kind of um very you know simple tactic
where she was just sitting on the
parliament steps right holding her son
and skipping school right it was not
confrontational and she has become
increasingly confrontational and she has
basically become part of the radical
flank of the climate movement so her
personal trajectory is like a really
good example because we're seeing that
for activists around the country and
around the world right but what's
interesting is that many people then say
oh these activists they're going to get
violent there's very little reason to
believe they're going to get violent
what is much more likely and I talk at
length about this in the book is that
people are going to get violent against
them yeah they are going to be repressed
by law enforcement I mean we're seeing
that we we seeing a little bit of that
in the United States we're seeing that
more and more around the world but we
also should expect that there are going
to be counter movements that will rise
up and be aggressive and violent against
the activists and it is an unfortunate
reality this what happened during the
George Floy movement right where you had
the police violently attacking
protesters and then you had Vigilant
showing up with guns and shooting people
uh and saying oh that's because the
protesters are violent exactly so that
is that's a wonderful example I mean the
other thing wor noting here is and I
talk in the book about the moment when
uh president Trump basically had all of
these peaceful protesters chear Gast in
Lafayette Square in Washington DC you
know for his photo opportunity but the
thing is that this is a perfect example
of how uh activists can capitalize on
violence is that you know there was
these were nonviolent protesters and
members of the media who got tear gassed
and they they were you know they were
harmed physically and they drew
attention to this and the protests in
next day was like twice the size yeah
and that is how it works capitalizing on
these moral shocks and the violence I
mean and there are other examples from
the Civil Rights Movement where we saw
you know dogs called on activists people
beaten up Etc and so forth it just list
goes on the iconic moments of that
movement exactly and those were the
moments when people who were
sympathizers to the movement mobilized
in solidarity and it is those moments of
solidarity I mean the George Floyd ju
the the moment when we saw the protests
after George Floyd was Mur was murdered
were moments of solidarity and one of
the reasons we saw so many people white
people in the crowd and people who were
coming out because of their
intersectional MO motivations is because
they were not willing to sit down after
observing and witnessing an unarmed
black man being murdered by a policeman
on social media right so that was like a
moral shock that motivated people and
they got angry right yeah but um so so
that's
number that's number two and number
three and finally and this is for people
who don't want to do AC AC activism you
do not have to be an activist to help us
save ourselves right you can be just an
everyday Citizen and that's the final
one which is about cultivating
resilience and as I said before when I
talk about resilience this is about
building our communities so that they
can with withstand the the climate
shocks that are coming and come they
will right so we know they're coming and
depending on where you live you know
what you're in for whe whether it is
extreme heat or extreme um weather
atmospheric Rivers tornadoes Etc when
those things hit first of all we need to
rebuild in ways that we can handle that
more because we know they're going to
keep coming places that experience sea
level rise you need to make sure that
your community is capable of handling
flooding the kind of flooding that's
going to become regular I mean and
hopefully the flooding that will you
know will not overpower your community
but still there are things you can do so
you need to be environmentally resilient
but more importantly I would say we need
to be socially resilient I mean I've
been talking with a lot of groups that
are working on disasters and they they
keep telling me about how what they
basically have been funded to do mostly
is what they call like Disaster Response
and that is like the number one thing
that a Disaster Response is is it's
mucking and gutting which is really
really you know not glamorous work at
all right mucking and gutting out after
floods after fires Etc right that is the
response but the problem is that you
need to also think about the recovery
right and Recovery is rebuilding in a
way where your community is more
resilient and when you do that you
really need people to be connected to
one another so that those who get
unhoused have support those who need
food those who need resources Etc and
those who need jobs because their place
of work no longer exists because they
get just washed away or burnt down and
so this the resilience is really
important and that's something that we
can all do by getting more connected and
embedded in our communities be it
through our local unions be it through
our you know whatever religious groups
there are or our schools or our
libraries right I mean I I love it it's
such a holistic vision of like how we
can uh build sa ourselves save ourselves
the title of your book I mean it's a
huge task but it's like that's all all
we can do is to is to do this
like we have to do it we have to do it
we will we will do it I mean like as I'm
an optimist right we will do it the
question is how bad is it going to get
before we do it and hopefully it won't
be too late for most of us I mean I
really believe I believe in people power
I believe we can do it I believe we need
to all embrace the anger and get
involved I mean people power got us here
right literally F fuels our people power
it's a kind of power that we
came up with we created the problem we
have the power to fix it we are the only
ones who are going to fix it and we're
the you know that kind of the kind of
power you're talking about is the only
kind of power that's ever done
anything yeah I mean and as as I say
that the last line of the book is
actually as unfair as it seems nobody's
coming to save us we're going to have to
save ourselves and so this is this is
the opportunity but this is the moment
now where it still can really matter it
will matter in the end but it'll matter
more now so and that's such an
opportunity I mean look I I I'm as angry
as anybody I can't believe we have to
you know Greta tunberg going like
I'm a child I'm a child like yeah no we
get it but yet you know this is the
position that we are in and we can see
it as an opportunity to have a huge
effect on the world around us by by up
and doing these things absolutely I mean
one final thing I would just say is that
you know there are lots of young people
who are just angry and upset and yeah
you know feel the same way that Greta
did and she did that in that iconic
speech right one thing I think is really
nice to see though is that we see all of
these what we're calling them like the
climate Elders the climate Granny's who
are coming out and are basically setting
an example and are providing support for
young people and working in you know
working with them in you know solidarity
we got the like rocking chair Rebellion
we've got all of these amazing ERS who
are also joining the movement so it's
not all on young people and I think we
just need to you know support everybody
who is doing everything they can to save
ourselves because it's going to take all
of us Dana thank you so much for being
here it's been incredible to have you on
the show thank you for having me this is
such a great
conversation well thank you once again
to Dr Dana Fischer for coming on the
show if you want to pick up a copy of
her wonderful book you can do so at
factually pod.com books that's factually
pod.com books and when you buy a book
there you'll support not just this show
but your local bookstore as well I also
want to thank everybody who supports the
show on patreon head to patreon.com
adamc Conover five bucks a month gets
you every episode of the show ad free
for 15 bucks a month I will read your
name at the end of this podcast and put
it in the credits of every single one of
my video monologues this week I want to
thank Kevin Sosa Josh Brio and mask when
you can protect your community thank you
so much for your support of the show
again if want to see me do standup
comedy head to adamc con.net for all my
tickets and tour dates I want to thank
my producers Sam Rodman and Tony Wilson
everybody here at headgum for making the
show possible thank you so much for
listening and we'll see you next time on
factually that was a headgum podcast


## Keywords:
