---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-T3IZ2ISxag
---

# Video
The Responsibility Processâ„¢
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-T3IZ2ISxag)

## Transcript:
welcome I'm Christopher Avery from
partner Works many people agree that
taking responsibility is the first
principle of success but until now
experts could not tell you how to take
responsibility they only told you that
you should be responsible some people
believe that responsibility is a
character trait something that some
people have and others don't that
assumtion tells us that we should find
the responsible people and avoid the
irresponsible people over the past 25
years I've studied responsibility within
individuals and
organizations I've learned that taking
responsibility and avoiding
responsibility is all part of a
fascinating mental process that can be
observed taught and learned today I will
share the responsibility process with
you you will see that there are six
predictable sequential mental states
that keep us from taking
responsibility this pattern operates
identically in all of us the
responsibility process explains how we
get stuck and it offers us a way to move
forward as you can see it's a very
simple model it will not make complete
sense to you today you will have many
questions that's fine everyone does over
time you will come to understand the
responsibility we process very deeply
and it will be your
friend responsibility sits at the top of
the list if we want to be successful we
need to spend as much time as we can
above the line operating from a mental
state of responsibility this is where we
are the clearest and most resourceful we
feel unencumbered we feel
self-empowered when things are going
well for us it's easy for us to take
responsibility and credit however
however when things go wrong and they
will go wrong we often lose the ability
to act from this mental position of
responsibility two things happen first
we feel upset frustrated or anxious
because we have a problem second our
mind starts a cause effect search for
answers as to how this happened to us
this takes us well below the line into a
series of non-responsive behaviors we
waste a lot energy coping with a
mismatch between what we want and the
problem we have in order to return to
the responsibility mindset we need to
First overcome these six non-responsive
mental States we call them coping States
let's quickly take a look at each one
our first thought when we are upset is a
thought of blame we call this mental
state lay blame we tell ourselves that
someone else is causing our problem
laying blame is why wired into all of us
it's part of our DNA when we lay blame
we give away our power how so well we're
sure that someone else must change or
take action for our problem to go away
and before our lives will get better to
get out of the mental state of blame we
need to recognize that it is a powerless
mental state regardless of who did what
to whom and we need to refuse to operate
from lay
blame when we stop blaming then we land
in a mental state called
justify when we're in the state of
justify we point again to external
circumstances which are beyond our
control as the cause of our problem if
you listen closely you will hear the
language of justify in many workplace
conversations here are three examples
it's the economy it's the way management
is around here it's the
culture when we operate from this mental
state of justify we tell ourselves that
something out there must change before
things can get better for us when we
refuse to justify our problem we
actually reject the external causes for
our upset so what's left is to look
inward that's right we beat ourselves up
listen to the language of shame I should
have known better I'm such a dummy I
deserve these
consequences when we're trapped in the
mental state of Shame we tell ourselves
that we're not good enough we even tell
ourselves that we lack something we
would need to get the results we want
Society often tells us that shame is
good we're owning up to our failings
however shame is actually quite a trap
it prevents us from the resourcefulness
available to us when we are in the
mental state of
responsibility when we refuse to shame
ourselves then we land in another mental
state we call this obligation we all get
caught in the obligation mindset we all
have obligations and commitments in life
and it's necessary to have commitments
but the Trap that I'm talking about
occurs within our minds and it occurs
when we have a commitment that we don't
like or don't want I call it the mental
state of have to don't want to when
we're trapped in the obligation mindset
we tell ourselves that we have no choice
there's nothing we can do when we're in
an obligation mindset we express
frustration and a lack of ownership
about our
commitment sometimes we feel so much
upset and frustration from the shame and
obligation mindsets that we try to
escape the problem
entirely when we're in quit we tell
ourselves that as long as we don't look
at the problem it will stay away of
course that's not true the problem
remains and our upset will return again
and
again when we refuse to feel trapped by
our commitments we we can enter the
mental state of responsibility when you
operate from responsibility you know
that you have the power and the ability
to resolve the problem when you operate
from this mental state of responsibility
you address the real problem instead of
coping with your feelings of upset and
anxiety so what about denial denial is
probably where you were before you
realized you had a problem that's why it
is below lay blame in denial you don't
yet know the you have a problem because
you are ignoring the existence of
something now the path to Mastery is not
simple or easy it will be the hardest
work that you ever do you will get stuck
in the process of trying to get
unstuck you'll be practicing
responsibility at many levels however
responsibility provides a better more
productive way to live and work my best
to you



## Keywords:
