---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_tTudFMeVC4
---

# Video
The Seductive Myth of Enlightened Centrism
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_tTudFMeVC4)

## Transcript:
hello everybody so this is just the
third video in my catalog of YouTube
exclusive content
and I'm already making a response video
to a video made by another YouTuber I
didn't think I was gonna make content
like this I didn't think I was gonna
make response videos but I don't know
what to tell you you clicked on it and
here we are so today I'm going to be
responding to a video by Dr Taylor Jones
who has a YouTube channel called
language Jones the video in question is
called six reasons the gender critical
right and the woke left are both wrong
about pronouns Dr Jones has a PHD in
linguistics so it makes sense that he
would make videos about language and how
it works in society and I do just want
to say up top here that like I don't
have a beef with this guy I'm not trying
to start an Internet Feud with Dr Jones
I'm gonna be honest I don't know if I
can go the entire video calling this guy
Dr Jones without feeling like an Indiana
Jones villain don't toy with me Dr Jones
even though I am responding to a video
where we're talking about referring to
people in a way that they would like to
be referred to is it okay if I just call
him Taylor Taylor is it okay if I call
you Taylor are you okay with that I'm
going to respectfully refer to you as
Taylor with the obvious caveat that
everyone knows up front you're a doctor
named Dr Taylor Jones I recognize that
this isn't a particularly large YouTube
channel but he still has more
subscribers than I do and the video in
question has over 200 000 views so I'm
still going to consider this punching up
but yeah I don't have any major problems
with this guy I don't think that his
videos are particularly poorly done or
cringy I'm not trying to publicly put
him on blast or humiliate him certainly
not trying to cancel him I actually
agree with about 95 of what he says in
this video I only really have a problem
with one overarching aspect of how he
chooses to frame the video and that's
what I want to talk talk about
here in this video and the framing that
I have a problem with is visible before
you even watch his video it's evident in
the title of the video six reasons the
gender critical right and the woke left
are both all caps wrong about pronouns
and it's this title that made me click
on this video in the first place I was
curious what evidence he was going to
put forward to make his argument that
both the left and the right are really
wrong about the way that we discuss
pronouns this is a title that I think is
intended to be pretty blatantly
non-partisan I think it's meant to
appeal to people who see themselves as
centrists he's telling the viewer right
off the bat that he's going to talk
about this highly politicized topic of
pronouns but he's going to talk about it
in a way where he's not favoring either
side of that political divide he's not
siding with the left or siding with the
right he's going to be equally critical
of both views he's going to tell us why
both of these very passionate views that
are very certain of their own
correctness are in fact both getting it
wrong and it's this aspect of Taylor's
video that I have a problem with because
spoiler alert he doesn't accomplish that
goal at all he makes a really good
argument as to why the right is
completely and demonstrably wrong about
pronouns but he doesn't make any strong
arguments as to why the left is wrong
about pronouns as a person who aligns
politically left I was sort of looking
forward to having this PhD in
linguistics educate me on what I'm
missing when it comes to the discourse
around pronouns and all I really got was
a guy pointing out how obviously wrong
the right is about pronouns but don't
take my word for it let's just do
whatever good response video does and
actually watch Dr Jones's video
pronouns I've been a little afraid to
make this video honestly but I guarantee
you need to hear what I have to say
again I don't have a beef with this guy
or his channel but I just that's a
really intense way to start a video I
promise everyone who watches this video
is going to be smarter at the end of
this video everyone needs to hear what
I'm about to say I guarantee it
everyone's talking okay yelling about
pronouns nowadays verbs adjectives even
nouns don't get this level of attention
so I just want to say right off the bat
here that there's a lot of tone policing
underwriting Taylor's views when it
comes to the discussion around pronouns
everyone's talk talking actually yelling
about pronouns these days and that right
there essentially comes to encapsulate
his entire argument as to why the left
is just as wrong as the right about
pronouns basically he just Wishes the
left would stop being so obnoxious about
it he wishes they'd be more civil and
reasonable but that's not actually an
argument as to how the left is wrong
about pronouns it's just one man's
subjective opinion on how the left could
better conduct themselves when it comes
to participating in the socio-political
discourse around pronouns unquestionably
there's a societal shift happening in
the anglosphere and elsewhere it's
largely motivated by a desire to be
inclusive and welcoming to the portion
of the population that self-identifies
as either trans or gender non-conforming
which all basically boils down to not
self-identifying the same way other
people might initially categorize you
especially around binary sex categories
male female man woman Etc some people
are very supportive of this shift and
others are very happy about it but
here's the thing the majority of people
I've seen on all sides and all sides are
wrong about most of what they're talking
about so here's six reasons why you are
wrong about pronouns one you're wrong
about what pronouns even are all right
so right off the bat point one Taylor
points out to the audience that a lot of
people who are participating in the
socio-political discourse around
pronouns aren't even aware what pronouns
actually are and how they function in
language and Taylor delivers this as
though it's people on the left and right
who are unaware of what pronouns are
sides but that's not true right like of
course not it's only people on the right
who don't know what pronouns are this is
sort of like the major meme from the
left when it comes to arguing with
people on the right about pronouns is
that they don't even know what they are
almost every single time that someone on
the right is mad on the internet about
pronouns they're simultaneously
demonstrating that they literally don't
know what pronouns are I talk to
and to give her pronouns
well I'm Ted Cruz and my pronoun is kiss
my ass
and Taylor takes the time to educate the
audience of this video in like what
pronouns are and how they work but the
thing about that is this is not
difficult stuff you learn what pronouns
are in elementary school the vast
majority of people on the left are aware
of what pronouns are you don't need to
teach us what they are it is our
ideological opponents on the right who
are struggling with that I'm pretty sure
some really funny smart good-looking
tick-tocker even made a super viral song
about it at one point it just said I
don't know what pronouns are

people like you make me sad
it was me
I was the
funny handsome tick tocker and this lack
of understanding of like basic
linguistic Concepts is really common on
the right in fact an overall lack of
education and lack of Scholastic
intelligence is pretty common on the
right as evidenced by all those studies
that show that increased education tends
to move people further left politically
which is why the riot is always trying
to demonize the education system and
Academia in general let's move on to
number two two you're wrong about gender
gender is a word related to the word
genre it literally just means type or
category part of the reason we talk
about gender and language is
specifically that linguists were trying
not to say sex we can get into a more
detailed discussion but sex is the
physiological and biological
reproductive categories for a species
alright so number two on the list he
basically explains to the audience that
they're wrong about gender and that they
don't understand that gender and sex are
two different things again anyone who's
been paying attention to how this
discourse has been unfolding in the
socio-political Zeitgeist is aware that
this is a problem only on the right
people on the left are constantly
banging their heads against the wall
trying to educate people on the right
about the fact that sex and gender are
two different things and this is why I
say that I don't disagree with most of
what Taylor is saying here he's not
wrong that a lot of people don't know
what pronouns are and he's not wrong
that a lot of people don't understand
that gender and sex are not the same
things and his explanation of what
pronouns are is not Incorrect and his
explanations of what sex and gender are
are not incorrect the only thing that
he's incorrect about is this implicit
insinuation that these are things that
both the left and right are wrong about
three you're wrong about how hard
neopronouns are in internal Linguistics
undergrads are often taught that
pronouns are quote closed class this
means that unlike verbs or adjectives
it's really hard to add new ones
and yet new ones organically arise all
the time again this is something that is
pretty much a direct critique of people
on the right people who argue that not
only do they not want to recognize Neo
pronouns and non-traditional pronouns
simply because they don't want to
recognize the validity of gender
non-conforming identities but also they
don't want to recognize Neo pronouns and
non-traditional pronouns because it's
just kind of hard to learn those new
words and it's unreasonable for those
people to expect them to learn something
new
but it's hard and Taylor here more or
less argues it's not that hard to learn
new parts of language if you actually
care enough to put effort into learning
them we don't get to anything that could
be considered a critique of how the left
is potentially wrong about pronouns
until we get to 0.4 which is that
learning new pronouns is actually not
that easy and here's the thing about
this point I don't think that it's the
norm or the rule for people on the left
to in general be incredibly vitriolic
and rude to someone who accidentally
slips up when trying to address somebody
who uses Neo pronouns or alternative
pronouns or non-traditional pronouns
like I'm sure it wouldn't be hard to
find somebody who could provide some
anecdotal evidence of a time when
somebody who used non-traditional
pronouns or Neo pronouns was rude to
them when they accidentally used the
wrong pronouns referring to that person
but that doesn't mean that this is like
a position that the left believes in and
that they are wrong for believing I have
a lot of friends who use Neo pronouns
and non-traditional pronouns and
alternative pronouns and I've never seen
them yell at somebody for accidentally
slipping up and using the wrong pronoun
when referring to them I don't think in
that situation most reasonable people
would just scold that person and be like
how damn dare you misgender me I think
the kind of person who would do that is
mostly the kind of person who exists in
straw man hypotheticals created by
people on the gender critical right
what's interesting about points three
and four to me is this is the point in
the video where he's most clearly trying
to show how both sides are unilaterally
getting this wrong so just as the people
saying it's impossible to learn new
pronouns are wrong the people acting
like it's the easiest thing in the world
are also very wrong so yeah when Taylor
says that he's saying people on the
right are wrong when they say that it's
just too hard to learn new pronouns but
people on the left are also wrong when
they say that learning new pronouns is
totally easy the only problem is I don't
think that that's an accurate
characterization of the left's position
I think it is an accurate enough
characterization to say that many people
on the right say that they can't be
bothered to learn new pronouns because
it's too hard but I don't think that
it's accurate to suggest that most
people on the left agree that adopting
new new parts of language into your
daily practice is this super easy thing
that poses no inconvenience to you I
think plenty of people on the left
understand that using Neo pronouns and
using non-traditional pronouns can be
hard I think most people on the left
understand that if a person is used to
referring to a friend or a loved one as
she her but is now trying to get used to
referring to that person as they them
that that might take some time and that
while that person is in the process of
relearning how to refer to that friend
or loved one they might slip up from
time to time and that's okay I think
people on the left in general understand
that it might take some effort for
people to adopt new pronoun usage into
their daily language practice I think
people on the left in general understand
that going out of your way to offer
somebody in a marginalized Community
respect and dignity isn't always easy
sometimes it requires a little little
bit of effort I don't think that it's
reasonable to believe that respect and
courtesy and kindness and dignity should
only be offered if it's easy and not
inconvenient to do so five you're wrong
about culture so I'm just going to be
completely honest I've watched this
section so many times and I still don't
understand it like I think I literally
understand each sentence that he says in
this section and all of the points in
this section I just don't really
understand how this section as a whole
works as an argument that the left and
right are both unilaterally wrong when
it comes to the way that they discuss
pronouns like he starts off with this a
huge overlooked part of the pronoun
debate is that both sides have unspoken
culturally informed assumptions that
dramatically influence how we think
about this conversation and it's like
okay the left and the right both have
different cultures and those different
culture cultures create different
assumptions that inform how they
approach this discussion but he doesn't
really go on in this section to
elaborate in any meaningful way on what
the differences between these two
cultures are and what the differences
between their culturally informed
assumptions are so I'm just left to draw
my own conclusions like maybe the
culturally informed assumptions of the
left when it comes to pronoun usage is
that using a person's proper pronouns is
a way to implicitly acknowledge that
gender non-conforming identities are
valid and good and okay and deserving of
respect and maybe a culturally informed
Assumption of people on the right is
that refusing to use people's proper
pronouns is a way of asserting that
gender non-conforming identities are
stupid and not real and not deserving of
respect and if those are the culturally
informed assumption ends that Taylor is
talking about here I guess I get that
but again I don't get how this is an
argument that both of these sides are
wrong and frankly if I had to choose
which of these cultural philosophies to
align with I would obviously choose the
one from the left I just think it's
generally more compassionate and nicer I
don't know this section just confused me
a lot he spends a lot of time explaining
how different cultures use pronouns in
different ways and it's like yeah
I I'm sure they do
I just don't understand how this is an
argument that the left and the right are
both equally wrong about pronouns number
six you're wrong about inclusion but
sometimes in the spirit of inclusion we
go a little far requiring people to
share their pronouns means that you
either force people to out themselves
not great or choose to be in the closet
not great okay so this is maybe the
argument that comes the closest to being
a compelling argument for how the left
might be getting things sort of wrong
when it comes to pronouns maybe you've
been in a situation like this I know I
have where you're at a new job or in a
new place where you're meeting new
people and you go around the circle and
everyone is asked to say their names and
a fun fact about themselves and their
pronouns so that we can all get to know
each other better what Taylor is
suggesting here is this could be
potentially problematic because you
could be unintentionally forcing someone
into a situation where they either have
to out themselves to a group of
strangers or they have to keep
themselves in the closet weirdly though
this isn't how Taylor presents his point
he he presents it as though anytime
you're in a situation where people are
being asked to say their pronouns you
are forcing someone into this situation
he doesn't say you might be putting
someone in that situation he says you
are putting people in this situation
where they either have to out themselves
or put themselves in the closet
requiring people to share their pronouns
means that you either force people to
out themselves not great or choose to be
in the closet not great like it's an
interesting hypothetical and like I said
I think it's the closest that Taylor
comes in this entire video to making
something that could qualify as a
potentially good argument for how the
left is maybe getting certain aspects of
the conversation around pronoun usage
wrong but you know it is just a
hypothetical that Taylor is creating the
reason I bring this up is If This Were
an actual problem and not just a
hypothetical one if this situation where
people are being asked to say their
pronouns were actually a thing that was
forcing queer people to out themselves
or put themselves in the closet I just
think that anecdotally I would have
heard from more queer people that I'm
friends with about this issue I wouldn't
just be hearing about it as a
hypothetical that's being posed To Me by
another straight white cisgender guy on
the internet but obviously I haven't
been everywhere and I haven't been at
every work gathering in every social
gathering in the world and I'm sure that
there are at least some gender
non-conforming people who have been in a
situation like this where it made them
feel uncomfortable because they felt
like they were being forced to out
themselves to a group of strangers or
they were being forced to keep
themselves in the closet around a group
of strangers I'm sure that has happened
and if a person told me that they had
that experience I would be sympathetic
to that but I just have to say
anecdotally that this is a situation
that I have personally been in many
times I'm an actor and it's not uncommon
when starting a new job especially in
the theater world for the cast and crew
to gather around and introduce
themselves to each other on the first
day of rehearsal and a lot of American
Theater companies have adopted the
practice
will to say their name and their
pronouns when introducing themselves
because there are a lot of gender
non-conforming queer people who work in
the Arts and who work in the world of
theater and again anecdotally my
experience in those situations has been
that overwhelmingly the gender
non-conforming people who are present in
those situations are usually pretty
grateful that we're doing that because
it means that they get an opportunity to
let everyone else in the group know
which pronouns they use without being
singled out we're all sharing our
pronouns even if they're traditional
pronouns and now this person who maybe
uses non-traditional pronouns or Neo
pronouns also gets to share their
pronouns and let everyone know how they
would like to be referred to I'm not
saying that Taylor's hypothetical
scenario is impossible I'm just saying
that it is just that it's Taylor's
hypothetical scenario he's not backing
it up with any substantive data or
empirical proof he's just positing a
potential scenario that could
hypothetically arise that could also
function as an argument for the left
going too far in respect of people's
pronouns

welcome back to the show I hope
everybody had a chance to go potty and
to get a little snacky poo as you can
tell I'm filming the rest of this video
a few days later it's the 4th of July
right now as I'm filming this so I
changed my color scheme up behind me to
be a little more patriotic and I put on
this ironic hat that I bought for when I
play a conservative character in some of
my Tick Tock videos it's ironic because
I'm not actually proud to be an American
as the Hat suggests not only because I
think it's weird to be proud of where
you happened to be born it's like being
proud of your height or your hair color
but also because I am one of those
insufferable lefties who thinks that
there is a lot here to be particularly
not proud of but whatever I hope
everybody has fun blowing things up and
making dogs and Veterans upset please
rise for the national anthem
for the red white and blue for the funny
things you do
Lyrica this is you
but anyway I sincerely have no interest
in making this a video where I'm just
going Point by Point through Taylor's
video and debating him or dunking on him
I know it may not seem like that because
that's all I've really been doing for
the first 20 minutes of the video but I
think I just needed to utilize that time
for context and to adequately illustrate
my argument that the things Taylor is
saying people are getting wrong about
pronouns are things that mostly only
people on the right are getting wrong
and they don't really apply to people on
the left and I think at this point in
the video that's more or less clear so
that brings us to the final stretch of
this video the most important part of
this video and this overriding question
of why
why am I doing this why am I making this
video why do I care so much about
Taylor's video and I promise I'm going
to answer that question but first I just
want to look at
one more part of Taylor's video and then
we'll move on I promise I was at a
conference a few years back and one of
my colleagues who was an expert on the
n-word yes that one he's got a book
about it coming out soon put the N word
noar as his pronoun on the right end
part of the name tag
yes it can function as a pronoun and yes
it's literally an important part of his
identity but also it's a social taboo
for anyone who's not black that's like
98 of the conference to say that word
let alone in addressing a black man he
was highlighting the tensions around
identity speech Community
self-determination and respect if you
truly respect him you'll respect his
chosen pronoun but you also socially
cannot call him that it was a
provocative move that got people talking
and thinking about all of these levels
of language so this is absolutely my
least favorite thing in Taylor's video
I'm sure that whoever this colleague is
of Taylor's is a very intelligent person
who is way more well spoken and well
educated than I am on a myriad of
different subjects however
I do not find this stunt that they
pulled at this conference to be thought
provoking or interesting or particularly
intelligent I find it to be pretty
Juvenile and small-minded and bad faith
I don't see much difference between what
this person did and someone on the
internet saying I identify as an attack
helicopter or somebody saying this I
identify as a 56 year old Asian
billionaire my Essential problem
whenever somebody makes these bad faith
edgelord jokes and tries to use them as
some sort of argument against people
identifying in a non-traditional way is
like
no you don't no you don't you're not
being honest you're not being sincere
you're lying stop it get some help no
you don't identify as an attack
helicopter no you don't identify as a 56
year old Asian billionaire and no this
man didn't actually want everyone at
this conference to refer to him as the
n-word he was just trying to be edgy and
provocative and to maybe vaguely say
something about how Neo pronouns are a
slippery slope but it's just silly it's
like if I went to a conference and I
said my pronouns are Hitler was right if
you talk to me you better say Hitler was
right before you say anything else oh
see in order to show me respect you have
to say that Hitler was right otherwise
you don't really respect me Checkmate
Libs it's just like it's just like wrong
this is wrong okay but now back to this
question of why why I'm making this
video why we're all here why I care so
much about Taylor's video well I think
at this point it's no secret that my
problem with Taylor's video essentially
centers on his chosen framing of the
subject matter and my analysis of why he
chose to frame it the way that he did
and basically I just think that the
reason why Taylor chose to frame his
video the way that he did has to do with
this tendency
some people have to want to frame their
socio-political beliefs as being
informed by some kind of
enlightened centrism this idea that
anyone who thinks that their side of a
particular debate is mostly correct and
the other side is mostly incorrect is
probably being deluded by partisan
thinking and isn't actually seeing the
whole picture real deep thinkers know
that the actual truth always lies in
some hidden crevasse between these two
ideologies that are so certain of their
own correctness but the reality is that
history is Rich with situations where
there was a staunch ideological divide
and one side was just overwhelmingly
more correct than the other side was the
truth about the ideological divide that
birthed the American Civil War wasn't
some nuanced complicated Centrist
position where the South was right about
some things and wrong about some things
and the north was right about some
things and wrong about some things and
the real truth lay somewhere in the
middle no The South was wrong about
slavery and the north was correct about
slavery and we don't really require any
more Nuance than that and the weird
reality about this video is I think on
some level Taylor understands that the
right is significantly more incorrect
not just about pronouns but about most
things than the left is well if you
believe there's a global trafficking
ring being run by one political party
out of the basement of pizza parlor that
doesn't even have a basement and you're
waiting for your orders from JFK then
I'm not sure I can say anything useful
like right there he's talking about
people who believe in pizzagate and JFK
Jr still being alive and potentially
being Donald Trump's running mate for
2024 and they're just simply is nothing
like that on the left there is no
Bizarro left-wing version of Q Anon
these two ideal apologies are not just
two interchangeable sides of a coin that
are both equally wrong about everything
and even though Taylor seems to
understand these things on some
intuitive level he still chooses to
frame his video as though the left and
the right are equally wrong when it
comes to this issue Taylor is framing it
as though the things that the left might
be wrong about are equally wrong and
equally harmful to the discussion as the
things that the right is wrong about and
let's get rid of the broader ideological
debate and just keep it focused on what
Taylor is talking about in his video
pronouns the things that the right is
wrong about are just simply much more
consequential and heavy than the things
that the left is wrong about the right
is not only wrong at the factual and
academic level by being willfully
ignorant of what pronouns even are in
the first place or by being entirely
unwilling to learn the difference
between sex and gender but the rights
position on this issue is also morally
and ethically wrong their entire reason
for being unwilling to learn what a
pronoun is or to learn the difference
between sex and gender or to try in any
way to respect people who use Neo
pronouns or alternative pronouns
is bad they just simply don't like those
people they don't like what they
represent they don't like that those
people fall outside of a heteronormative
paradigm and they actively want to
disrespect those people they want to
dehumanize those people to degrade those
people whereas if we look at the things
that the left might be getting wrong
when it comes to pronouns they just
don't hold anywhere near that same
weight Taylor's basically just offering
us some hypothetical scenarios where
maybe the left's attempt at inclusion
could wind up inadvertently making
someone feel uncomfortable so
essentially Taylor's just offering us
subjective opinions on how the left
could maybe improve their bedside manner
when it comes to how they engage in
discussions around pronouns but there's
nothing really substantive there there's
no data there's no harm being
demonstrated it's just Taylor's opinions
yeah well
that's just like uh
opinion
and the reason why we're all here the
reason why I'm making this video the
reason why I think that this needs to be
called out is because I think that this
kind of Centrist thinking needs to stop
it's time to stop I think this kind of
central philosophy has become very
pervasive in our culture even among some
very intelligent well-educated people
because it feels intuitively correct
it's basically born out of people asking
themselves what's more likely that one
side is always right and the other side
is always wrong or that the truth is
some nuanced mixture of both views and
without collecting or weighing any data
on that it can seem intuitively like
it's the second one I also think that
centrism appeals in a pretty direct and
significant way to the ego you see these
two warring factions these two
diametrically opposed ideologies both
screaming at each other demonizing each
other both so in some preferably
self-righteous both so certain of
themselves both so passionate and
irrationally emotional about their
positions and somehow through all the
noise and the chaos you utilizing some
rare form of wisdom some stoic lack of
irrational emotionality are able to find
the enlightened middle path but there's
a hidden truth about centrism that I
don't see being pointed at often enough
and that's that centrism is every bit as
dichotomous in its approach to reason as
picking a political side is most
centrists see the fundamental flaw of
the right and left being that they
always think the other side is wrong and
they aren't critical enough of their own
views basically centrists think that
anyone who defaults to an ideological
position based on the assumption that my
ideological in-group tends to be
reliable and correct while my
ideological out group tends to be
unreliable and incorrect is seeing the
world in an irrational black and white
binary way but centrists are just as
guilty of that same binary thinking
centrists still tend to default to the
perspective of their ideological
in-group it's just that the ideological
in-group of centrists is people who are
in the center of the political spectrum
and the ideological outgroup of
centrists is people who are on the left
and the right of the political Spectrum
there's still an ideological position
for centrists to default to based on the
conviction that people on the left and
the right tend to be wrong more often
than people in the middle do and all too
often it's not supported by anything of
any substance it's just supported by
this vague intuitive feeling that this
must be the answer that if one bed is
too hard and one bed is too soft the
third bed must be just right and this is
problematic and dangerous and harmful
because it fails to acknowledge the
fundamental truth of the ideological
divide in our current socio-political
discourse and that is that just as the
South was way more wrong than the North
was in the American Civil War just as
the colonialists who settled America
were way more wrong than the indigenous
populations who they slaughtered and
stole land from just as the racist
bigots who opposed the Civil Rights Act
of the 1960s were way more wrong than
the people who marched with Martin
Luther King and stood with Malcolm X
just as the Nazis in Germany were way
more wrong than the Allied Forces who
opposed their cause the modern American
right is just way more in the wrong than
the American left is there is just no
good faith equivocation between these
two positions there is no secret
enlightened nuanced true truth that lies
between them and that's why I did this
that's why I made this video because I'm
just tired of people propagating the
message that these two ideologies are
more or less the same there are not the
same maybe going a little bit far in
your attempt to use inclusive language
and to include gender non-conforming
people into mainstream Society is not
the same thing as refusing to
acknowledge gender non-conforming people
because you want them to be eradicated
from society and anyway that's it that's
that's the video that's that's the end
of the video I hope you liked it uh hey
go watch my friend Tiffany topple's
video Teenage feeling if you haven't
already I directed that video and I'm
really really proud of it doesn't have
anything to do with what we're talking
about but I would like it if more people
would go and watch it I'm putting it at
the you know in the description if you
want to watch that
um you can check out my patreon
patreon.com Austin Archer if you want to
support my channel and the things that I
do on Tick Tock and my podcast over
there
um and yeah okay uh I think I think
that's that's about it that about covers
it so I hope everybody has a is having a
good time and I hope everyone's having
fun and that we're all we're all doing a
great great job uh being
being people love you so much okay we'll
see you later bye



## Keywords:
