---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_jI5JdlZSXE
---

# Video
The Antidebate: Experiments in the Art of Sensemaking for a World Gone Slightly Mad.
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_jI5JdlZSXE)

## Transcript:
everybody knows he's a liar but you want
to I want to make sure graduated last in
your class first in your
class when gets out of control interest
rates go up please let list answer you
excuse me Chris I'm speaking and I'm not
done yet time when you going to
be
welcome everybody to this evening's anti
debate let me say a little bit at the
beginning before we start about why
we're doing it and what it's about
debate has its place debate can be
beautiful edifying it's often a
spectacle a clash entertaining it's
often very enlivening if it's done well
it can even be
informative but sadly the way the world
is today there's a many structural
incentives toward Wars polarization
built into the way we get our
information so we're in a phase of
History where Divergence and bation and
disagreement is actually being uh
compounded and exacerbated by the
systems and structures that Prevail and
this is a big deal because democracies
or even any functioning form of
government that includes people relies
on a capacity to discuss adequately
what's going on so I first encountered
the idea of the anti- debate
when I read a post by Peter limberg on
the emerg site what is emerging. comom
and that was a relatively political
version of the anti- debate it was
particularly framed with regard to
recent debates that were happening in
the US and he was saying wouldn't it be
great if we had something a different
kind of practice that
was if anything the exact opposite of
all the things that are going wrong with
debate just look at it as a form it's
typically two people historically they
would be male today they may not be and
they would there would be an audience
watching these two people flesh
something out and very often there would
be a contention or
proposition and that gives rise to a a
contest um one side has one view one
side has the other view you mobilize the
arguments that support your view you
find the counter arguments through your
opponent's View and of course there's a
great illustrious history to debate so
when debates the done well it can be
really rather a beautiful thing but
there are so many things militating
against doing it well the very
architecture of social
media is built upon maximizing
polarization but paradoxically the way
it does that is it unites people in what
they're against people are looking for
that sense of contest even uh Conquest
even humiliation watch for his left hook
so we want debate to be sort of there as
a reference point to to grind people in
what this is it's a kind of public
exploration of Any Given subject but
it's anti in the sense of antidote it's
trying to actually get beyond all the
things that we see as being wrong with

debate I was involved with the anti-
debate from almost the very beginning my
involvement really stemmed from my own
longterm
question about where is the voice of the
people you know we living in a
socioeconomic political system that
really only gives voice to the people
once every 5 years and then only
requires them to vote in a choice
between two parties what I've always
been interested in is this idea that
every human being plays a part in a
really colorful and Rich tapestry of
Voices That Could at up to something
that would respond holistically to the
problems that we are facing today what
I've just realized is that all my
decisions on this are made by my
feelings we live in a time where we're
all exposed to to things that we
struggle to make sense of moments where
we can't quite agree with ourselves our
values don't always align with our
actions our ideas don't always chime
with our values and a lot of what the
anti debate is getting at is that
internal struggle it's about finding
your own inner Center in a relationship
so what are we trying to achieve at the
end of it it's not some beautiful middle
position which everyone can agree on
it's not some consensus verdict it's a
deeper felt sense of your relationship
to the issue at
hand the the anti- debate is a process
where you can bring much more
of who you are as a human being you know
your emotional self what what is
important to you spiritually what you
value deeply and bring that into a
conversation about things that really
matter and about issues where there can
be contention where there can be
disagreement and dissonance and to try
and hold that gracefully in the service
of a collective
wisdom feels like something we deeply
need as we go through the process we're
we are experimenting and so while we
have methodology and we've done this
before we're ready for surprises and
we're quite happy for you to help us
co-create this I feel for me personally
the anti- debate has really come alive
since EO and Indra have helped helped me
with it because I've realized it's we'
connected it to democracy a bit more
closely this is something about a a
practice of deep democracy if it's done
well I have been a designer I have been
a
participant a guinea pig you could say
and I've been a host and I would say it
definitely has a lot of potential
because it's fun it's engaging it's
challenging it's uh it's all those
things and because it goes just beyond
Theory it goes beyond thought U that's
why I think it has such potential
because I don't recall who came up with
this quote but it said like it's easier
to act your way into a new way of
thinking and think yourself into a new
way of acting and uh I believe that is
very very true I think peace we don't
really know that much about peace and
whether it's interesting or not because
we don't know much about it so I would
suggest that actually peace is a lot
more interesting than violence it's just
that we actually haven't explored it
very much action arguably is the true
Transcendent value in the world so you
you have to act you have to put yourself
on the line you have to take steps you
have to you know stand take a stand of
of what what it is and and see how other
people receive you or or don't and um
either way this is a kind of courage to
put yourself into a new
world we managed to put together a
funding application with the
encouragement actually to their credit
of the John Templeton Foundation when I
first met somebody there I spoke to them
about it as an idea there's this thing
called the anti- debate we don't know
what it is yet we need some time to
create it we've actually no idea what
the practice looks like yet we want to
start trying and we may even take a
while to get to public Eng engagement
because until you know what you're doing
there's no point in putting something
out there that's just not yet formed so
the first few anti- debate practice
sessions were six people gathering
together and we'd often practice with
two people together choosing an issue we
wanted to be somehow contentious so the
early stages were quite interesting in
terms of the one-on-one activity was not
without its value we learned something
about what it was to inhabit another
point of view but mostly it was slightly
underwhelming it had this feel feeling
of this is not the call the anti- debate
had its own kind of agenda its own kind
of source energy most context are not
two people most organizational contacts
most political parties most
communities any given electoral
system invariably multiple layers of
Interest so the evolution of the anti-
debate was something about recognizing
that the one-on-one conversation while
it still had its
place wasn't necessarily our Touchstone
and there might also be something about
the way the world is evolving that makes
it less and less likely that one-on-one
will work there's something about social
media that's changed from being mere
consumers of kind of information and
knowledge to actually what they
sometimes call prosumers you know we're
actually creating and consuming at the
same time so most people who inhabit an
online space will will will have a
political view or a view of Any Given
contentious issue and they'll also be
observing views coming in and they'll be
relating to them in various ways in that
context watching two people thrash it
out is not nearly as interesting as a
larger plural encounter with lots of
different views on where they come from
so and we began to think that rather
than doing it one-onone we needed to set
up a process that was a bit more
Collective a bit more plural a bit more
collaborative and it was also very clear
to me that the anti- debate was a
quintessentially offline activity
because it's much more interested in the
the role of the body the role of sematic
dat what's happening in your body as
part of what's going on in an argument
one Innovation we had was tblo where you
would show in space your your view of
the uh question at hand or issue at hand
agree
disagree I'm going to ask the room to
speak to itself just an observation in
myself that I noticed that when I move
to a position the first thing I kind of
almost unconsciously do is kind of say
who's in my community hello here it's
nice to see you there just just noticing
that so one of the main ways to move
Beyond debate was the question debate
the question is given to you and you may
or may not like it there's a power
struggle in the very question and about
what should we be talking about here and
why and we felt that needed to be part
of the the method how are you feeling
about what you're hearing in relation to
your question about is fear ever useful
it feels related but it does feel quite
separate or rather it feels like there's
a pairing or polarity here I'm tired of
not seeing women in all of the powerful
institutions I'm tired of women not
being acknowledged as voices I'm tired
of old women being made invisible I'm
tired of girls being conditioned to
become passive with toys I'm tired I'm
just tired of so many things is
masculinity the problem Sheriff hands
okay we have a question now you have
completed the first stage of the anti-
debate
we didn't know what we were going to
talk about 50 minutes ago now we do and
so this would move on to the next phase
is what we sometimes call the question
bomb which is that within any good given
question there would be millions of
other questions nested within it so for
example one question we had along the
way was is war natural that's a good
example of a question that needs to be
disaggregated what is war what is
natural how do we decide what is natural
what do we what do we imply when we call
something natural how do we make a
distinction between war and conflict and
it's not for one single authority to
answer them it's for the room to know
that these questions are alive and next
we'd often have something about uh
thrashing it out so we'd say what we
feel about this we were quite early on
Keen to get to feelings right this is a
very important part of the anti- debate
and that felt like I was having
something taken away from me um and I
don't choose to believe that it it
exists but in an individual sense I I
don't choose CH to give over my power
it's just not true that human beings are
primarily rational creatures right yes
we have reason yes we're capable of
great rational press when the time comes
but underlying it all there are these
deep feelings of threat perception and
and anger and fear and maybe resentment
and a kind of identity protection going
on these are all baked into any given
public conversation our job in the anti-
debate is to make them a part of it so
we're less subject to them and they
become more like an object of inquiry
that we can begin to explore together
sometimes we succeeded sometimes we fail
but that's what we were trying to do
well it's very short really I think this
is a human- centered question and I
would like to think that we think beyond
the human and natural refers to the
whole of
creation okay one more question relating
to this thinking and feeling are both
the same and different if you agree with
that statement go here and if you
disagree you're
here who loved the move who felt great
now we're getting somewhere
right I was standing in the middle and I
didn't feel the you know I could go to
end of the room and then you say
something like that and I'm like great I
that's exactly where I was the fact that
the emotion has a legitimate place in
the anti- debate for me that was a big
thing I think this idea that reason and
uh emotion are different parts of
cognition and don't really have a way of
working well together um I think it's
really outmoded we really have to learn
to bring our emotion in the way we deal
with people in the right way this is why
uh these sorts of opportunities to Horn
your skill your cognition um can be
quite helpful so for me I found it quite
revelatory it was a thrilling
experience throughout the an debate we
were also very keen to keep in mind the
critical mass of people who just
couldn't give a damn right certain
number of people who are like this is
not for me I I don't particularly want
to talk about this they're not going
anywhere they're part of our world and
we need the process to somehow
acknowledge them and bring them in when
the time's right because they sort of
help
to help us to get in perspective whether
what we're doing is really the right
thing and over here still are the people
who felt they couldn't get behind these
positions
and we we'd actually like you now to be
another group we that's why we chose the
name in the process to call you the
enigmatic people that we don't actually
know really what they think and feel
they know what they think and feel I was
part of the group in that first an
debate they called the enig matics there
was a good 15 20 of us who were just
sort of sitting toward the back of the
room watching this all play out and
feeling really just sort of
disillusioned
disenfranchised um disenchanted with the
process which I thought was really
interesting because I think that's
really reflective of what happens in
society these people are always in the
room and they're always in your
community and they're always in the
public space so I'm just going to invite
you for a second to hear from the people
on this side over
here well kind of standing besi behind
the that but feeling reluctant to move
into a new group for the same reason I
don't join a political party although I
vote because I'm kind of thinking
where's the empathy how are we going to
shift into empathy where we can sit down
with people we really disagree
(Laughter)
with I pull back for the project because
I think that that sense of being before
what's not known actually takes the
development of quite deep relationships
between the participants in a debate and
so bringing to people together for you
know an evening or even an afternoon
when they don't know each other before
um and maybe are coming together because
they feel they're on opposite sides
cultivating the sense of trust and not
just in each other actually but faith
that being mistaken or being exposed to
a wider or alternative Viewpoint that
that can be good for you I just felt
that we didn't really get to grips with
that we didn't quite know how to bring
that
about I think one of the main challenges
has been moving from Theory into
practice there are a lot of really good
intellectual ideas Concepts
Frameworks um but when you move that
into live practice with Warm Bodies it's
difficult and there's a different skill
set that's required it's much more
important to focus on the
relational okay the anti debate where's
it going what's what's it for who's it
for what are we trying to achieve it
always had this feeling like throughout
it we were like what the hell are we
doing we're making this up as we go
along why does it feel that we have to
do this and yet we don't know what we're
doing right it's something to do with
you could say listening to the Future at
some level being pulled Along by a
certain pattern that is is implicit and
you're trying to make it a little bit
more explicit so the evolution of the
anti- debate that point we began to feel
we were missing a little bit of the
initial contest the binary gives you a
kind of oscillating energy between two
forces that can be quite compelling when
it's done well right we after a while we
didn't want it to collapse into dialogue
look right so we introduced this
Innovation we call it swarming near the
end and that's where after you've taken
some time with the question to first of
all decide on what you want to share
together and by the way there's a little
voting process for that where people
people drop out when they feel the
questions not not theirs then you begin
to feel the group physically stands
around the question they want to they
want to go with we do that and then
there's a certain amount of time
exploring the question an engagement
with the underlying issues and values in
the question a certain amount of
representation of the diversity in the
room once you've done all that there's
still this issue of and so what how can
this practice actually in some way Focus
your mind actually clarify what's at
stake so the so what we build up to
towards the end is people showing not
just their opinion but their moral and
political commitment and this is called
taking a stand I stand for virtue
cultivation internally and externally
effectively what's going on here is
you're trying to recruit people you're
trying to attract them embodied
resistance is with your body it's not
something outside of you so it's about
the Earth reflecting into your body and
Awakening the inner movement of politics
okay who's moving who's moving towards
Dominique I think it's so interesting
that I I can't speak about it as if it's
a static thing the words that want to
come to me is like organism like I don't
want to call it a project I want to find
some term for it that speaks to its sort
of living essence because I think that's
part of its magic and its potential and
also why it's still frustrating to
people because it's not something that
you're necessarily going to come out of
with a 12-step action plan I'm wondering
if anyone here is going to make any
difference in their lives or the way
they act as a result of this and
depending on the outcome of that is that
what this was designed to do or is this
process more like um maybe a religious
experience or maybe a GRE good
psychedelic trip where it kind of works
through you over the coming months and
years without you really realizing it
somewhere deep inside it felt really
alive as a process it wasn't just
sometimes these things can be quite
cityy Downy talkie talkie but it felt a
lot more um yeah a different energy to
that which I really appreciated and for
me personally I find myself asking
myself some difficult questions some
important questions I may have left with
more questions than I have answers but
in a good way we all had different takes
on the statement and just through this
very short discussion we were all able
to see each other's points and realize
that actually we're quite aligned on
this even though our focus is on
different words and statement for me the
most important thing about the anti-
debate is that it transforms the the
tempo at which people speak and also
even
the the kind of personal involvement
let's say you know it allows a different
register different
levels I think there's so much benefit
to a for a group to unearth what's live
and that they want to have a
conversation that they may be that
wasn't
predetermined um and just the unearthing
of unexpected points of view and really
tuning into where you might resonate
with it or disagree but we can learn
from nature to access our better selves
as humans we're stretching a muscle here
and and expanding our our capacities
here which um yeah it's really important
I'd love I know this is happening in
schools which is absolutely where it
needs to be we brought the process into
the schools pretty much exactly as we've
been running it with adults and when we
did this I mean prior to this we have no
idea what was going to happen you know
we don't know how the young people are
going to respond and so it was real
Delight to actually find their
engagement was so high with it you me to
lesson not
that's an age where developmentally
young people are figuring out who they
are what they care about what they stand
for what they believe and also making
sense of the world and so the anti-
debate is a kind of process where that's
really what you're doing you're getting
clarification on what you feel what you
think what you believe but you're also
experiencing that exploring that in
relationship to what other people's
thoughts values and opinions
are one of the things that's interesting
about the anti- debate as I understand
it is it's it's something that has that
many different people have contributed
to over its
existence so it's not it's not just get
one sole author lots of people have kind
of given their input so the anti- is all
it's like a mut you know it's kind of
this it's kind of this uh lovable Rogue
right and so my hope for the anti-
debate is that actually continues My
Hope Is that we can find a way to
release it into the world and that more
and more people can start to iterate
upon it and play with it and bring their
Innovations to it the anti- debate as a
piece of social software if you like
would be very useful if it was simply
available to communities to pick
up uh to learn the mechanics of and to
use for themselves set their own agenda
set their own tone set their own
pace I think some of the people and even
my first impression of
it was perhaps
like this is hubris this is hubris try
and attempt to devise a new form of
Civic dialoguing of relating of coming
into conversation about the world and
reality and it is hristic it is
audacious
and yet it's worth it's worth trying
it's worth trying I do believe that
creating new social practices that are
worthy of the challenges of our times is
a big part of the work it's not enough
to theorize it's not enough to persuade
you actually have to practice in a way
that speaks to and from the challenges
that you're writing about thinking about
it's moving beyond the expectation that
a mere idea can change the world it's
the idea enacted socially and culturally
that begins to feel more
promising



## Keywords:
