---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L0R7NVB2YVo
---

# Video
The Frankfurt School, Student Radicalism, and Anti-Communism, with Prof. Gabriel Rockhill
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L0R7NVB2YVo)

## Transcript:
foreign
Journal I'm Joseph this is Samuel and
today we're really excited to have
Professor Gabriel Rockhill joining us
Samuel if you want to introduce
Professor Rockhill and we can go into
the questions yeah so as Joseph said
we're with Gabriel Rockhill he's the
director and founder of the critical
theory workshop and a professor of
philosophy at Villanova University
thanks for joining us
thanks for having me on it's a pleasure
so to begin with we want to kind of
foreground this discussion with the
broader context of why we're interested
in this and why we're interviewing you
specifically after your article on the
Frankfurt School of anti-communism came
out and I think it's to note that we're
students and we engage generally with
people who are learning critical theory
or leftist Theory and reading the
article it was it was really Stark to be
reminded of the constant instances where
we're presented this work as nothing
more than Theory I had a quote that I
kind of wanted to launch off with not
from your work but from a different work
um it was a quote by Jurgen Krall who
was a Theodore adornos PhD student and
he was one of the theoreticians in the
student resistance uh during the years
of of of unrest at the at Frankfort
University and he had this quote that I
was reading that kind of wanted me to
start off with and kind of launch into
what we're interested in where he wrote
six months ago when we were besieging
the Council of Frankfort University the
only Professor who came to the student
sit-in was Professor adorno he was
overwhelmed with Ovations he made
straight for the microphone and just as
he reached it he ducked past and shot
into the philosophy seminar in short
once again on the threshold of practice
he retreated into Theory this quote
first of all being written by a student
and someone who's actively involved in
the politics of the moment and of the
movement he's engaged in commenting on
his professor's betrayal of active
engagement with politics is kind of the
reason we're here discussing this
because I think as students we've been
introduced to critical theory the
Frankfurt School from a very deep
politicized especially de-radicalized
perspective and the perspective that you
introduced in your article is also to
note the specific instances of
anti-communism of compatibility of the
Frankfurt School and we wanted to just
begin with how this creates a condition
where in which our pedagogy of these
theoreticians becomes one that is
expressly unpolitical and at worst
actually anti-communist discouraging any
kind of anti-colonial liberatory
politics so that's our place to begin
why are we even discussing this and what
are the aftermath effects of having
taught and introduced the Frankfurt
School in this manner throughout
Academia for the past 60 years
yeah it's a great starting point I think
that one of the ways of framing my
Approach at least to the Frankfurt
School is by re-situating these books
and authors these cultural products
within the larger system that has
produced and promoted them which is a
kind of inversion of how we're usually
thought to think of Commodities where
Commodities are simply there and we read
them or we engage with them we buy them
um because it's what's on offer the
question I'm raising is why is that
what's on offer why is it that when I
was a student and I became interested in
Marxism people immediately appointed me
to adorno and marcusa as opposed to
Dominica losordo Michael parente Walter
Rodney or lots of other figures one
could think of and in my own
investigations what I began to kind of
unpack is the extent to which there is a
global Theory industry uh not unlike
what adorno and horkheimer talk about
when they diagnose the culture industry
but if you know their writing on the
culture industry they're mainly kind of
looking at the forms of mass
entertainment and not taking into
consideration the way in which high
culture including Theory and the
intellectual World itself is part of an
industrial mechanism and so if we
actually look at the deeper history of
the global Theory industry as it's kind
of developed since at least World War II
and has origins of course before that
what you see is within the Western World
a promotion of certain forms of kind of
radical Chic critique that traffic in
gestural politics and symbolic politics
but lack any real political substance
and moreover that also engage in various
forms of obscurantism and discursive
pyrotechnic so really fancy words and
hyphens and italics and references to
Hegel Heidegger Etc that kind of lose
the audience particularly the young
audience who is often then convinced
that well there must be some type of
magical charm to these texts because I
surely don't understand them but all the
professors and everyone else in the room
seems to have a lot of admiration for
them so bringing that all together I
would say and this is of course a
reference to the work of Karl Marx that
these Works have a kind of cultural
commodity fetishism that makes it such
that we are presented them as
Commodities that are actually detached
from the entire system of social
relations that produced them in the
first place that made them circulate and
that preempted or determined to a
certain extent their reception because
we're supposed to receive them in awe as
kind of canonical works and so one way
of I guess reducing my work in that
regard is that it's a materialist
analysis of this cultural commodity
fetishism an attempt to understand well
where did these Commodities come from
why are they being promoted Etc and this
of course then leads to the larger
political stakes and I'm sure we're
going to get into this in Greater detail
but just one element that is really
important is that the United States in
particular that you know the Imperial
Powers uh in Europe and the United
States as well as their intelligence
services in particular we're very
interested in dividing and conquering
the left and in order to do that they
distinguish between the non-compatible
left which is the Communist left because
the Communist left actually wanted to
change the extent socioeconomic system
and the compatible left or what they
sometimes refer to as the respectable
left and the respectable left is the
left that is fine with capitalism and
with imperialism and so one remarkably
consistent feature of so much of a
radical Chic critique that is put forth
in the global Theory industry is their
rejection not of Communism as an idea or
as a concept or as a discourse and I'd
be happy to talk about figures like you
and others uh derried out for that
matter Etc
um but what they share is a rejection of
actually existing socialism so
communism's fine is an idea as a concept
as a discourse but as soon as real
people are making significant changes to
the material world then this becomes
abort and unacceptable and unpalatable
and so the intelligence Services the
Central Intelligence Agency MI6 lots of
different agencies that are involved in
global propaganda have invested their
resources that are extensive very
extensive in fact Unlimited in certain
instances insuring up the compatible
left and in drowning in mythology
basically the uh communist left or the
incompatible left uh and maybe just
coming full circle one of the other
quotes that I love by um Jans Hogan Khal
who was of course one of adorno's PhD
students is that when he was arrested at
the behest of adorno he uh referred to
the critical theorists as uh
or critical theorists right that
basically they were full of and
they were full of because they were
talking as if they wanted a radical
particular society but as soon as the
students organized along
Anti-Imperialist lines and
anti-capitalist lines and did something
about it occupying buildings on the
University campus then adorno showed his
true colors and he lined up with the
powers that be and he did this
systematically moreover across his
career we have learned a lot about
um you know the actual material
shortcomings of adorno in terms of like
student activism and stuff like that so
you know we agree he is full of but
how does that come through in his actual
Theory maybe there's this tendency to be
like okay let's separate the person from
the ideas so how can we see you know his
class position and his real motivations
bleed through into what he's actually
writing yeah I first of all I would say
that I reject the separation of person
and ideas because it's based on an
idealist posture that's very widespread
in the Bourgeois Humanities it's the
idea that you could have you know a
person that lives and acts on the one
hand and then the purity of the spirit
of their mind on the other uh you know
until proven wrong I take it that there
are not minds and vacuums and that all
minds are embodied in actual reality and
so if we look at the reality of an
embodied person like someone like adorno
you find oath in his practice and in his
theory are really not only Resolute but
I would say rabid anti-communism like
frothing at the mouth kind of
anti-communism and a rejection of uh the
Soviet Union of China
um tacit at least support for the war in
Vietnam and so forth as his closest uh
collaborator and a close friend Max
horkheimer expressed his his complete
support for the U.S intervention in
Vietnam and adorno didn't then you know
yell out in opposition and say no we
have to actually be on the side that
someone like Porter marcuso who's also
in their circles was on on the contrary
he said we shouldn't lose sleep over
Vietnam and so his practical political
positions there's another one that's
quite significant and that is the uh
intervention on the part of the Brits
the French and the Israelis and the
sewer canal in Egypt in 1956 where
adorno and horcrime were lined up and
said that well Nasser who was an
anti-colonial leader of course in Egypt
at that point in time is nothing more
than a fascist Chieftain this is a quote
from the way in which they describe him
who is following the marching or orders
of the Soviet Union and of Moscow and so
across the board any time that adorno
not only in his public statements but
also in his private correspondence I've
found no indication whatsoever that he
would be in support of socialism in any
extant form so any materialized form on
the contrary he prefers what I call in
the article that we began by discussing
ABS Theory which of course in the
reference to crawl we can do this orally
better than in writing but it's a BS
Theory it's anything but socialism which
is of course a BS Theory because it
ultimately lines up on the exact same
position that Margaret Thatcher took and
that is another acronym Tina there is no
alternative and so in spite of all of
the melancholic despair expressed by
adorno over the state of consumer
society and capitalism at the end of the
day you would be hard-pressed to find
any instance in his life for work in
which he says that well there's an
alternative to these really horrible
things and that alternative is actually
existing Socialism or the Socialist
project in some sort Instead at best you
have a kind of appeal to utopian ideals
to uh promissory notes for the future
and other such things so he really
manifests the Beating Heart of the
compatible left and that is
gesturopolitics and symbolic politics
that sound radical but a very clear
opposition to any form of people power
and a really profound form of socialness
social chauvinism is a term that's not
widely used today but was very widely
used in Marxist circles in the early
20th century to refer to those people
who were so enamored with their own
society and their own culture that they
could not see beyond it and so adorno is
blind to the impacts of imperialism
because he himself in the positions that
he occupied in the imperialist corps
benefited from them and so he was well
positioned I guess to turn a blind eye
to that imperialism and and basically
um Embrace a social chauvinistic
position much like much of many of the
other member or at least leading
luminaries of the western left or
Western Marxism I'm really glad you
brought up the article about Nasser
because it's something that I had wanted
to bring up as well
um first of all that quote that you
mentioned it reeks of of orientalism it
reeks of I think what Emmanuel
wallerstein has written about with
respect to European universalism as a
kind of justification for
interventionism and the rhetoric of
power
um and I wanted to talk about it
specifically because it's so conflicting
like when you listen to that quote where
he's very openly in favor of the
intervention against Nasser it seems to
contradict his other quotes and
assertions that he's somewhat apolitical
he doesn't like practical politics he's
neutral on other questions and of course
at the same time Western Marxist I I
think to kind of ground that within the
broader Western Marxist rejection of the
the Soviet incursion into Hungary
um and Czechoslovakia that there was so
much outrage over that
um and then by by contradiction there
was very little outrage against the the
French and British uh colonial actions
in Egypt so I think we all understand
the reason for that it's very clearly as
you mentioned the product of of a
European point of view and I I want to
situate that within a broader discussion
around the extent to which Western
Marxism as such being basically
euromarxism Euro communism all of that
kind of eurocentric uh bias within those
strains of of pro-imperial as we've
talked about on our show before a
pro-imperialist left how this very much
was able to intertwine within as you
describe the melancholic apolitical
neutral and and really inert facile
politics of the Frankfurt School that
ultimately said anti-colonial
anti-imperial politics are it's too much
you know we need to actually just sit
back and observe the world and write
about it rather than actually go and get
our feet muddy in any capacity
yeah I mean the relationship between the
history of the western left and social
chauvinism is uh deep historical
relationship that really goes back to
the major slit in the world communist
movement between the second and third
international and to Lenin's very
insightful critiques of the second
International for uh succumbing to
social chauvinism and one of the key
elements that Lenin foregrounds that I
think is really important for us to
understand for the more General kind of
diagnosis of the western left kind of
post Lenin that we're talking about is
that there's a reason for that social
chauvinism and the reason is the Deep
history of imperialism and so just as
the second International
um basically lined up on pro-imperialist
project uh because of
the ways in which colonialism was
through a whole series of mechanisms
making the life of the working class
within the capitalist core uh
positioning it at a kind of superior
level economically to the global working
class
this meant that there was a there were
elements from the economic base that was
driving that ideology
meaning that in looking back on it given
I think Lenin's insightful analysis we
should actually expect that to have
happened meaning that the Western left
is a left that grew up within the
capitalist core and in the capitalist
core you have the wages of colonialism
the kind of Labor aristocracy and all
the profiteering of the imperialist
expansion out from the capitalist Corps
and so the working class within Europe
and the United States as well as the you
know professional managerial class in
these areas had a very material
relationship to imperialism and it
shouldn't be then surprising that so
many of them lined up and took a
position
image they defended the superiority of
the West uh embraced social chauvinism
basically accepted Western imperialism
because all of those things were
basically benefiting them materially and
so in that regard Lennon's critique of
the second International I think needs
to be redeployed in relationship to the
Western left in the latter part of the
20th in the early part of the 21st
century because if you look at if it'd
be French Theory German style critical
theory or other manifestations of
so-called critique within the
Contemporary Western Academy you could
talk about afro-pessimism you could talk
about liberal queer Theory you could
bring in a lot of references in this
regard one thing that's really
remarkable is that this social
chauvinism is still very very widespread
and there's a facile and very thin and
superficial critique of eurocentrism
that consists in saying well we need
voices from elsewhere we need to bring
in you know people who speak differently
and things like this but the authors who
are integrated into the capitalist core
tend to be those that actually line up
both intellectually and politically with
the Western left so you can look at
figures like do cell or you could look
at figures like Spivak you could look at
many of those who have been kind of
elevated within the Western court today
and recognize that the same basic
pattern is operative right and so in
that regard there's a there's a broader
I think historical economic analysis
that is necessary to understand some of
the mechanisms that are operative and to
come to the core of your question then
one of the things that you see very
clearly within this broad Western left
is a politics of Melancholia a politics
of Despair and I think that this
affective ideology
is so important because it is the kind
of beating heart if you will of ABS
Theory and that consists in recognizing
to their credit people like adorno and
Herkimer do recognize this that
capitalism is a force of evil in the
world because it exploits people it
engages in imperialism it engages in
various forms of Oppression Etc
those negative aspects of the western
left so the critical aspects where they
say that capitalism is bad consumer
Society is bad Etc uh have often been
been linked to a critique of any
possible positive project right and so
what you have is a diagnosis of the
problems without an elucidation of the
Cure
and if we could just allow ourselves a
brief analogy or comparison imagine
going to a doctor and the doctor saying
to you you know you're really sick and
I'm going to describe this illness in
great nuanced detail so that you
understand just how sick you are
and there's this medication that we have
that people have used elsewhere to solve
this illness but the last thing that you
could possibly do is take that
medication because it's even worse than
the illness that you have right and so
what they put forth is this really
melancholic dystopian worldview in which
everything is horrible but the
alternative is much much worse
and so you have an entire industry that
is basically based on critique
not revolutionary transformation
and that's the kind of bread and butter
of the western left and again we could
look at just about anyone unfortunately
it's unfortunate how consistent this
orientation is uh zizak lining up on
NATO and supporting the war in Ukraine
you can look at Harbor Moss basically
doing the same in a recent
um intervention uh you know the list
goes on as far as like really concrete
and specific positions that members of
the western left are at least the most
visible members of the western left have
taken that basically communicate the
most fundamental line of demarcation and
ideological struggle and that is the
demarcation to come back to what we're
talking about before between the
compatible left and the non-compatible
left and it's precisely for this reason
when you see the bigger picture it
actually makes perfect sense because
someone like Zizek or Brad bed you or
adorno or these figures they're Global
Superstars right uh they're referred to
by Fortune Magazine as you know zizak is
one of the top 100 thinkers in of the
20th century
capitalist
you know Publications like this that are
promoting that type of work are not
doing it in ignorance they're doing it
because they're fully aware that it is
fantastic to promote the idea that
critique is acceptable
as long as it preserves the Border
that keeps it from True social
transformation and that's what thinkers
end up doing unfortunately more or less
across the board no I think what we're
really getting at here is that all of
these theorists are basically operating
from the same Baseline imperialist
ideology that's
um you know as you say in your writings
it's like intertwined with real life
like material life processes
um those being you know imperialism and
you know the wages of of colonialism so
I think to get at this question a little
bit more I'd like you to sort of explain
what you mean by ideology and you know
how that's intertwined with sense making
uh just so we can look at this question
from a different angle I've been working
with Jennifer Ponce de Leon on what we
refer to as a compositional model of
ideology and this is of course unlike
the theorist that I just mentioned who
love to put forth their theories is
radically new uh and basically copyright
them and brand them as if it was novel
thinking the thinking that I've been
doing with with Jennifer Ponce de Leon
is rooted very deeply in the historical
materialist tradition and dedicated to
Collective knowledge production
um so everything that I'm going to say
is uh simply an attempt to both pick up
on and contribute to a collective
tradition not to copyright ideas in this
facile sense that is often done within
the global Theory industry and so the
compositional model of ideology
uh outlines the extent to which ideology
is not just about a system of ideas it
is instead a total experiential
apparatus that is
uh imposed upon subjects by a particular
social and economic world
so one is ideologically configured not
only in the way one thinks but also in
one's affects so one's feelings and uh
one's sensibilities in one's perceptions
of the world the things we see or the
things we do not see the things we hear
and do not hear also in one's desires uh
in one's aspirations and so the
compositional model of ideology is just
trying to flesh out a broader
understanding of ideology as a total
sense making mechanism
and it's the means by which a given
Society formats
individual subjects in every aspect of
their existence
in this regard uh one of the things and
here I'll put my own cards on the table
because I have definitely been
ideologically composed by the global
Theory industry I mean this is how I
came up as a student I went and studied
with derida and bed you and figures like
this in France because it was put forth
as the most radical theory on offer and
it took me a long time to figure out
what was actually going on and honestly
a lot of that had to do with the
affective ideology that carries a lot of
the western left because I remember the
sexy books and the uh sophisticated
vocabulary and the kind of uh very chic
settings within which if it be art
galleries or you know performance
centers or seminar rooms or things like
this that all of this theory was
presented within and so part of the work
that I've been doing with Jennifer on
ideologies trying to identify how
ideology critique then cannot simply be
a critique of ideas you can't simply say
well you're wrong about it these are the
right ideas that's what ideology
critique is no ideology critique has to
also engage at an affective level at a
psychological level it has to look at
how our perceptions are formatted so
that everybody now in the Western World
sees the Ukraine but they don't see
Yemen for instance or Somalia or you
know Ethiopia or other places that one
could be focused on and so that form of
ideology critique then also needs to be
related to the ways in which that
composition is anchored in an economic
base and so one situation in class
relations tends to determine and compose
one sense of the world
in a very visceral and kind of
um basic sense meaning that what you
experience at a daily level
uh format to your ideology meaning do
you have access to food and potable
water uh is your uncle in prison or are
you you know going to an elite school in
the Northeast uh or teaching at an elite
school in the Northeast and that daily
set of class relations very much has an
impact on the way in which you perceive
the world and your sense of the world it
is that you're living in and how that
world could potentially be changed or
not changed and so there's a lot of
different aspects to this but I think
that
connecting it back to what we were
talking about a moment ago part of the
way in which the compatible left has
operated ideologically is to communicate
to people at an affective level
that certain forms of critique are
acceptable because they're respectable
because they're honest because they are
rational
but other forms of analysis such as
communist analysis is beyond the payoff
and flirting with insanity
Madness
um just it it is it tends to kind of
bring up all of the specters of of
gulags and uh Terror and of Devastation
and that that affective ideology is one
of the most powerful policing mechanisms
I mean in my own education again I
remember the first few times where
people were asking me this is years ago
oh what do you think about Cuba I didn't
know anything about Cuba but I know what
I felt about Cuba I felt that it must be
dictatorial right I mean that there must
be a really oppressive set of social
relations because that was what was in
the ethos and none of the figures that I
was reading Foucault and Rancier and
people like this in Bali Bar None of
them were saying no Cuba's actually like
in actually existing social estate that
we should take seriously and we
shouldn't be revolted by it and so that
affective ideology really keeps certain
political projects off the table and
polices the left border of critique so
that we just focus on what the rest of
the western left is talking about and we
accept as a given certain assumptions
about the world like China is an
authoritarian capitalist country that is
just to be condemned every other
um you know actually existing socialist
State and so part of my own even
personal ideology critique has been one
of uprooting those affective reactions
when I hear China or Cuba or Korea or
any of these other countries and instead
saying wait a minute
why don't we actually look at what's
going on and get the best possible
sources of information
instead of Simply having an affective
reflex that's been programmed into me do
its work of keeping me from the
scientific labor of exploring actually
existing socialism in a very sober and
open-minded way in which you can also do
it critically and point out where you
think that there might be limitations
and things like this but you can do it
kind of at the adult table instead of
the child's table you know a
Thanksgiving holiday where basically all
you're encouraged to do is react by
affect and kind of acting out and not
have a sober assessment yeah I'm glad
you mentioned the economic base of all
ideologies we're in the process of doing
a reading group right now uh here at
Cornell with other students around the
world on Walter Rodney's the colonial
Marxism and he has a quote in there
where he says that very simply put every
ideology is a class ideology whether we
want to identify it as that or not and
he's talking about that in the context
of debates around
attempts to formulate a third option
without having to commit to socialism
but also not wanting to identify with
capitalism and he ultimately says that
those will always fail because there
there is no alternative actually to
choosing socialism as the only route out
of capitalism
um and all the Alternatives he looks at
ultimately fell back into capitalism uh
sort of proving his point I want to
bring that up with respect to a big
point in your article being the Congress
of cultural Freedom the Central
Intelligence Agency uh specifically the
manner in which I think it falls in this
pattern of neither Washington nor Moscow
either Washington nor Peking this kind
of I don't want to choose so I end up
sort of vacillating back into Washington
at the end of the day which is the case
pattern as you point out and I think
ultimately what that lends itself to as
you've been discussing is the fact and
class character of Academia of
intellectuals themselves still being
Bourgeois at the end of the day and and
if if that class determines one's
ideology then it's no surprise that
Bourgeois ideology would be produced and
I think that's to stimulate the
conversation around Walter Rodney puts
forth the alternative of a guerrilla
intellectual someone who can commit
class suicide against the usual
orientation but as students were always
presented with revolutionary
intellectualism as an option and
Academia as you were pointing out is
always sort of pushed for left-leaning
students as you know if you don't want
to work in a capitalist industry if you
would like to advance critique of of
society then you can go into Academia
but what's frustrating is reading your
article and all of these conversations
it seems to come out that Academia
itself I mean we should be very aware
that it is another type of capitalist
industry but we sort of mystify that I
think and then are surprised when
academics Who present themselves as
revolutionary in the case of the
Frankfurt School as revolutionary
intellectuals are co-opted by the
Congress for cultural Freedom by the CIA
so I guess my question is why why should
we be surprised when Academia itself
continues to have a class character one
that we ignore but nevertheless is and
then I guess a secondary question to
that is how do you avoid this
cooperation of of intellectualism of
attempting to be critical as you were
pointing out but this critique often
becomes very useful for the existing
imperialist or capitalist order which
can take critique very easily and turn
it around and make it a weapon of the
CIA or the Congress of cultural freedom
great question I'm glad that you're
reading that book by Rodney which is
excellent uh like all of Rodney's work
across the board and I think that it
relates quite directly to what we were
just talking about in the sense that
there is an objective world of global
class struggle
that produces within certain strata
that are situated within that class
struggle the illusion
that they can subjectively tap out
and be neutral uh be silent observers be
the kind of intellectual flies on the
wall but as you quite cogently pointed
out you can't tap out of class struggle
it is an objective reality
or as Howard Zinn whose politics are
slightly different than Walter Rodney's
often said you cannot be neutral on a
moving train right and so
of course the intellectuals that we're
talking about and all of those
intellectuals who feign some type of
neutrality are themselves part of a
class project objectively speaking so it
doesn't actually matter what they say
individually because their subjective
Illusions can simply mask the fact that
there's objective class relations that
are operative and one of the things
that's really important I think to
understand
um who's a French philosopher
um Marxist uh has spoken quite or
written quite poignantly on this front
is that the professional managerial
class as it's been developed in a
capitalist core in the latter half of
the 20th in the early 21st century
occupies a really specific position and
that is a position in which they're not
like the petty bourgeoisie of the early
20th century the small shopkeepers and
property owners and things like this
they they don't kind of own means of
subsistence in that sense but instead
they occupy a position in which they
operate within institutions that are
controlled by those who control the
means of production the means of
circulation of information Etc meaning
the Bourgeois capitalist class while at
the same time there are those and these
are the ones that we're mainly talking
about because there are plenty of
intellectuals who simply line up on the
capitalist ruling class right the Samuel
huntingtons and the fukuyamas of the
world Etc but there are others who
instead want to create the impression
that somehow they're serving the
interests of the general population
and these are the radical recuperators
like adorno and horchimer and whatnot
and what they do is it's it's quite a
kind of uh it's a dual movement of sorts
in which they work in these institutions
while making gestures towards the
general population in various ways but
ultimately their social function is to
recuperate the radical and certain
forces of the masses within a
pro-capitalist project
and so they're kind of the political
henchmen or Hench people if you will of
the capitalist ruling class and one of
the tactics that they use is their
purported neutrality right and so I
think a broader diagnosis of this class
stratum of the professional managerial
classes that operates within the
imperialist corps is really important
and that leads to uh the vocabulary that
you use to
co-opted by organizations like the
Congress for cultural Freedom what's
actually quite interesting about the
history of that organization or the
information research Department which is
a similar organization that was run by
MI6 and CIA that was headquartered in
Great Britain is that the
co-optation suggests that well
intellectuals were doing work and then
they were kind of recuperated by these
institutions but actually it was the
opportunism of these intellectuals that
coalesced quite seamlessly with a way in
which these organizations themselves
functioned meaning they weren't so much
co-opted as they were opportunists who
benefited from the uplift of these
institutions someone like George Orwell
or uh who's a quite famous French
philosopher at least within the European
context they had their work translated
circulated around the world they were
invited to all these junkets they became
world famous writers because of the work
of these intelligence services and so
their opportunism got the uplift of the
system and the system got from them what
they wanted which was basically uh
anti-communist claptrap in very
sophisticated verbiage and so in that
regard I think that the
the The Logical co-optation isn't quite
as operative as the logic of kind of a
mutual reinforcement in which the
institutional forces and the subjective
forces of the intellectuals involved are
kind of pushing in the same direction
the other thing that I would say is that
there's also an imperialist character
right you said it's a class character
but coming back to Walter Rodney of
course uh and to Dominica losordo and
Lennon and many others the class
character of capitalism has in at least
its modern instantiations taken the form
of imperialism and so the relationship
between countries is often a class
relationship and so we can't lose sight
of the fact that it's not just the
university occupying a class position
the universities in the United States
and Europe occupy an imperial position
in relationship to the rest of the world
and they vet what is acceptable from the
rest of the world and what should be
then promoted as a kind of form of
global global Theory and your question
about how to avoid that is a really good
question right uh in in the case of
Rodney we know that Hima was a guerrilla
intellectual he was involved with the
rastafara movement he was involved in so
many different movements in Tanzania as
well
um as well as in Guyana and we know now
that it's the Guyanese state that was
involved in the organization of his and
the planning of his assassination and so
as far as you know the intellectual work
that can be done that is of A Sort that
would actually break with the
imperatives of the institution there is
a certain amount of class suicide that's
involved in that because then you don't
get the uplift you're not promoted in
the kind of star industry you're not the
top hundred thinkers of Fortune Magazine
and other such things
um I think it also requires and this is
I think key in a way that also Echoes
our conversation about the Western left
is that it's not just you know people
often think about ideology critique or
intellectual work
as an individual exit like I'm gonna
figure out on my own how to be a gorilla
intellectual or how to escape ideology I
think it's a very incorrect way of
thinking about it the real goal if
you're invested in human Liberation
isn't for me to get out or for like you
individually to get out it's for us to
build Collective power and to build
Collective power that means that
intellectuals really have to be anchored
in the global socialist movement and
this takes many different forms it takes
party forms it takes Union forms it
takes various forms of you know
organizations and things like this and
it also means collectively working with
others in order to move the needle in
various Ways by building institutions
and by operating in a much more
Collective manner
um this also means that we have to find
ways in again echoing what I was just
saying about Rodney the goal is not for
intellectuals to stick their necks out
and get their heads chopped off the goal
should be for us to collectively build
power so that we can actually
intellectually and culturally
contribute to a global project that is
not the global project of the
imperialist PMC but is instead the
global project of human Liberation and
so we could talk more specifically if
you want about particular tactics for
doing that you know I'm involved in the
critical theory Workshop which you
mentioned which is uh you know
International educational platform and
part of what we try to do is to have
sober and adult conversations about
actually existing socialism so that
there can be some institutional space
for engaging with the work of people
like Rodney people like um Claudia Jones
and others who are revolutionary
intellectuals right they're not just
critical theorists who are bemoaning the
limits of capitalism and saying that
there's no solution to them they're
people who have really Concrete
Solutions that we need to learn from we
need to debate discuss but we can't do
this in the abstract all of these ideas
have to be anchored in the movement they
have to be anchored in the Practical
organizing of the masses of humanity in
a project that is a world historical
project of human Liberation particularly
because we're at a point in time at
which there's no longer simply the risk
of nuclear Annihilation and of the kind
of subjection of the totality of
humanity to capitalist social relations
but human extinction is on the board due
to the ecological destruction that has
been
that has been perpetuated by capitals so
the stakes could not be higher we need
to work together collectively in order
to Marshal all of our intellectual and
cultural power in order to move this
Global project of human emancipation and
ecological survival in the right
direction
I was joking earlier Academia is the
left wing of fascism
um but what I mean the reason I made
that joke is because I think that
I think that you know both what we were
talking about with
um adorno and like that milieu as well
as how like Michael parente talks about
fascism like a false revolution I think
it there is this sort of falseness and
this failure to break away from the
material basis of the ideology of
capitalism so yeah I was just wondering
about the connection between those two
how they both sort of Promise a way out
from this horrible thing we call
capitalist imperialism I mean the very
first thing that I would say and this
overlaps a little bit with our earlier
conversation is that fascism was
conceptualized in the early 20th century
by Mussolini and others but in media
Series so it was kind of as they were
already doing fascism they started to
conceptualize and try to figure out what
it was but of course it existed prior to
that and the history of colonialism is a
great example of what fascism looks like
and it's kind of modalities of primitive
accumulation and so it depends on how
expansive if we want to have a general
understanding of fasm or a more specific
understanding as people often do because
they see fascism and it's European
manifestations in the interwar period
and
if we do simply look at that interwar
period one of the things that's
remarkable and important to understand
is that the aristocracy which still was
an important class formation within the
kind of long 19th century and remained
so today I mean we just saw this with
the death of the queen and whatnot uh
had authoritarian modes of governance
that it would regularly use it was just
like old school authoritarian brutal
Rule and what happened in 1917 with the
Bolsheviks of course is the emergence of
a very unique way of seizing state power
and what the Bolsheviks did is they
played the Parliamentary game and they
insisted on playing the Parliamentary
game they were propagandizing on every
front while at the same time they ran
underground organizations that were
considered illegal because of the way in
which Russia operated and that dual
strategy of operating above board and
then also uh doing things somewhat uh in
the streets and on the fringes is
precisely what some of the fascists
tried to recuperate in order to
revitalize the authoritarian elements of
capitalism but give them a kind of new
modern and almost adventurous kind of
orientation and so parenti of course
famously referred to Fascism as a false
revolution which is precisely what it
was in this European context because
there was an attempt to reach out to
workers and in particular to the the
petty bourgeoisie as well as the kind of
lump in proletariat the veterans and
other groups like that and to say to
them yeah there are real problems with
societies uh that we live in like we
just saw with the the fascist who's
become Prime Minister of Italy right
um she points out oh there's a problem
with the corrupt Financial Elite and
they're all these abstract references to
the financial Elite but when you look at
the history of actually existing fascism
that Financial Elite has often been
funding the rise of these fascist forces
so there's a class project of the
capitalist ruling class using the
political Elite that's also using them
in order to gain power in this twofold
way in which the Bolsheviks had gained
power both working through Parliament
and through in the case of fascists
street gangs that were doing illegal
activities but the state was looking the
other way
and both in the case of Mussolini and
the case of Hitler we should forget they
came to power through liberal Bourgeois
democracies these were not coup d'etat
they played by the rules of the game and
in a Bourgeois democracy the basic rule
of the game is you get as much funding
as you can from the capitalist ruling
class in order to gain electoral power
and that's precisely what uh that's
precisely what happened now its
relationship to the academy would take
some time to unpack right because
there's so many different aspects to
this but one of the uh elements that's
really important is that liberalism has
never been a bulwark against fascists
historically we've seen this time and
again like the Spanish Civil War when
the United States didn't support the
Republicans who were uh you know
advocating for the self-determination of
the people
um they didn't weigh in on the side of
the fascist dictator Franco but they
just kind of let it play out right as a
warm-up to World War II in which they
also did the same thing they stood back
and watched things unfold and as Truman
famously said he wanted to see he wanted
basically the Nazis and the the Russians
to bleed each other dry and then
intervene at the end of the war based on
whoever was winning and that is exactly
what happened it just so happens at the
Army surprisingly for Truman ended up
being the one that was winning the war
at that point in time
um so the history of the liberal
intelligencia has often been one of
aiding and abetting fascism either
directly in certain instances or
indirectly by not by basically lining up
as the compatible left and uh taking a
position that was recalcitrant to the
only known solution to Fascism that
Humanity has found thus far and that is
socialism uh we shouldn't forget that in
the wake of the Great Depression there
were fascist movements in every
capitalist country and you do not have
to look far in the United States or
elsewhere today in our contemporary
world to recognize that there's a
massive Resurgence of fascism that goes
hand in hand with capitalist crisis and
the rise of China
and so we are in a position in which we
should be having very Frank open and
important debates about the Resurgence
of fascism and how it can actually be
compatible because it can't be combated
through the liberal intelligency it
can't be combated with liberalism look
at what they did they voted in you know
Biden came into office as the last
bulwark against Trump and what's he done
a proxy war in Ukraine and a war on
working-class people in the United
States he's considered he's basically
continued the capitalist neoliberal
agenda and the imperialist agenda right
and so if you thought that biting voting
Biden into office was going to save us
from fascism you were sorely sorely
mistaken because fascism of course has
an international Dimension that we
always need to foreground maybe the last
thing that I would say in this regard
because I realized that my comments are
kind of touching on a number of
different issues is that the University
was also stopped with Nazis in the wake
of World War II right 1600 Nazi
scientists 1600 1 600 Nazi scientists
were brought to the United States in the
wake of World War II and they were given
positions at leading universities
Cornell was one of them 14 leading
universities in the United States housed
Nazis who were given research centers
often assistance and they were promised
nationality if their work were fruit and
by that that meant basically producing
weapons of mass destruction and mass
death uh which many of them did of
course they went on to take uh senior
roles or occupy senior roles in NASA and
in NATO of course and so there's a deep
and dark history of the relationship
between the University
and not simply the liberal factions that
I was talking about earlier but just
straight up Nazis and fascists
uh I don't really I don't have like a
formatted question but I think what it's
prompting in my mind is to think about
the
the necessary kind of nature as we were
discussing before of Academia you've
discussed throughout the kind of
uh system of academic branding that
exists like when you claim an idea and
it's yours and that's something that I I
find a lot um in reading about Academia
and talking about it is this kind of
tendency towards is you know the term of
knowledge production and
the ability to claim certain ideas and
and kind of create a brand on them but
I'm curious as you were discussing you
know the collective alternative to that
I'm thinking and we're thinking a lot is
you know as we do this project and we
try to learn about anti-imperialism in
particular thinking about all the the
complicated exigencies of that like what
solidarity looks like on an
international scale because as you point
out it's it's necessary if we're going
to fight uh fascism the rise of fascism
uh to deal with and address solidarity
um and as a necessary part of
anti-imperialism and I think when we
think about that knowledge does play a
role in it because it's a constant back
and forth between us people who grew up
and were educated within the Imperial
core for example when you made that
comment about Cuba earlier I was
thinking about the fact that I grew up
outside of Miami and South Florida and I
was thinking about what I was told about
Cuba when I was young and it was not
good at all have but there's a there's a
kind of inversion of that process so to
speak which is visiting those countries
learning from people who live there and
are participants in the process of
building socialism and we had a separate
conversation with a professor who has
done a lot of work in Cuba discussing
the ways in which we can tend to sort of
import our biases about these projects
when we go and visit when we you know
come away feeling critical about this
thing isn't working out or you know I
would I would prefer to see things this
other way so I wonder if we can maybe
talk a little bit about I guess this is
a whole issue of the fact of bringing in
what you think socialism should look
like and imposing it upon people who are
actually doing it and saying because
these things don't match up I choose not
to support this which I think is the the
whole issue with the Frankfurt School in
a lot of cases that they would like to
see you know and that comes up with with
a sort of marxist humanism or this kind
of desire to promote code
all of the the niceties of of a
socialist imagination and none of the
the kind of complicated aspects that get
involved such as the real as you pointed
out I think is really important the
really difficult debater on what to do
with this state what to do with with
political power and those debates don't
go away overnight but they've been
ongoing in countries that actually have
been creating socialism and I think uh
when we kind of go in there and and in
an attempt to perhaps learn but come
away feeling fatigued and feeling deeply
cynical about socialism because of some
bias we had beforehand that hasn't been
the standard that hasn't been lived up
to I think that's the number one thing
that can lead people towards this inert
neutrality and the kind of reversion
back to I I believed in socialism but
then I went and saw it I was very
disillusioned with what I saw so I
wonder if you can talk more about that
of what the what the right approach to a
a solidarity or a kind of learning from
actually existing socialism can look
like as opposed to the process we have
of learning from capitalism to hate
socialism
yeah that's a great question there is
such a widespread tendency to
either explicitly or implicitly Embrace
utopian socialism within the Western
left
and to think of socialism in terms of
this absolutely perfect system that
would realize all of one's subjective
goals in which racism and gender
inequality and everything would just be
eradicated overnight the state would
disappear Etc and if that doesn't happen
immediately
then it is just to be condemned and
Dominico lasordo I think is probably the
single clearest author on this front
because he foregrounds the relationship
between this Western left utopian
socialism on the one hand and the deeper
history of a kind of Messianic ideology
that's a layover from the feudal uh
phase of
um of development which wants everything
to change all at once in this Messianic
Manner and what he insists on against
that and I think he's absolutely right
is that we don't we should not approach
actually existing socialism with our own
subjective aspirations and our own
Messianic hopes instead we should look
at it scientifically right and the
science of actually existing socialism
which is of course what angles argued
for
recognizes that socialism is not born
by falling from God socialism emerges
out of profound conflicts and
contradictions within a capitalist World
System
therefore our expectations should be
that those contradictions and those
complications carry over that there is a
kind of long durray or a long duration
to revolutionary transformation there's
not a punching a button if this isn't a
Marvel film right we're actually
building a new society as Ernesto Che
Guevara said the easiest thing about A
revolution is the seizure of power the
most difficult thing is building a new
society and so if we have that in mind a
few things that I think are really
important because it relates actually to
uh a project that I've been working on
the kind of dialectics of actually
existing socialism is that we have to
know that there has never been socialism
set free there's never been a socialist
experiment in the world that wasn't the
object of the most vicious and heinous
imperialist crimes to try to destroy it
and strangle the red babe in its crib as
Winston Churchill said about about the
intervention of 14 capitalist countries
in the Soviet Union in 1918-1919. so we
only have socialism Under Siege right
this is the stage where it's the baby
steps of what could be you know a more
developed socialist or eventually
communist project
secondly all of these countries in order
to survive have to develop as quickly as
possible
because if they don't they're going to
be crushed
and we've seen that again and again
history proves it
but the level of development means that
they have to take feudal societies
illiterate populations often populations
that don't even have clothes or access
to potable water and make them into a
society that's capable of Defending
itself not just against you know nearby
countries but against the most powerful
imperialist Army in the history of the
world
that's an incredible incredible task and
it's very stupid for subjects to go in
individually and say to themselves well
I think socialism should have been like
this like there should be rainbow water
fountains or who knows what you know
some idea about what it should be no
socialism is you need to develop the
forces of production to such an extent
that you can survive survival is step
one of the Revolution the third thing
that I would say is that you have to
develop in a way that capitalist
countries have never developed before
and that is that you have to develop
without using colonialism as a mechanism
of development
right how did how did Europe and the
United States kind of catapult itself
ahead
in its development well through
colonialism through land theft through
uh super exploitation right so you need
Super development without super
exploitation that's part of the
conundrum a fourth point and there's
many others that you have to go into but
I'll leave it at this is that you
inherit all of the ills of decades and
centuries of capitalism
you inherit racism that is deeply deeply
entrenched homophobia deeply entrenched
gender dynamics that are very very
deeply entrenched and you cannot develop
Society defend it from imperialists do
it without using colonialism and wipe
out and eradicate all forms of
superstition and racism and and gender
ideologies overnight you need to
recompose your entire Society
um and that's going to take I mean look
at capitalism right capitalism has been
around since you know depending on who
you read it has roots as far back as the
Renaissance or the 17th century and has
been developing for centuries right
uh socialism you know the first
successful socialist Revolution was in
1917 we're only 100 years into this
project
and so we should not expect to go to a
society and have everything be perfect
we should expect deep contradictions and
deep difficulties linked to all the
problems that I just highlighted and and
others as well and in that regard one of
the things that we should do is learn
from what's going on and learn what it's
like to make a decision in those types
of circumstances not from the point of
view of a professor in the global North
who's you know the biggest Stakes of
what they do is they might you know
mistype something and make a typo and
have to delete it this is very different
than setting up an agricultural policy
for Cuba that wouldn't be based on
monocultures and that would take into
account global warming and the struggle
against it and other such things so uh
in that regard I think we have enormous
things to learn from actually existing
socialism and this kind of comes back to
the original point of your uh of that
you raise and that is how can our
anti-imperialism also be rooted in
networks of solidarity and I do think
that
the most important element of our
anti-imperialism needs to be involvement
in parties organizations Collective
structures that are mobilized for
anti-imperialism like the answer
Coalition like uh parties and
organizations that support actually
existing socialism
um and I would put that primary to the
kind of cultural front of struggle
because one of the problems in the
history of cultural Marxism and Western
Marxism is the idea that well it's just
a culture struggle right we could just
make some new movies and write some new
books and that's going to sort it out no
class struggle is primary and the
cultural element needs to always be
situated in relationship to class
struggle which is the driving force of
history but in relationship to culture
struggle there's a lot that we can and
should do and part of the work that I've
been involved in which is also
Anti-Imperialist kind of solidarity is
trying to make the work that's been
invisibilized by the global Theory
industry visible and have it circulate
in a much broader Spectrum than it
otherwise would so that we can learn
from the intellectuals and cultural
producers in places like Cuba China and
elsewhere instead of just you know
continue our parade of ignorance so the
book by Dominique lasordo uh Western
Marxism I've been involved of the
opinion translated it into from Italian
to English because a lot of the lasordo
books I mean lasordos in Italian
thinkers so you know he's um but one
dedicated to
um supporting actual existing socialism
and I've also been involved in there's
an excellent book called uh an Amigo by
Raul Antonio Capote who's a Cuban author
who worked for the CIA for years but
unbeknownst to the CIA was also working
for the Cuban government and he told an
incredible tale this is a university
professor and a literary figure in Cuba
who tells the incredible story of his
life being recruited by CIA working on
all of their dirty and horrific
destabilization efforts in Cuba and then
being able to do that in such a way that
he was countering them at the same time
by working with the Cuban government and
so I've been involved with some of the
comrades that I work with in hopefully
um getting that book translated into
English so that people can have a
first-hand account of what CIA
destabilization efforts look like in
Cuba but also what the fight back looks
like right because we don't only want to
focus on the kind of nitty-gritty of the
evil things that the US Empire is doing
around the world but also how people are
building actually existing socialism and
building the the fight back
well thank you so much for taking so
much time I apologies we've gone a
little bit over
um we wanted to finish it on two last
things one we always ask like a kind of
general question at the end of all
interviews we do which is related to
optimism or kind of like hope that you
can have about the possibility of of
furthering this but in this case I'd
like to specifically ask about you know
you mentioned throughout and you've
written about this and you mentioned in
the interview your own kind of
intellectual journey and a kind of like
process of unlearning some aspects of
this I wonder if you have any points of
optimism or kind of advice perhaps for
students and young people who are going
through this intellectual process and as
we're you know attempting to do as well
not not even trying to unlearn but
actually just trying to like set
ourselves on the right path to learn in
the first place and try and make sure
that we have the knowledge necessary I
think you've been very helpful to impart
this for us about you know all aspects
of of collective work of having this
optimism uh having this belief in in
class struggle uh predominantly so yeah
any advice or any recommendations you
would have and then our last thing is
just a general uh where people can find
you where they can read your stuff
um and yeah go for it
yeah I would say that my revolutionary
optimism is rooted in two things one is
objective reality and
according to objective reality
capitalism is a self-destructive system
that is destroying itself and will
destroy itself
capitalism is destined to die and the
real question
is are we going to die along with it
and so that leads me to the second
element of my revolutionary optimism and
that is that there is a very palpable
kind of subjective
uh I think transformation
that I see in almost all of the young
people that I interact with because you
were born into a world almost 50 years
old so you're born into a very different
world than I was born into I was born
into the world of the Twilight of
communist Consciousness and the reign of
fukiyama and Huntington Etc in the heart
of the US Empire in which you know
French theory was the lingua Franca of
the global radical Chic and that was as
good as you could get the younger
generation one of the things that I find
very exciting and even intoxicating is
that there's a very clear recognition of
the stakes of class struggle because of
the ecological destruction of the
biosphere and the fact that this
generation might simply not have a
planet to live on combined with the fact
that people at least a lot of the young
people that I interact with are hungry
for a broader spectrum of analysis in a
way that was largely excluded in my
generation not entirely because there
were people who are a lot more
politically savvy than I was uh you know
at that point in time and thankfully
they were kind of carrying the torch at
a moment at which I was unfortunately
Hoodwinked by Petty Bourgeois
opportunism and lost in the archive of
deconstruction and other such things and
so my revolutionary optimism is also
subjective in that sense because all of
the younger generation that I interact
with is really invested in opening up
the spectrum of analysis and looking at
all possibilities meaning not for
closing the possibility of a
non-compatible left taking seriously
what socialism is and what it could be
and looking at the history of struggles
in such a way that there might be ways
forward that are very different than uh
what we've encountered thus far uh you
know in at least within within the U.S
context and you see a major uptick in
organized politics in the United States
there's a swelling of the ranks of the
Revolutionary left organizations across
the board and I think that we should
continue to both encourage that promote
that but then also find ways of using
that for Collective self-education and
the collective development of the types
of organizations that we need because
we're also still at a very early stage
and so while I'm optimistic both kind of
objectively and subjectively so to speak
I also recognize that the stakes are
very very high you have resurgent
fascism around the world the risks of
World War III and nuclear Devastation
and so it with that in mind I think that
it's important for people to recognize
not only that we need optimism but we
also need realism we need to learn from
what everybody's done in the past we
have to keep our people safe and we have
to find ways of building power
coherently and very quickly
in order to leverage power in the
direction of people and away from the
parasites who live off of us and who use
us for their profit
uh regarding the final question it's a
little bit more of a of a banana auction
I'm involved in a lot of different
collectives and organizing Endeavors so
the critical theory Workshop is an
educational platform that I mentioned
earlier I'm also part of the collective
for Liberation school I do a lot of work
with the Liberation Center in
Philadelphia if people uh happen to make
it this way
um you're welcome to come down I also
work a lot with my comrades at the
people's Forum in New York uh with the
party for socialism and Liberation
um
yeah I I do a lot of kind of work across
different sectors in order to support
various struggles also I'm involved in
various organizing Endeavors in France
because I spend a fair amount of time
there the prcf is a really interesting
and important political party there
that's taking I think a very important
line not only in France but in
relationship to European politics more
generally
um so maybe I'll just leave it at that
then
right yeah thank you so much you've been
very generous with your time and we
really enjoy the conversation I I think
we can say we we learned a lot so thank
you for joining us thank you really well
thanks for having me on and thanks for
the work that you're doing because it's
really important to have these
conversations bring people in and kind
of build the intellectual and cultural
platforms so people can share these
ideas educate one another and it's a
central central part of of the class
struggle which is
foreign


## Keywords:
