---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gqvtpOvPxOw
---

# Video
The Insurgent Power of the Commons - Silke Helfrich and David Bollier
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gqvtpOvPxOw)

## Transcript:
but toughness there's lots of competing
events seeking your attention so I
really don't think you're going to be
disappointed by the evening to perplex
women community I'm Jonathon head of the
economics master is pushed by to a
program which you own the college and
I'm je for Nader of the Thomas R economy
project so we've we've organised this as
one of a an occasional series of talks
that we call adventures in New Economics
we've been doing this off and on for
probably twenty or thirty talks over the
years and we're so excited to welcome
silky and David here but Rakata me
project how many of you have heard the
Thomas r economy project
fantastic how many of you are aware of
the Rakata me Center at the top of town
race the riccati Center at the top of
town just across from the lamb is a
co-working and incubation space it is
one of the projects in town that I would
say broaches the Commons model but we'll
see it's okay what you can kind of
community resource and if you're looking
for a place to work and connect with
or doing things interesting things
that's a good place for you local
entrepreneur forum or community of
dragons and the author of that aha so
this is also we have for the community
to support the local enterprises that
you'd like to see in the town ones that
are as I like to say solution Airy so
ones that are going to benefit the
community in some way and we do that
every year we've done it for the last
eight years in a row and the next one
will be in the spring so you have an
enterprise that needs some funding and
support that could be for you or if you
know somebody who's got something like
that I guess a couple of housekeeping
notes if you need a toilet you're in
luck because there is one it's just
right over there by the front door is we
do have some expenses associated with
this so this is a sliding scale kind of
thing with you if you haven't yet
contributed there's a little thing up
there on the bar and
you wanna say something about this so
dating Sokka are the really
but when introduction I went to weed
that we should actually forgive me I'm
not gonna do that because much more
interesting you think the blur was
actually in the book describing their
backwards in current areas of activity
and employment but rather than I'm going
to speak in a more personal way that
actually David's been coming he's giving
the guests faculty of the economics for
transition master's program for number
of years and I share his conviction that
the columns concept and praxis is a
critical bit it's like a focal point but
I think unifies so many of the elements
that comprise the emerging new narrative
new paradigm that wants to be born and
so I must say that in the years that
I've worked at the college
David's presentations have been among
the most illuminating and I think have
helped the students go wow that's the
portable weight and silk I met the
conference's belong in reclaiming the
urban columns which is overweening
tremendous event it's just so much
energy and one thing I notice about
these two is that they're not informal I
could I could even there I think that
what could be and there are people who I
know a number of people who we invite to
the college who recognize that actually
think of the words in tier 1 but my
feeling is is so much freedom there's so
much stagnation with in conventional
academia and so much more freedom just
outside of the margins but I notice that
silica and David are among those who I
deeply respect as commentators the
chroniclers of the new America
patterns who have chosen to have
relationship with academia pejorative
independence our tournament so I have to
say they are a great chroniclers of the
widow think it's we recognition to we
member of the power of the Commons have
a story that could hidden for quite a
long time I think David and still are
really helping us through their
chronicling in different volumes this is
a very boiling them aware of wealth of
the Commons patterns of commenting and
now just published their freedom live
the comprise multiple essays studies of
how the Commons actually is resurgent so
thank you so much to me to Thomas


Thank You Jonathan for that introduction
Thank You Jay and Jonathan and the
economy for helping organize this event
this really I've heard a lot about top
news totnes over the years but this is
my first time here so I'm really
thrilled to hear that I hope be here and
I hope in our conversation I can learn a
little bit more about what's going on
here because it seems to be really such
a vibrant area of new paradigm creation
and development I from the United States
I work for the reinventing the Commons
project at the Schumacher Center for new
economy in western Massachusetts and
silca can explain a little bit about
herself that she's in southern Germany
and is seems to be everywhere in Europe
and around the world all the time in
college full time is Commons activists
and scholars like myself we have
collaborated in the various Congress all
over the years I'd like to talk about
our books were half of the slides and
then the so-called takeover and resume
the conversation talking about some so
let me just convince me for 45 minutes
and then a conversation yes about 45
minutes and then we'll have a
conversation questions and see where it
goes and I start with this image and
related image of the market of the state
and how I think we don't even need too
much explanation about how the market
state system is in seriously
dysfunctional
so many respects and we can see the
signs from rexif to trump to the rise of
right-wing authoritarianism the failure
to meet basic me is the failure to deal
with known problems from climate change
to a host of other environmental issues
and I think there's just a increasing
lack of confidence that that system of
governance could help us solve the
problems then essentially the capital
airlines are falling apart and I think
that this is an avoidable culture that
is kind of dangerous because we need
some credible new approaches forward I
think there are many many promising
smaller projects that are yearning there
to coalesce into something larger and
I'd like to see the Commons as part of
that conversation in helping to give it
the more definition and that's somewhat
what we've attempted to do in our book
and we're trying to really think of the
Commons help us imagine new pathways for
growing in the world and in addition how
can that happen and having studied the
Commons for 15 or 20 years often
firsthand as well as through the
academic literature we wanted to try to
understand common in the verb as opposed
to the noun and the deeper more refined
way economics has home canonicus and a
whole idealization of what human beings
are so what does the Commons mean what
does common aim mean and those are the
kinds of questions we wanted to answer
in books free fair and alive is the
English edition that just came out two
weeks ago
publishers and the German Edition came
out of April which social was largely
responsible for and she's been on the
road quite a bit talking about it
especially in the german-speaking
countries part of the problem is that so
much of the conversation about solutions
is bogged down and I think a rather
archaic debate between should we have
capitalism which shall we have socialism
in some of these which is not to say
that socialism in some form might not
have some merits but it's really
somewhat archaic debate that doesn't
graduate with some of the contemporary
challenges especially I might say with
the rise of the Internet and different
forms of the way trust legitimacy the
participation occur it's more than a
state centric answer that we need and
part of my problem is that the market
state binary has just eclipsed our sense
of the cultural memory of the Commons
and it's not seen as having anything
meaningful to say who is the market and
the state is the only significant
systems of governance or dealing with
the problems and the Commons is
relegated to this afterthought if it's
not a little involved at all as some
medieval artifact that we really don't
need to think about or some academic or
intellectual thing and I think part of
my mission in is to try to recover the
Commons from the disuse and the smears
such as the tragedy The Economist most
of you will be familiar with the famous
1960 essay by Garrett Hardin was a
biologist who wrote a very much closer
than essay even today that's that
basically puts forward the fable that if
you have a collective resource of a
pasture and everyone is free to put as
many cattle on
what it will result in the rumination
over exploitation and tragedy of the
Commons
this has been seized upon by politicians
and economists as a truism that
collective resources cannot be
successfully managed and therefore the
best solution is to either to give
private property rights to the resource
so that the market can deal with it more
responsibly because investors presumably
care more about those resources or the
government and we know the problems with
government so goes the conservative
argument so the tragedy just really kind
of been this dark shadow over the
Commons for many years it had this fable
has a lot of embedded political
assumptions and I'd like to quote by
Louis hi who says it's really the
tragedy of unmanaged blazing thinner
problems with resources with easy access
for non communicating self-interested
individuals it's really kind of it's a
libertarian notion of the Commons and
moreover it's focused on the the Commons
as the fun alone resource which is
really just an error because the Commons
is a social system for managing
resources it's not a resource and
Commons has rules and a community and a
system for governance and sanctions
against people who break the rules so he
was really describing what I like to
call the tragedy at the market which is
precisely about overexploited that the
resource and not
external consequences it was Elinor
Ostrom from the Indiana University
political scientist who really helped
debunk the the tragedy the Thomas Isla
super extensive scholarship over decades
she did lots of empirical research in
dozens of countries and helped assemble
an international network of scholars to
study farms farmland fisheries wild gain
forest many other shared resources to
show that indeed you can collectively
manage resources effectively outside of
the market or state well this works he
won the Nobel Prize in 2009 it was the
first time a woman has won that prize
and I always find it interesting to note
that it was in 2009 the year after the
2008 financial crisis when they they
wanted a different type of economist and
in fact she was a political economist
who was studying
cooperation as an economically
consequential form of human behavior
imagine that because the standard
economists can't quite go there so she
was really an outlier but a historic
wanted to use the last three years of
her life man getting the Nobel Prize to
help tirelessly the campaign around the
world to call attention to the no one
excuse me one important lesson is that
the Commons is not just a resource we
need to remember that because the common
usage is often that because off of that
the Commons is an unknown resource like
space or the ocean
Internet and in fact there's none no
social system so it's not quite really
accurate to call those comments even
though we might have moral ethic or
ethical claims and those resources but
the comment is really living
self-organized social system now I want
to take a brief diversion to talk about
enclosures because the language of
enclosure is House help us understand
why the comments are becoming more
visible enclosures are essentially the
course privatization commodification
marketization of our shared wealth when
especially corporations often in
collusion with the state takeover forest
plans farm lands indigenous peoples
territory
that has historically been used as not
just for meeting survival subsistence
needs but as a source of cultural
identity and people would and basically
takes it over and because the resource
can be acquired cheaply for free and
this is causing all sorts of problems
around the world I consider it really
the unacknowledged scandal of
contemporary political economy because
what will happen so things that are free
of subsidized resources and to have the
state cooperate
keeping the commoners at bay from
maintaining control of their resource
and the state generally often declines
to be a conscientious steward of that
shared physical otherwise and we can see
this going on right now with the
International land grab in Africa Asia
itself on South America where it's
essentially a replication of the English
and closure movement where sovereign
investment funds and hedge funds and
others are with in cooperation with
governments and elites in those
countries taking over and privatizing
the countries often respectable to the
purposes and then displacing the
communities that have historically
relied upon them who then have to flee
to the cities creating all sorts of
additional problems and of course the
ecological dimensions of this earth are
huge as well twenty percent of the human
genome is now privately owned through
patents which has a lot of consequences
for what kind of research you can do or
at least people are fearful scientists
are fearful of treading on someone
else's research and there are many many
other enclosures I could go into but I
don't want that to be the focus of this
evening I just want to reference
enclosures as a really pervasive problem
which markets will call it progress in
human development it's in fact often
dispossession and of a very severe sort
and this leads me to bring up the notion
of how we're often hostage to dated
world views the course of our research
this book we came across an example of
my home town
Amherst Massachusetts of a geologist in
1840s who was quite prominent who saw
these footprints in sandstone blocks he
was trying to figure out what they were
and because Darwin hadn't yet published
his work the word dinosaur had not been
invented he could not in because he was
himself within the biblical tradition of
understanding the world you know is
we're going to be about difficult
revelation of science he thought they
were giant birds or something like that
could not imagine deep time before the
creation and the lesson is not that he
was just the right of fool but he was
part of a worldview that could not
conceptualize or perceive in a different
way and I think that that's is more or
less what I would say is going on today
with contemporary market capitalism
where value is metaphysically equated
with price in progress is is equated the
commodification of marketization of
resources that's how we include the
world and you know free trade is really
about it's seen as a way to improve
things but in fact more about extraction
and dispossession of people so there's a
lot of governing mindset that we need to
start to confront in dealing with these
problems and I would just say that
commoning has to be recognized as
generative and value created in its own
right it may not be monetized in the way
market resources are but it's creating
all sorts of value in terms of care work
ecological stewardship intergenerational
connection and you might even say human
and well-being is connected with all
sorts of non market value so this is
really a different worldview and logic
and ethos than that that we've inherited
and that we often continue to propagate
in market culture with the health of the
state the Commons is a way I think to
help deal with some of this mindset
because it's about exploring and
developing these bottom-up practical
experiments for meeting our needs and in
governing ourselves in a way that
doesn't depend directly on the state and
is not ideological totalistic it's very
practically oriented much as I might say
transition to transition is very much in
that spirit it's important to note that
really the Commons is really better
understood as a verb than a now appears
mind that was a prominent historian of
the Congress has said there is no
comments without comment in which means
the social practices and the ethical
norms and the traditions the customary
practices and many other things that go
in to managing the successful commerce
so part of what silk and I have been
attempting to do is to get the
discussion of the Commons from the
framework that is usually applied to it
by economists and social sciences which
is this rational actor economistic
framework or resource management
framework into one that sees
relationality among people among people
and the earth as a primary element of
how the conference functions and this
involves I'd say a mindset mind shift
almost as great as the geologist
and trying to escape the the pervasive
mindset of market capitalism today it's
very difficult in the course of our book
we found ourselves in matched in a lot
of terminologies and concepts that he
said you know things are not quite right
we need to escape from it we needed to
see value as a living creative
co-created phenomenon and so this was
part of the challenge we faced in
writing that book that needs to escape
some of these old languages like the
word resource I just can't use very
easily anymore because a resource
implies something that's different than
me and humans that we can use however we
want especially this property for market
exchange as opposed something that is
part of me in concern to my well-being
so we tried to invent some terms at one
time we use as care well something
that's care wealth is a different
category of something than just a
resource that we use and you'd like to
talk about the nest a tie because and
we're not just atomized individuals with
no connection to each other or no shared
culture we're a nested I or nested and
all sorts of Co activities that inform
who we are
so these are the kinds of concepts that
we've tried to develop in showing that
there's different categories of thought
we need to start to try on and learn and
see how they can describe often practice
of realities that we do all the time but
we don't have a cat
understanding that in a self-aware way
then we can talk about some of these
other terms later and I office problems
with trying to explain how this is an
inner dimension of commenting that many
social scientists don't really care to
go into but how do we kill astray to
help the Commons changes inside I found
this map of the great sandy desert which
is the waiting they've traditionally we
moderns the West would describe it but
the indigenous people see it quite
differently as you can see this
beautiful work of art which is
essentially their math at the same
landscape and it suggests all sorts of
relationality with that landscape and a
richer deeper inner way than science
categories might apply to you
so this is where silver will pick up the
conversation and talk about how we tried
to giving these kinds of talks its kind
of inevitable to learn about what's
going on here and it's a bit hard to
speak to people are so well informed
about what we actually try to find out
and not only in form but doing what
we're trying to describe I think that so
think so if I will say now makes a lot
of sense to you hopefully then we've
done a good job because it's basically
trying to I don't want to say popularize
but to to bring the hearing
consciousness abandoned so what's going
on in the world and
as we started to to think about our
birth with it
these are doing something that many
people - who write this this kind of
book is analyzing the problem looking at
problems what's wrong with with the
market system what's wrong with the
really with relationship to the state
why is mommy liberalism captain of
neoliberalism flawed etcetera etcetera
etcetera and after almost a year and a
half except in a way it just make sense
to do this because well first of all
many other people have written books
made and make this analyzers made better
than me to death to it and secondly many
of these brilliant books end up as a
chapter 10 the answers are yes but there
are solutions solutions there are in the
world and then it kind of gives you a
very rough overview of these solutions
that's what I'm out there and there's
comments out there and various
solidarity economy out there and many
others and if you like okay I know this
already
how does it actually work so we decided
to focus especially in part two of our
book which is chapter four five and six
of how does it actually work and how can
we name it and pulling it in such a way
that speaks to people but actually but
based on this idea David was introducing
to you that is that we we we realized we
were really in a mess of we cannot birth
the use words like work on labor in G as
as we wouldn't know these kinds of
concepts are so tied to wage labor to
the market economy neglecting what we
all know is the case
so we were forced into this inside that
we cannot properly talk about the common
if not based first and foremost on what
we call about to shift without we cannot
do it if not realizing understanding and
giving in language to that idea that we
are interconnected all of us not only as
human beings but also is to add around
us future former generations so what
does it mean to begin accounts discuss
and describe commonly as based on a
process relational ontology ontology
looking at the world that idea of
looking through a window and I'm torch
it gives you a window through which you
look at the world and this makes pretty
clear as much metaphor that the window
you look through defines pretty much the
port of the world you you are able to
see if I look through that window I will
probably see what is it wall if I look
through that window I will see a street
and I haven't started to believe that
toughness is all about sweets are
talking about wall so this is the reason
why we think that we need to stop at the
altar shift the book start actually in
chapter 2 where that story from Alfred
Hitchcock night name and what that idea
if you plan to not with feet and like
truth sense all levels it will have an
impact and effect at a micro level I'll
talk a little bit more about
major truths and through the meso-level
as we can connect as commoners in our
Regents and meal and until tomorrow
better if you start from the very idea
that everything is connected everything
is a flow everything is a process then
we will divide at every level different
types of institutions they'll just come
up with different kinds of item so on
this in a way to say that the question
of scale which it sells of the way of
working in the cat's vertical way of
authority
if being hacked can I say that
so the question of scale can have turned
into how can we actually connect in such
a way that it not allowed to see and an
idea can expand and grow bigger and
bigger and bigger in an organic way and
so how to understand now coming from
that perspective how to describe that
activity that is as old as mankind and
as new earth Wikipedia but a federated
wiki which is the new generation of
after bikini is not in such a way that
the world view is already being
enshrined and there was another person
that's more than from my place McMillon
always but love that happen in those
living in Sussex silt living in plastic
justify like thunder - Lewis work ever
and which which kind of area
architecture software publication
objection architecture
okay Christa phallic Stanley it's a
really interesting guy because he's a
trained mathematician but they're made
of international career in architecture
and he had huge building projects
throughout the world when she can please
and enacted one would play differently
then in normal development of fanatic
architecture protective being down and
why is it that way because he looks at
it as an unfolding whole K&F if I
envision something the whole it's
already there any thing I need to do it
to approach the wall while being in each
step I go the hole so what is my
technique to see that home he comes up
with an idea that he calls a pattern
quoting to understand that a pattern is
not kind of a sequence of saying the
search and although like in a paper wall
it's not a model it's not a recipe
pattern a kind of finished
most famous but not the best book
published in 77 alleges the pattern
language and the other wonderful times
way of building so in these books in the
late seventies he describes a pattern at
the core of the solutions to problems
that secure over and over again I think
that you can apply 1 million times
without ever repeating twice with the
core of successful solutions to problems
that occur over and over again and then
you can apply 1 million times without
ever repeating twice does this make
sense to you can you kind of come up
with an idea as we talk about community
based economy localize the economy or
the comments what would be a problem
that occurs over again any idea what
kind of problems do we have it when you
want to produce together make and use
something together greed
sorry greed great kind of people take
more than like a tribute for instance
right does it sound familiar to people
what has its methodology fix methodology
you have to do it this way the kind of
lack of creativity you're right or ok
get to an orbit to a collective
understanding of the way to proceed what
up
tell laughs the love of directory love
efficient the life of common mission -
lots of energy right so what do we do
that in the market economy how do we fix
that problem control over be control of
a paper right here controller we pay you
can think about controlling of paying as
patterns of dealing with that problem
that there is no intrinsic motivation in
a market economy you can think of this
as a pattern that makes money rule the
world
and our brains and ourselves sale
decision-making is another one I'm sure
you have encountered here and then
problems with the solution making a
group it's a very common thing but it's
a problem that occurs over and over
again and now the idea is you have a
million different concrete method to
deal with that problem but all
successful method methods but somehow
have something else instead let's go for
a few examples you remember any nostril
to first and until now only when to win
a Nobel Prize economy and she was very
much looking at the common a community
based government as connected government
where people make their own decisions
where states should respect the autonomy
have come down to make their own
decisions where they can adapt rules
decide to think without set boundaries
it's at Exeter the desert really
important I mean the us from Charlotte
scholarship has not only enclosures have
made comments visible also for us from
school of scholarship
to make the comments Elizabeth and the
recent decays the part of looking at the
comments and devising patterns in
commoning is obviously looking at the
peer governance of self-organization
what Austin was not so good at are not
so deep into it I would say yes what
does it mean for the way we relate to
each other as human beings
there there might be conflicts and
methods of conflict resolution but there
might be many other ways to prevent
conflicts there might be many other ways
to kind of organize such like our
together in such a way that peer
governance will be a little bit easier
so we want to look at this part of the
story as well and finally commented
commenting is usually coined at an
alternative economy this is also
something that a strong but not
particularly strong and she was she was
even describing kind of within a firm or
an enterprise you would have cooperation
and collective governance which is true
true so but what does it actually mean
to think about the Commons as a
substantially different way of producing
making a music thing and meeting
so we call it provisioning and these
three areas together them to try a
discovering and I was particularly proud
of this is David observable that he
finally came up with our design at the
try at the three spheres etc this was a
few months ago today I think that is a
terribly terribly outdated beaker dismal
today what would the legal framework
look like if we approached the world
from commenting perspectives based on a
relational process ontology what happens
with me if I produce as a commoner think
like a commoner and act like a commoner
it entails of sales transformation which
is certainly not sufficiently addressed
in the book so this is part of that
parents approach is always totally
incomplete it is enough of we make
something that we think makes them to
approach the topic but there can be way
more than what you will be in this part
these are our 28 patterns travel
patterns we've caught through each of
the three areas don't make enough it
doesn't make sense
I'll have it and I will try to give you
an idea of how we proceeded using three
or four examples right so this is the
provisioning part economic part if it is
true that the comment is an alternative
economy so then how would we proceed it
would probably look at what does the
economy today me and what is the basic
the most basic
economy but does the economy mean to you
what is it all about this that's
interesting exchange of of what God sent
us this as the standard neoclassical and
classical definition of economy how
would this exchange of good and sell
goods and services be mediated through
money so does assume at some of you
might remember that ice Totalus 2500
years ago had two terms for economy
right
almost a course and another one was
chromaticity so the part of the economy
very exchange to a conservative through
money was called mystical and this is
what we today called economy there are
the key apart all the other stuff that
helped meeting our need get left out so
ii mean and even standard economic box
the basic definition of economy is
economy is what helps us meeting
people's needs
so this was our basic question what do
communists do to meet their needs how do
they build houses how to produce
vegetables
how do do data create knowledge how to
evade the healthcare etc etc etc patrick
build machines what kind of machines
they use that kind of tool to the user
and so we went through we did a whole
conference on a topic so we went through
these areas how do the contributions we
need financial energy
labor our human energy come together how
do we allocate the so-called resources
and by the way
is where the comment was really powerful
in both so-called natural dealing with
natural resources but also acknowledged
coding design because if I drink this
water you can only have half of it right
now so there are things that become less
as we share them for each one's
individual youth at a certain moment
economists call it rivals but if you
share knowledge about the comments and
then we'll have a discussion I still
have my knowledge you would have more
then you contribute something I will
have more so there are things that
become more when we share them and so
the very basic idea is we cannot use the
same if the Economist was that would
save notes of allocation for two things
that thought there are so different such
as water as note and even though what
happens in the market economy how do we
allocate knowledge we consider it a
service we put prop private property
rights on it and then we traded as a
commodity mediated for money so we were
looking at how to communist do this
differently and I'll give you the very
there's one
a very basic idea of how all the
resources that we need to produce
something come together for tonight what
did you do how did you contribute to
this event that what is the term
lighting lighting a kale met with you
you you just put a part in if they
contribute what you can nobody is forced
to pay a certain amount which means that
you lower their hindrance for people to
join the event right and this is pretty
much what patents are all about so the
basic patterns is that idea of
contributing freely no coercion the way
to pronounce it no conversion but the
methods were doing so can be very very
different so you do it on a sliding
basis other people will do it
differently a lot of people would and
churches very often that you're the head
of something and running around there
are all whole federations are
comfortable in the project you who run
completely contribute their money their
energy or their time on a free basis and
a second one okay how let me go once
more to this this is on top of the
social life because it said a lot about
me respecting your own condition as a
human being me taking account being
concerned about your condition me not
wanting to make you
pending on the availability of money to
join event but at the same time it's a
basic pattern of the economy and so what
you see here is kind of very close to
the provisioning pattern in fact the
three fears are closely interrelated a
parent cannot work alone they are all
interconnected to put it in
two-dimensional thing it's kind of not
getting it right because they are kind
of all interconnected in three three
three or four dimensional I'm pretty
sure you're familiar with the Community
Supported Agriculture aren't you hmm
was not familiar with the Community
Supported Agriculture good so I didn't
know how it works here any okay I had a
discussion about it and press them
because I really don't know how it works
in the UK but I can tell you how it
works in never form the GDL right at the
border so I can show you my knowledge
about my community supported agriculture
and past and most of them in Germany
which by the way go in number the first
thing they do is before producing before
even producing where they come up with a
budget for the cost of production for
next year right it's that same here okay
and then people will kind of decide
consciously to be members of that
community supported agriculture right
and then I didn't know how it is here
but in Germany we basically say this is
what we need for the production of next
year please contribute and then we do
bidding kind of bidding rounds so you
first rather to say each month I am
billion able to
50 euro and I will sum it all up and we
realized at the end of the day we have
5000 euro less than we need but can we
do a second one okay I will go up to 55
but then usually they have a range of
5200 according to people needs and
capacities contributions and this is why
I think the work we have done might be
interesting for people participating in
this kind of experiences because why is
it so important to help people freely
freely contributing not to repeat the
pattern of who has money control who
have not count right
so how does the story go on with the
Community Supported Agriculture so it's
interesting to see how in Germany
community supported agriculture to make
sure that people can contribute freely
most of them we find a minimum
contribution that's true and then what
happens next everybody contributes
before production and then what happens
next
so we'll produce potatoes onions
tomatoes whatever right
whether it's great super conditions yeah
loads of tomatoes you can bring your
friends along and pick whatever you want
it's possible but if as
country in our place last year we had a
tremendous really horrific drought and
actually I'm I'm used to think in these
terms in terms of a different kind of
economy of radically different patterns
about the Community Supported
Agriculture and even I was disappointed
when I got nice chair because you don't
get a commodity anymore
you couldn't say but I contributed I
paid so I need mother
I need cucumbers yeah no you came but
because there were no conditions for
producing them what does it mean that I
don't get it it means oh I don't have
this lightly it means that we share the
risk of production so the basic pattern
is we share the risk of production right
it also means that we practice not
direct reciprocity with the producers
and a gentle reciprocity we agree that
the farmer cannot come up with something
that on this condition is impossible to
produce and we all came at that we
accepted the basis of a social agreement
although another pattern you can apply
it in the community supported
agriculture in whatever other context if
contributing and sharing what becomes
more as we share it generally as I said
share waters different from sharing
knowledge so why would we should we put
a cap on sharing knowledge there's no
need for it doing this if you think
about it disrupts the way the current
economy is going up I once gave you
talking in Bavaria and Munich and have a
lot of people from the car producing
industry in there and they do know that
97% of producing a car that value this
that has been produced for a car if some
ideas and design that is things that
could have more as we share them not
only 3% of it is really material stuff
so what would it mean if you would if it
really freely shared software code and
design as calmness to and this is why we
invite all those people engaged in
enacting an alternative economy to
reflect on their governance otherwise we
might not be able to keep comments and
commerce distinct there's very awesome
an assumption that the Commons means
everything without money everything
without to market everything will come
to state there people who think very
radically radically about it but
actually the to grower the comments and
here and now means to grow the comments
in the context of
market state system that is we need to
consciously come up with designing and
envisioning other parents of doing
making producing thinking and talking
while setting the boundaries to the
market of the state so I have a few more
slides before we conclude our talk in
which we try to explain how this general
scheme of how Commons works at a micro
level among ourselves has implications
for the political economy at large
levels we
I haven't sorry I have to quickly change
to a different slide
Oh
we frequently get the question well how
does the comment scale because it were
accustomed to thinking of the Commons is
a very small small system in how can we
get it bigger how can its influence be
greater so that we can build what we
call the commons verse with a larger
universe of projects and we have a
certain immersion to the word scale
because it tends to imply higher
hierarchical centralized systems which
are managed from the top and are more
prone to corruption and control of
politics than something that's
distributed and more easily accessible
to people and more integrated with their
local circumstances so we think the idea
that the Commons can smell the less have
greater influence and expand is less
about scaling than emulating federated
so that people can not replicate in an
exact way but emulate a commons in its
patterns for their own circumstances in
an active themselves it's not a boot
print and then nonetheless venerate
among each other so there could be cool
learning and an advancement of the
general ideas of norms at the Commons
first going forward it's also true that
developing appropriate infrastructure's
for comedy can greatly facilitate in
expanded comedy a massage for example in
the Barcelona Catalonia region how we
weeping at this alternative Wi-Fi system
is a massive infrastructure for
commenting of the internet access which
is designed in a different way than top
of the general telephone or cable
systems do and so having infrastructures
that are
the pelvic celery has expanded com2 yeah
there's a role for what we call commons
of public partnerships where the state
I'd say most fruitfully at municipal and
city levels can enter into partnerships
in which they enable commenting rather
than being a bureaucracy with command
and control but provide perhaps the
legal authorizations the technical
support financial assistance and
financing for comedy to occur these are
all ways in which we can build the time
in the first overtime and I think one of
the guiding principles for this is again
not having the market state be these
joint Leviathans who are controlling
everything but realize that the next big
thing is going to be a lot of small
things much as the Internet is a lot of
many different pieces loosely joined
that nonetheless collectively create
really gushers of creativity and
transformation so I think this is a
principle by which a lot of Commons will
be joined together and we can't ignore
obviously the role of state power and
how this happens I think this is one of
the more difficult and complex areas
because the state does have considerable
resources in coercive power and many
people are oriented to the state and
policy as the primary or something only
vehicles for a TV chain but I'm
reassured by hanukkah rents comment that
power springs up between people when
they act together vanish the moment
Spurs so the very act of coming together
as condors in a cultural and social way
is a you'd say it might say pro no
political act because it's asserting
one's own sovereign needs and controls
sovereign needs and trying to control it
among oneself in a wave of the state of
the market are often interested often
interested in doing so there there's a
political dimension to this and
especially as commenting gets bigger and
starts to bump up against the received
ways by which the market state does
things along the conversation but it's
something we do need to take seriously
so with that we'd like to open this up
to a larger conversation and invite some
questions from all of you and agreed to


## Keywords:
