---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E-qnXNUSUMA
---

# Video
The Nature of Order in Game Narrative
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E-qnXNUSUMA)

## Transcript:

all right
oh gee DC at the narrative summit is the
best part of the GDC and the GDC is the
best part of the year I'm so excited to
be here my 23rd GDC okay so today I was
going to give a talk about the nature of
order in game narrative and to
understand what that means I need to
take you into the future five years
forward ten years forward no to the year
2500 alright we're gonna go to the year
2500 and we're gonna look back we're
gonna look way way back all the way to
the 20th century and I'll ask you the
question who will be remembered from the
20th century in the year 2500 I'm going
to make the argument that the two people
who will be most remembered from the
20th century in the year 2500 first will
be Albert Einstein who redefined the way
we think about the relationship between
space and time and the second person
will be most remembered will be
Christopher Alexander who redefines how
we think about the relationship between
space and mind now I know a lot of
people are thinking shel what are you
talking about how can it be that's one
of the most remembered people is someone
who I've never even heard of and I say
well it's not uncommon right like look
at all of these people none of them were
appreciated when they were alive all of
them died in obscurity many of them in
poverty so why would we think that there
aren't people among us now who are going
to be celebrated long after us because
we're unable to appreciate the gifts
that they brought us while they were
here and I think that Christopher
Alexander is
of those people the first time I found
out about Christopher Alexander was when
I was working at Disney as you can
imagine Disney Imagineering has a
fabulous library called the IRC and I
made it very much my habit to go to the
IRC all the time every Monday I would go
and take out a new book I would always
just get some new book and one time I
happened to see this weird little book
on a shelf
the timeless way of building and I
thought I wonder what that means I don't
understand what that is and I opened it
up to a random page and I find these
words each one of us has somewhere in
his heart the dream to make a living
world a universe and I thought yes yes
yes yes yes exactly right yes this and
nothing but this right and so I eagerly
took this book home to see what it was
and started reading it and so I'll read
you from a little of it right now
there is one timeless way of building it
is thousands of years old and the same
today as it has always been the great
traditional buildings of the past the
villages and tents and temples in which
man feels at home have always been made
by people who were very close to the
center of this way it is not possible to
make great buildings or great towns
beautiful places places where you feel
yourself places where you feel alive
except by following this way and as you
will see this way will lead anyone who
looks for it to buildings which are
themselves as ancient in their form as
the trees and hills and as our faces are
it is so powerful and fundamental that
with its help you can make any building
in the world as beautiful as any place
that you have ever seen so that's a
powerful claim and so how do we get
there what is the timeless way of
building well Alexander's idea is that
the way that we look at space the wisest
way to look at it is with our hearts and
the idea being that things that are
wonderful and beautiful be they places
or spaces or objects or experiences they
have certain wonderful feelings and he
refers to the quality of these things
that are good and right and just you
know it this is how things should be he
refers to this quality as the quality
without a name now the quality may not
have a name but it does have certain
aspects so let's talk about the aspects
that he that he says this quality has so
he talks about things and places that
feel right as feeling alive and having a
living quality to them now I know I
experienced this one I played Ultima
Online I played that game quite a bit in
the place I used to hang out was the
town of you you was just kind of a small
town kind of in the north and you see
there's a map of the town there from
above you can see up there there's a
there's a castle up there and there's
there's a town center and there's some
things out on an island there's a bunch
of things there but in truth there were
only a small fraction of this place felt
alive I'll show you where those yellow
lines anything on those yellow lines
felt alive everything else felt dead and
useless okay
now you see that part where there's sort
of a little lumpy star at the top that
was where the bank was that was where
you stored all your objects you had to
store your objects there and you see
that big fan of yellow lines at the top
that was where the monsters were you
would go up and fight monsters and then
you would return back to this little
town and put things in the bank so there
was this constant flow of people back
and forth now what about those other two
lines that ones to the right that went
to a teleport gate which of course could
take you anywhere in the world which was
really useful and
the line going down south was for people
who wanted to take the long walk and go
and visit other towns no one ever went
anywhere else no one went to the town
square no one went to the island no one
went to the other places but those this
little network of things felt totally
alive and most particularly that
Junction that kind of southern Junction
when those lines came together if you
wanted to just hang out and see people
come and go and know what was going on
you would hang out there and it felt
wonderful and it felt alive so another
property that he talks about is things
feeling whole apologize for the scene
down the middle here I scan this right
out of the book places that's so there
are sometimes places that feel whole
they feel like they don't need anything
else they have everything that they need
other times things feel comfortable and
I like the way Alexander talks about the
the idea of comfort the word comfortable
is more profound than people usually
realize the mystery of genuine comfort
goes far beyond the simple idea that the
word first seems to mean places which
are comfortable are comfortable because
they have no inner contradictions
because there is no little restlessness
disturbing them imagine yourself on a
winter afternoon with a pot of tea a
book a reading lights and two or three
large pillows to lean back against now
make yourself comfortable
not in some way which you can show to
other people and say how much you like
it I mean so that you really like it for
yourself you put the tea where you can
reach it but in a place where you can't
possibly knock it over
you pull the light down to shine on the
book but not too brightly and so that
you can't see the naked bulb you put the
cushions behind you and place them
carefully one by one just where you want
them to support your back your neck your
arm so that you are supported just
comfortably just as you want to sip your
tea and read and dream when you take the
trouble to do all that and you do it
carefully with much attention then it
may begin to have the quality which has
no name so he also talks about
feeling free so that they could be
anything that they wanted to but at the
same time these things have a feeling of
exactness that they are just so that if
you change them even just a little bit
that might ruin them they're also
egoless they're not about someone
showing off they're not about someone
saying how look how amazing I am they
just are for themselves and for the
people who use them and then very
importantly he talks about them having
an eternal quality and I really liked
the way that he describes this I once
saw a simple fish pond in a Japanese
village which was perhaps eternal a
farmer made it for his farm the pond was
a simple rectangle about six feet wide
and 8 feet long opening off a little
irrigation stream at the end a bush of
flowers hung over the water at the other
end under the water was a circle of wood
it stopped perhaps 12 inches below the
surface of the water in the pond were
eight great ancient carp each maybe 18
inches long orange gold purple and black
the oldest one had been there 80 years
the eight fish swam slowly slowly in
circles often within the wooden circle
the whole world was within that pond
every day the farmer sat by it for a few
minutes I was there only one day and I
sat by it all afternoon even now I
cannot think of it without tears those
ancient fish had been swimming slowly in
that pond for 80 years it was so true to
the nature of the fish and the flowers
and the water and the farmers that it
had sustained itself for all that time
endlessly repeating always different
there is no degree of wholeness or
reality which can be reached beyond that
simple pond and of course we all want to
make things that last things that last
are the things that are good and have
the right qualities
so how do we get to all of these
qualities and that's what the timeless
way book is about and the timeless way
is a simple idea already all you do is
you do what feels right and you test it
and you change it until all imperfection
is gone so here's an example where he
talks about building a lab suppose you
have built a small laboratory building
it has a kitchen a library for labs and
a main entrance you want to add a fifth
laboratory to it because you need more
space don't look for the best place
right away
first look at the existing building and
see what's wrong with it
there is a path where tin cans collect a
tree which is a beautiful tree but
somehow no one uses it one of the four
labs is always empty
there's nothing obviously wrong with it
but somehow no one ever goes there the
main entrance has no places to sit
comfortably the earth around one corner
of the building is being eroded now look
at all these things which are wrong and
build the fifth lab in such a way that
it takes care of all these problems and
also does for itself what it will have
to do right so what he's really seeing
here the fundamental idea is this is
playtesting and agile development one of
the things Alexander's famous for he
often builds campuses college campuses
and the thing and we've all seen
situations like this on campuses right
the architect did not understand where
people really wanted to go when they
built this and so Alexander's method was
now I'm not going to lay down sidewalks
I'm just going to leave it all grass and
I will see I'll come back two years
later I'll see where everyone did walk
and then I'll pave that right and that's
the notion of the timeless way of
building you you come up with an idea
for what feels right you see how people
use it and then you would just and you
make it you make it work part of what he
recommends for example it sounds sort of
crazy but building buildings out of
cardboard
doesn't sound crazy to Sean Patton but
building actual buildings out of
cardboard so partly so that you can see
where the Sun is going to fall into the
buildings and then once you feel good
about
card Berg one then only then build a
real building so there's a companion
volume with the timeless way of building
which is much better known it's a book
called the pattern language because
after having established the right
process for creating living places
Alexander got together with a bunch of
people and said all right let's talk
about let's see if we can enumerate the
architectural patterns that actually
feel alive and feel like they have these
qualities so how many of these are there
there 10 are there 15 know there's 253
and I've enumerated them all here for
you we won't have time to go through
them all but we'll talk about some of
them so he starts out with big patterns
like pattern 4 is agricultural valleys
right that we need those in order to
live in a healthy society a mosaic of
subcultures so talking about the way
different things interconnect within a
city neighborhoods having boundaries
being an important pattern that
neighborhoods that just blend flow into
each other with no boundary or they have
that's a certain problem then the
patterns start to get a little more
intimate pattern 68 connected play there
needs to be way for kids to get together
to play I like his comment here if
children don't play enough with other
children during the first five years of
life there was a great chance that they
will have some kind of mental illness
later in their lives and what better
cure for that than pattern 73 adventure
playground yes that's a good one he
talks about he starts talking about
buildings I like this idea courtyards
which live and I love his counter
example here the courtyards built in
modern buildings are very often dead
they are intended to be private open
spaces for people to use but they end up
unused full of gravel and abstract
sculptures but then he gives examples of
courtyards that feel really alive and he
doesn't analysis of what is it and he
points out it's not money it's not that
these are expensive places but it has to
do with the way people flow through them
the views in and out of them is it
comfortable to to sit there and to be
there is this a nexus of where there are
things to
are their natural elements as well as
man-made elements here here's a pattern
that should be near and dear to the
heart of any a game designer paths and
goals and you'll you'll see he has this
little fountain when you're talking
about paths that seems strange but what
he points out is that it is a bad path
that doesn't give you a goal that you're
moving toward and that good path design
has a series of little landmarks where
you're looking forward to getting to
this one and then getting to that one
and getting to the next one because
that's the nature of walking as he says
the process of walking is far more
subtle then one might imagine and of
course we do this in games all the time
but why not do this in the real world
light on two sides of every room it's
just something that we feel better about
another one ceiling height variety when
all ceilings are the same height it has
a bad feeling for us when they change it
has a good feeling and then finally he
wraps it up on page 1064 with pattern
253 the most infinite the most intimate
of all things from your life so this
book was very influential it caused a
big stir in the architecture world some
people like that some people didn't like
it but many people outside the
architectural world were influenced by
it if you've ever heard of the idea of
software design patterns the people who
started that movement were very much
influenced by Alexander's book a pattern
language and I have to say I don't think
I would have ridden art of game design
with my lenses approach of a hundred
lenses if I had not read pattern
language it definitely showed me that
that was a good way to do it in fact I
got double benefit because at the time I
was reading pattern language I was
wrestling with how to layout the map for
toontown online and after I read it I'm
like oh okay paths neighborhoods with
boundaries central hubs and like I just
understood how you make a good
neighborhood and I wasn't the only one
will write read pattern language and he
made Sim City very much he talks about
how he was inspired by pattern language
to make Sim City and if you play the
Sims and you use patterns from the book
if you put lights on two sides of a room
the characters are happier he like
programmed the patterns right into the
game
now a lot of people have thread in no
pattern language and that's usually all
most people know about Christopher
Alexander but I contend that that was
far from his greatest work so he did
that stuff back in the 70s and he was
not satisfied with what he found there
he he felt good about these patterns but
he wanted to break it down and get to
something more fundamental and so later
he wrote these other books this series
of four books which are called the
nature of order he wanted to break
things down into more fundamental
components and he wanted to truly
understand the quality that has no name
and in these later books he gets bolder
and he gives it a name and he says that
quality is life and he argues that life
isn't what we think it is we think of
just living things organic things as as
what life is and he argues that life is
something more fundamental to the
universe than that life as we know it
has those properties that's why it
persists that why is why it stays but
that's not the only kind of life in the
universe his big revelation is that what
makes things stay are things that have
centers and that anything that has
structure and persists and stays is a
series of overlapping centers now that's
a deep idea and kind of hard to grasp
and what he does is he breaks it down to
a series of fifteen patterns that create
these centers so he breaks it down to
these fifteen properties and he argues
that anything in the universe that stays
and persists has these fifteen
properties every building every tool we
create but also things in nature living
things have these properties but also
other things atoms and molecules all
have these properties the structure of
galaxies and the structure of star
systems has these properties everything
everything everything has these
properties and not to get too weird
about it but he kind of starts to come
to this conclusion that these properties
are more fundamental than the universe
itself because no universe can exist
that doesn't have these properties
so this is a deep idea but we're not
going to dwell on that deep idea what
we're going to do today is we're going
to go through the 15 properties and
we're going to look at the question of
how can these properties help us when
we're trying to construct game
narratives all right
so the first one is this idea of levels
of scale and what he's talking about is
that great things are not just great at
a single level they're usually great at
multiple levels they have multiple
things interacting like this interesting
kind of architectural porch here that
has beautiful big elements beautiful
medium-sized elements and beautiful tiny
elements and of course levels of scale
like that goes all through nature right
look at lightning bolts they're
incredibly fractal they have the same
structure at the top and then they have
tiny ones and tiny and tiny and tiny and
that's how so many things in nature work
they work nature works at levels of
scale and in terms of creating beautiful
things I often think about what John
hench said he was one of the old
Imagineers and old Disney animators and
he would talk about how anyone can make
something that's beautiful from far away
that's easy to do you can make a big
castle or something that looks beautiful
from far away but so often you get close
and you're like oh is that what it is
and that's part of the reason if you go
to Cinderella Castle at Disney World and
you go as close as you can you will find
there are these beautiful mosaics that
are inlaid over many of the interior
surfaces and no matter how close you get
you see how gorgeous and beautiful they
are and in fact if you look even at the
top a little the little points of the
towers are actually made out of solid
gold because they really were committed
to this notion of making things
beautiful close up and far away now in
games we use levels of scale all the
time because it feels good it feels good
to kind of move from big and into small
and sometimes we use it in ways that are
very very powerful this idea of kind of
comparing levels of scale the game spore
was a symphony of levels of scale and it
was one of the things that was so
exciting and so appealing about it but
you don't need to get into these giant
universe size levels of scale to do
interesting things part of the reason
pac-man worked so well is because it had
good levels of scale you your immediate
goal is get the dots and the dots are
little and then you have this other goal
sometimes to get ghosts and ghosts are
kind of a big deal and eating a ghost is
kind of a big thing and then your bigger
goal is clear a board and that's like a
big part of it if the game didn't have
all three of these levels of scale it
would feel sort of dull if you were just
doing one of those things it would feel
sort of dull but the fact that you have
these goals at three levels makes it
much more interesting and when it comes
to story of course we have some of the
same thing you you have plot and plot is
like a big structure and that's your big
structure for any story you put together
and then medium you have characters
right characters are kind of at the
medium level of narrative design and
then at the small level of of narrative
design you have your fabulous dialogue
right and if all three of these things
are not excellent if like john hence was
talking about you have a beautiful plot
but boring characters and dull dialogue
everything stinks right but if you're
great
at all three of these levels you have
something that's really solid and really
wonderful so the second pattern is the
idea of strong centers now that seems a
little self referential because of the
whole idea is we're defining what
centers are then how is strong Center as
a pattern and what he's just talking
about is that the stronger the centers
are the better things get and I'd like
this example of a plaza here imagine the
plaza without that upmost tower there
like the north atop tower there it would
not be as strong it would not be as
interesting there are different things
that like multiply the the multiple
patterns come together and make centers
much stronger than they then they would
be on their own and of course we see
this all through nature right we see it
on star systems are all about strong
centers you've got these Suns at the
center if you look at you look down at
the microscopic level at the way atoms
are formed like and then the way
molecules come together you'll see again
these really strong centers the nucleus
of each atom we see it in video games
all the time
yeah star castle
those are some strong centers right
there that dude does not want you
knocking on his door man he doesn't but
if you're good you can kind of get in
there get in there get up no come on get
in there yes all right
strong centers that's part of what makes
pub G work right if pub G was just an
island and you ran around like who would
care but what happens is there is a
secret centre and you don't know where
it is and the whole world is shrinking
down to the secret centre and if you're
done near the centre you're gonna die
it's gonna kill you and where is the
centre where is the centre and that's
what everybody wants to know when people
get very emotional about that they end
up having very strong feelings about the
centres and in in pub G but we won't we
won't dwell on that one thing off and
think about is choose-your-own-adventure
type stories and how as a genre of
writing it never really sticks that well
in the literary world every few years
someone will say hey here's some new
choose your own adventures and look how
to be for the thing for kids but if you
like go to Barnes & Noble there's not
like a choose-your-own-adventure section
because it's just not a genre that stays
and I think part of the problem is where
are the strong centers they're just not
here choose-your-own-adventure structure
is a big gangly floppy thing with no
real strong center and that makes it
hard to enjoy so I found again and again
the idea of finding out what are the
centres of my game because now you have
to ask the question if strong centres
are important what are the centres of my
game so we're working on a game at Shell
Games right now all about a virtual
chemistry lab and originally it was
called super common and we started
trying to figure out all right what are
the centres of this we knew that our
central mechanic was realistic
manipulation of laboratory equipment we
knew that that was that was central if
we didn't get that right we were in
trouble this is meant to be an
educational game so it has a
transformational goal of teaching real
lab skills so if we don't get that right
that's a problem so these two things we
know are centres but then this could be
boring right this could end up being
like a really boring thing if we don't
do it right so we knew a central aspect
was that we needed a strong
fantasy and we knew that a lot of people
have a fantasy of I'm the lab genius I'm
the mad scientist in the lab so we
changed it from super chem - now it's
called hollow lab champions right and
it's all about being the greatest lab
worker in the world and we found that
these three things together by focusing
on these is the center and things are
starting to come together with that game
so another pattern pattern number three
property number three is boundaries
boundaries as alexander puts it they
draw attention to the center boundaries
creates sensors and right here you see a
map of a cathedral here and you see how
important the boundaries are in terms of
creating centers here's some boundaries
in nature look at the the here's a
cutaway of us some some wood cells right
nature is all about the boundaries all
living things are made out of cells and
cells have boundaries all over the place
check out this door it's kind of a cool
door looks pretty cool I'd be like yes I
might go in that door how about now Yeah
right look at all those boundaries
boundaries make things important
boundary boundary boundary boundary
you'll find the fancier any picture is
the more boundaries it has on the frame
going around it because there's
something about boundaries that create
strong centers makes things important
now in game design we know all about
boundaries so many games are all about
boundaries and boundary lines and cross
this line and cross that line and and
complete this goal and complete that
goal we're all about boundaries in game
design but what about in our narrative
design are there boundaries there well
they show up in surprising places if you
talk about the hero's journey the
obvious place to show up there is with
thresholds right those moments where you
cross and you can't come back that's
really important if you don't have good
thresholds in your story design then you
don't have good story you've got to have
those clear boundaries and the most
interesting stories are usually the ones
that pit two systems against each other
with conflicting boundaries and you have
to make a choice about which boundaries
you're going to respect and which
boundaries are going to violate because
that ends up being exciting this was
part of the idea and Bioshock with the
little sisters right you've got one
system that says you want to get as many
points as possible well guess what in
order to get as many points as possible
you're going to need to murder
of little girls or you can rescued
little girls but you only get half as
many points so now your normal sense of
decency and its boundaries are put up
against the boundaries of meaning at the
game similarly papers please is a game
that establishes all these rules here's
your job this is what you do you need to
obey the rules in a certain way and then
it puts you in situations where you
yours again your sense of human decency
is like maybe violating the rules is the
right thing in this case so the system
of rules and the system of what's right
come into conflict so I often find that
creating the best most interesting
stories is about boundaries in conflict
with each other
so now a surprising pattern alternating
repetition and you can see it
illustrated here in the classical egg
dark pattern which you can see in
buildings all over the place outside
this is a patterns been around thousands
of years will not go away because we
like alternating repetitions so much but
wait ripple isn't repetition boring well
repetition can be boring when it's just
straight repetition it's boring and bad
and has a bad feeling but when it's
alternating repetition we love it
so consider the checkerboard we don't
have to make checker boards like this we
could have made it a piece of graph
paper but we don't like a piece of graph
paper
we like alternating repetition we could
have made it a rainbow of squares a
bunch of different colors all different
colors no no no
alternating repetition is what we like
as humans and we see this everywhere
everybody knows you know and it when
here is going to know about the flow
channel keeping your game kind of on
that on that wonderful place between
boredom and anxiety in that wonderful
state of flow and you increase your flow
over time but of course we all know
that's not really the right way to do it
that's the right way to do it right you
get a little bored because it's a little
too easy and oh my god it got so hard
and now who I get a little bit of a
break you get a tension and then a
release attention and then a release
that's the pattern that we like and of
course you see this in games like
flaming the flood right you have these
horrible intense experiences on the
islands and now I'm back on the river
and it's a
and I can relax and alright I'm getting
ready I'm relaxed enough it's actually
getting a little boring here on the
river I'm going to go back on the island
and it's going to get exciting again and
even in one of the most classic patterns
of game narrative the string of pearls
or the rivers and lakes approach where
you have a cutscene and a level and a
cutscene and a level and as much as
people sometimes deride that pattern
the reason the pattern doesn't go away
is because it's wonderful alternating
repetition we like to kind of take a
break and sort of see what's going on
and get set up for the next thing and
then get all active and then take a
break right so it's alternating
repetition it feels feels really good
the fifth pattern took me a while to
understand the pattern he calls positive
space and what's weird about it is what
he's saying is that things that are well
designed don't just have a good shape
unto themselves like this here's this
ancient bowl that has kind of a cool
shape but also the negative space around
them also has a good shape so if you
look at the shape around the bowl it
actually is kind of a cool pleasing
shape as a counterexample here's a
here's a sculpture that's just kind of
you know modern sculpture right there
and it's kind of a cool shape by itself
but the space around it doesn't really
have much of a shape and as a result the
thing is just kind of a little bit blad
so we see this spatial in games all the
time right there's a Monument Valley
level right there and you see it's got a
cool shape all by itself but also look
at the negative space around it those
are good interesting shapes but what
does this mean in the world of narrative
what is positive and negative space mean
in narrative and I think I'll sometimes
think it the right way to think about it
is positive space can be dialogue is the
kind of positive space so what is that
negative space then well it's either
silence or someone else's dialogue right
and this is illustrated incredibly well
in oxen-free if people have played this
is is so masterfully created because
like a lot of games you make these
little choices here your different text
choices and lots of games have this but
what's so artfully done in oxen-free
is you don't have to pick one of the
choice
silence is an option and then something
else will happen and so if you want to
you can be silent and then more than
just silence being an option when you
pick these is up to you it's not like
someone talks and then they wait like
normal games in oxen-free that the
dialogue options come up while someone
else is talking and you can interrupt
them at any time and sometimes the
interrupting them is fine and the right
thing to do sometimes it's incredibly
insulting and other times saying
anything at all is a bad idea because
someone is saying something very
important and you want to say something
but actually restraining yourself and
letting the other person talk is the
better choice so it's more natural it's
more like things are in the real world
and again it has this idea of positive
and negative space in dialogue another
patterns the idea of good shape he makes
the simple observation that things that
are well constructed and meet their own
purposes and do so well and and help
everyone out they tend to take on shapes
that are just beautiful by themselves
and so in some ways good shape is kind
of a signifier that yeah you probably
did this right like look at this boat
sail right man that just looks so strong
and so powerful and of course it wasn't
designed to be beautiful it was designed
to maximize its ability to move the boat
now we have good shapes and games all
the time all right there's a little it's
a little bit of Legend of Zelda shape
right there here's one I like your
classic Phoenix right that's kind of a
cool shape on that big boss monster this
I believe is the first boss monster in
the history of gaming is that guy in
Phoenix but sort of what's so cool about
this as a shape it's not just designed
to be pretty it's functional the whole
idea is you're gonna shoot holes and all
that orange mass underneath because
you've got to shoot that purple guy in
the middle and of course he's really
hard to shoot because there's all that
you've got to clear this big tunnel
because there's so much stuff around him
but the secret strategy is that purple
ribbon under him is a rotating ribbon
and you need to shoot holes in that but
what you can do is move over to the side
shoot along the side and like get holes
in the ribbon and then get the ribbon
sit up and then go back to the middle
because the middle is dangerous because
that dude is dropping all these things
on you
so because everything is functional in
the game
like this just this good shape naturally
emerges from it and shapes can be
spatial but when again when you get into
the world of narrative like what is what
are the shapes what do we mean by good
shaped I think sometimes we need to
think of good shape in terms of time
having the right shape of interaction
over time is important one of the things
I I was blown away when I first played
the interactive Walking Dead by a few
different things so traditionally when
we've had an interactive dialogue
moments we put them at important moment
times now of course that means you're
respecting the story first of all
Walking Dead didn't do that Walking Dead
said no the most important thing is
rhythm of interaction is most important
there's a shape of interaction that we
like and we're going to give you
dialogue interactions at that rhythm so
it feels good so it feels natural but
you know like ooh but what if some of
those one of those dialogue things don't
mean anything that's okay a lot of
things we say don't mean anything and
that's okay now the problem is that
creates a bad ambiguity how do I know if
something I said was helpful or not
helpful and these guys had the insight
so when you do something that really
makes a difference this little thing
pops up that so-and-so will remember
that right and personally I feel like
that was a really good shape that kind
of came out of thoughtful design so
here's the surprising pattern local
symmetries this is not an obvious idea
at first we all are always told that
symmetrical things are beautiful and
beauty is symmetry etc etc but look at
this building that's not a very
symmetrical building but then you notice
you know this is this is the Alhambra
here it is full of small symmetries
little symmetrical rectangular spaces
symmetrical rotational spaces it's a
bunch of local symmetries all glued
together and this was I'd never heard
anyone make this observation before that
many great wonderful persistent things
our local symmetries all glued together
the human body is certainly this way our
hands are a local symmetry with each
other but they're not symmetrical with
our feet and it wouldn't be better if
they were right that wouldn't
necessarily be a good thing and
certainly look at our organs inside the
body some of them are symmetrical with
each other others are not
and then they're all kind of glued
together these very different things
with each one having its own symmetry
all kind of stuck together where do we
see this in games well here's a map of
the original Zelda I mean look at that
it's like the map of the Alhambra like
it's there's no overall symmetry because
overall symmetry isn't helpful but look
at all the local symmetries look in all
the little local symmetries all glued
together now when it comes to stories I
am less clear at what relevance this has
I'm a little stumped by this honestly I
have an instinct that it has something
to do with characters when I see a bunch
of characters that are all different
from each other and they're all kind of
brought together like this feels like
local symmetries to me but I feel like
there's something deeper with local
symmetries in narrative that I don't
understand yet but let's press on
pattern eight deep interlock and
actually as the way Alexander puts it
ambiguity and deep interlock and
normally we think of ambiguity as bad
but what he's talking about is an
ambiguity where you have two things
interacting with each other in such a
powerful way that it's hard to give
attribution to either one of them so
here's some Inca stone carving where
these stones just fit together perfectly
and beautifully and which one defines
the space over the other I mean this is
the idea of the dovetail joint right
neither one is in charge it's only
because they are both perfectly deeply
interlocked that you have something
that's strong and solid we see this in
games certainly the game of Go is all
about deep interlock there's nothing to
push against in the game except the
other player and everything that one
player does is defined by pushing
against the other player and each game
ends up being its own kind of
identity the way things are pushed
together
Terrence Lee talks about the idea of two
kinds of stories in every game that
there is the explicit story which is the
one the designers trying to tell but
then there is the player story the story
of like what the player is experiencing
the story that's happening to them and
when those line up it feels great and
when those don't line up gets super bad
like maybe you've got a situation where
the you as the designer you gave a
sidekick to the character and you're
like yeah I've got this awesome sidekick
and I think it's great and I think it's
funny and the players like I hate this
guy I totally hate this sidekick and
then you create a situation where oh no
the sidekick fell in a well you've got
to help out the sidekick and the player
might be like no screw that
right I'm so glad that guy fell in a
well do I really have to rescue that guy
I really don't want to that's terrible
that means everything's falling apart in
your story because you don't have good
deep interlock between the players story
and the explicit story and this is one
of the one of the first games I
experienced it did this really well was
planetfall you know the old Steve
maretskiy game here he creates this
beautiful sidekick this this character
named Floyd who's funny and cute and he
just can't help but be super entertained
by by Floyd and so as a result when
horrible things happen to Floyd you're
like no he's like it's a big deal and
I've talked to many people where this
was the first time they cried during a
game was in planetfall because these
things were just so well aligned yes so
there's your DP under Loxy between yeah
okay you got it all right
next pattern is contrast okay I love
this this bowl and Alexander has a
picture of this bowl in his book and he
he points out how like the two opposites
really make this one unity they really
bring things together and contrast
course does make things stronger but
often in surprising ways zippy the
pinhead via bill Griffith once had a
long expostulation about the
sure of comedy where he points out that
all comedy is the unity of opposites
I'll let you think about that for a
minute right there
the unity of opposites but it's true all
comedy is the unity of opposites like
this sign right it's funny because these
two things should not be together or I
saw this sign in Newcastle right and
that's how Comedy Works and comedy is
really important in our stories right
and so understanding how to get that
contrast how to get the two opposites
together and bring them together in a
surprising way is important and this
brings me to undertale which of course
has a lot of really wonderful funny
moments in it but at the same time it
has a lot of really serious moments in
it so it's a weird game because it's
very silly and very serious but now I
ask you the question would undertale be
more serious if you took the funny parts
out and would it be funnier if you took
the serious parts out the answer in both
cases I think is a no the serious parts
make the funny parts funny and the funny
parts make the serious parts more
serious that is the magic of contrast it
requires a certain bravery to use it but
when you do it can be used to really
really great effect so the next one is
gradients or graded variation and this
is just an observation that when things
change gradually that is sometimes
beautiful we talked about boundaries
when things change suddenly but also a
gradual change can be a beautiful thing
and I had to wrack my brain a bit to
think about gradual changes in games
because we often have very punctuated
changes in games gradually gradual
changes are often more hidden and subtle
but one that I thought of that I'm a
recent game Jason rorrer's new game one
our one life I know if people are
familiar with this game but
the idea is that you log into this world
and you are a baby you come into the
world as a baby and you're going to live
one hour but in that one hour you're
gonna go from a baby to a very old
person and at the end of that hour
you're going to die but it's a
persistent world and so the changes that
you make will be permanent and when you
log in in the future as a new person
generations down the road you will have
a mother and father in the game and the
the world will be persistent and part of
the power of the game is that gradual
change over the course of of an hour so
finding those right gradual changes can
be important pattern 11 is very counter
intuitive the idea of roughness now
normally we think of roughness as a bad
thing we want to smooth things out we
want to sand things we want to polish
things we want to take away all
roughness but what he points out is that
roughness often is part of what makes
things great and real I loved his
picture of this house which in a lot of
ways seems kind of like an atrocity
right the the lines don't line up right
it's very inconsistent but there's a
very human peaceful quality about it one
example I think about a lot is pure
vanilla extract if you go to the grocery
store you have a choice you can buy pure
vanilla extract or for a dollar less
imitation vanilla flavor now what's the
difference between these things you
think oh well one comes from real
vanilla the other I don't know comes
from some lab whatever it's something
that that smells like vanilla but is in
no way vanilla and that is completely
wrong in truth both of them contain the
same thing a bunch of vanillin molecule
c8 h 803 suspended in an alcohol
solution that's what both of these are
the only difference is where it comes
from the pure vanilla extract comes from
the vanilla plant the imitation vanilla
flavor comes from a process of pouring
acid on
paper pulp that just happens to create
this same molecule but you're getting
exactly the same thing well not exactly
the same thing because the imitation
stuff is actually pure it's nothing but
alcohol and vanilla molecule whereas the
pure vanilla extract is not pure it is
all this extra junk that is not vanilla
that comes from the vanilla plant but is
not the thing that smells like vanilla
but the reason we favor that one is
because of all that junk we like all
that weird rough junk it makes
everything feel broader and more
interesting and more complex right so
this is a case where purity actually
gets you in trouble
purity isn't as good roughness ends up
being better who for example would pay
to go and see the perfectly straight
Tower of Pisa nobody would do that right
it's it's the roughness that makes it
interesting I once heard Peter Milano
talk about the idea that the greatest
difficulty for game artists is dirt that
getting things to look dirty is so hard
and and it's true and it's important to
make things look dirty because they give
things a roughness in in sports any ball
that you have in a sporting game they're
not perfectly smooth if they're ever
touched by human hands they're not
perfectly smooth it's the roughness that
defines them the roughness is how we
interact with them think of a game like
monopoly
what is monopoly it's a landlord
simulator you're gonna be a landlord and
do Landlord things okay awesome what are
the avatars gonna be alright they're
gonna be this what should shouldn't they
be that little monopoly dude with the
mustache in six different colors nope
there's gonna be a hat and a battleship
and a shoe and what are you doing what
kind of screwed up game design is this
right and I often think of what Goethe
said all miracle work must as a whole be
perfectly intelligible but in some
particulars a little unintelligible
right I'm sure he was thinking about
monopoly when
he wrote that if minecraft was all
beautiful polished environments would it
be better no no the roughness is
important okay pattern twelve echoes
echoes is an interesting idea I love
this little this little Hut I think it's
in Turkey here this little house and you
see these sort of echoes of design look
at how the roof caps echo each other
even though they're a little different
from each other
and then even the doorway has a very
similar shape and angle to the roof
peaks and it kind of connects everything
together so Alexander often talked about
making sure the angles of different
things are connected and that helps
bring an overall connectedness his
counterexample is this interesting
building actually created by
Michelangelo but when you look at this
building it's not really great like
nothing connects to anything else very
well the angles are all different the
shapes are all different it's a little
bit of a hodgepodge there's a big
overall symmetry for no good reason and
then there's these local symmetries but
nothing connects and it just doesn't it
doesn't feel so great so in games we do
this all the time we did this in our
water bears VR game we'd had this
initial tablet based game called water
bears which was all about bringing
colored water to these cute little water
bears and we've made a VR version and we
said wow this is so relaxing to play
this
let's since it's a relaxing game let's
put it in a relaxing setting so we put
it in this this kind of Caribbean
setting I was very relaxing it kind of
echoes the nature of the game play a
less relaxing game night in the woods
right is also full of echoes this is a
game that is all about growing up moving
from the world of childhood to the world
of adulthood and how you have to give
things up in order to do that and so in
in doing so they made the characters all
very cartoony childlike characters but
they put them in very adult situations
thus kind of echoing the whole theme and
sort of playing up that contrast another
great example of echoes I like is cup
head cup head even though it's you know
maybe not the deepest game narrative and
world it has a really nice connection
between what you do in the game and the
overall story so really what's cuphead
about this is a game about jumping into
danger right so our story is that these
two cup headed brothers they were
gambling with the devil they knew it was
dangerous right but they jumped right in
and they gambled with the devil they
lost so they lost their souls so what's
the solution the devil says well I've
got a bunch of people I need you to
collect contracts from it's gonna be
super dangerous and they're like alright
let's go do it and so they go and jump
into danger here's here's an example of
some danger jumping here right so this
game is so freaking hard you see that
little pink thing that's actually kind
of important boink jumping on those pink
things so those pink things are what's
in the game it's called a peri move
those pink things will kill you if you
just jump on them they'll and you'll
just die but if you time it just right
right here you can take a look here some
more of them if you time it just right
and you hit the jump button a second
time while you're in the air your
character spins a little bit turns pink
and then we'll hit the pink thing in and
like build up all these bonus attacks
that you can use later if this was me
doing this scene I would have died six
times by now because I would have I
would hit the parry button at the wrong
time and hit the ghosts and I'd be dead
so you got a story all about characters
who jump into danger and then you have a
central mechanic that is about literally
jumping into danger and you can argue
that these guys took this nature of
echoes a little too far because you know
there they are the moldenhauer brothers
you know two brothers who who were kind
of the who initiated this game here and
there's there's Maya their cousin kind
of talking about it they jumped in on a
thing they did not know what they were
doing right I mean here's the initial
frame from the cuphead trailer you'll
notice coming 2015 right you had a game
I mean and this is the second one the
original trailer said coming 2014 right
so this game was three years late and
they never would have been able to do it
if they hadn't done it
deal with Microsoft's right in order to
do it and I don't want to say
Microsoft's like the devil but like it's
possible to take the Ecco thing a little
too far it's all I'm saying right there
all right three more patterns here one
of them is the void and this is a little
bit of a strange pattern a void where
nothing is there this picture is a
picture actually from my house when my
wife and I moved into the house we live
in about 15 years ago we picked it up
but I don't know target or Marshalls or
something or like oh this looks kind of
cool and my fascination with this
picture is just never-ending even though
what is it it's just some leaves but
what gets me is that black square right
close one eye and put a finger up and
cover the black square and you'll see
this is a completely unremarkable
picture and then you take that finger
away and you're like black square what
are you doing there why are you there
and this void pattern shows up in lots
of places every Church has the void
pattern inside it because that's where
important things happen the human heart
what does it have a lot of complex
structure in there no empty it's empty
inside there right the most important
things are empty inside and part of the
reason that's important is because when
you answer an empty space suddenly you
become very important and everything you
do becomes very important we see this in
the hero's journey there's always that
moment of entering the cave right the
cave is this kind of empty space or
something very important is going to
happen we see in video games all the
time like a boss monster battle never
happens in a linen closet it always
happens when you come into a big empty
space and you're like oh I think things
are going to happen right now I see a
bunch of local symmetries in an empty
space and I think oh yeah oh yeah
something's going to happen right now
so the void is very important and of
course think about the void in terms of
storytelling
if we talk about positive and negative
space being dialogue and silence the use
of silence is often very very powerful
that way and and there many games I
think undertale is a great example it
off has have found clever ways to sort
of use silence in order to deliver the
power the fourteenth pattern is
simplicity and inner calm the idea being
that when everything unassessed away and
you only have what's needed there is a
certain calm quiet quality because
nothing else is needed everything is
here
as simple as it can be and there's a
perfect quality about it these these
pillars holding up a shrine in a
Japanese shrine or one of Alexander's
examples and he points out that these
things are not trying to be what they
are they're just usually serving an
unusual purpose in the simplest way
possible and that often gives them a
sort of strength and inner calm now
simplicity and complexity we talk about
all the time
in games and it's tricky right because
you hear people say oh I hate that game
it's too complex and you heard people
say I hate that game it's too simple
well well what does that mean somewhere
in the middle is right no we know simple
games are better except when it's the
bad kind of simple what what does that
mean well part of the idea is there are
two kinds of complexity one of them is
innate complexity believe it or not what
you're looking at right there is a
single board game experience someone
took all these board games they made one
set of rules for how you play all of
them in a big connected sequence there
is a lot of innate complexity learning
the rules takes quite some time there as
opposed to a game like go which is a
very complex game but not innately the
complexity is emergent because of the
clever way that the center's and the
patterns push up against each other one
of the best ways to build towards that
kind of simplicity is to give things
multiple purposes again going back to
pac-man because I just love pac-man so
much the dots in pac-man
they seem so simple they just like
they're just dots who cares but when you
count up their purposes there's many of
them first they're your goal eat all the
dots on the level so now my game for
they've established my goal for the game
they give me points and points are my
judgment of how good I am at the game
they create a pleasing sound of progress
Wacka Wacka Wacka every time I eat a dot
no Wacka Wacka when I don't eat dots so
you get this kind of nice feedback loop
of progress this is how I get extra
lives I've got to eat dots to get points
points get me extra lives too so in
order to survive in the game the dots
make me survive and where's the progress
meter I don't need a progress meter the
dots simply at a glance show me my
progress I don't I don't need it they
solved that purpose and then they have a
secret purpose very few people know
about every time you eat a dot in
pac-man it slows you down just a little
bit it kicks you back just a little bit
and that's enough and to make you go
just a little slower down a dot hallway
than an empty hallway and guess what
what speeds of the ghosts go the ghosts
go a little slower than you in an empty
hallway and a little faster than you in
a dot hallway so suddenly you had this
very interesting strategic decision to
make the final pattern is not
separateness okay what does that mean
well he's talking about things being
connected to each other in a fundamental
way I love this picture this picture he
has of a path made of these stones
connected together and of course so many
of the patterns are seen here you see
the stones are connected to the earth
but all the stones are actually the same
they're not different stones they're
just turned at an angle they're all the
same square so you have this perfect
echo along them and then you have
alternating repetition and then you have
a gradient you have everything here
everything is connected and one of my
one of my favorite games in this regard
is brothers a tale of two sons this is
just a gorgeous beautiful game and it's
so clever the idea of it is these two
brothers going into adventure and you're
going to control both of them and you do
one with each one of your hands one hand
controls one brother one hand controls
the other brother and you solve a lot of
interesting
by moving these two brothers together
now of course this works with the human
neurology because one hand is controlled
by one half the brain the other hand is
controlled by the other half of the
brain and the only way they communicate
is up the middle of the little go up the
corpus callosum there and so it's almost
like the two halves of the brain which
sort of behave like siblings now
actually get to be siblings in the game
and then now I'm going to give a spoiler
cover your ears and sing if you if you
really don't want to know something bad
happens to one of the brothers and
you'll never feel so alone in your life
when suddenly that brother is gone
because half of your brain is now unable
to participate in the game and then
cleverly what happens next in the game
is so beautiful that I think it will
make anyone cry and so it's a great
example of deep interlock between the
player story and the game store story
but it takes it farther it's not just
the the explicit story and the game's
story but it goes actually into the
psychology and even the neurology of the
player and there's this beautiful
connectedness and non-separateness that
happens between all three of these
things and for me this is why games that
aren't just fun but games that actually
change us as people games that educate
games that transform are so important
because great games they change us and
they make us better at connecting with
each other and they make us better
connect and connecting with the entire
world which is kind of the ultimate in
non-separateness so there's the patterns
there's a fifteen patterns we've only
really scratched the surface talking
about them I hope you find some utility
in thinking about them I hope you find
them useful and of course we've only
scratched the surface of the works of
Christopher Alexander so I hope you'll
check out some of his works there's so
much to learn about there and now at the
beginning I said that even though
Alexander's obscure now that he would be
famous in the future I'd like to make a
prediction about how that will happen I
think the way it will happen is through
AI because a eyes are designed to make
the world a better place and a is love
of patterns now very soon all of you
will be working closely with a is
because a is are going to be such an
important part of game narrative in the
near future and so don't be too
surprised when a few years from now when
you're training up some AI to kind of be
a character in one of your games
the ki it's like hey human have you
noticed these 15 patterns that make
everything better and you can be like
yeah robot I know that's how we made you
thanks



## Keywords:
