---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9SV5NJyKZY0
---

# Video
The Internationalist: Issue #70 | Vincent Bevins
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9SV5NJyKZY0)

## Transcript:

hi everyone welcome to another edition
of the internationalist I'm Tanya and
today I will be speaking to the
acclaimed journalist and writer wincon
bevans who's most notable for his 2020
book the jakata method and he's also
contri uted to Publications such as FIA
de Salo Pao the Atlantic the guardian
among others thank you so much for
joining us today Vincent yeah thank you
for having
me our conversation today revolves
around uh Vincent's second book which
released in October of last year called
if we burn the mass protest decade and
the missing Revolution where he details
and examines protests including the Arab
Spring and the uprisings in turkey and
Hong Kong and how these mov movements
shaped and continue to shape our recent
times so to begin our discussion today
Vincent I wanted to first ask you the
question that immediately jumped at me
as I read your book which is how social
media platforms like Facebook and
Twitter during the times of mass
protests be it in Brazil or turkey have
undoubtedly provided avenues for citizen
journalism and amplification of
Grassroots movements I mean we saw that
in India when the farmers movement
happened in 2021 and in your opinion um
how can journalism navigate this
landscape effectively to harness the
benefits of social media activism while
mitigating the risks associated with
misinformation and
sensationalism yeah thanks so much yeah
I think that social media undoubtedly
played a role in the mass protest of the
2010s that my book analyzes and so in my
book in order to be included in the the
history that I build um Mass protest
must have gotten so big as to overthrow
or fundamentally destabilize an existing
government and anytime that this happens
I think you have to have multiple
causality there's always three four five
six things behind um that kind of
protest um explosion and I think social
media is one of the things that gets you
over the line in many of the cases
probably in all the cases one of the the
multiple causes and this was seen as a
really great thing uh early in the 2010s
especially by people like me in Western
media um as the decade wore on it became
more clear how um this could be sort of
a poison chalice how how social media
makes some things possible but makes
other things possible too um that are
not so positive for Progressive um
political movements so to answer your
question more directly I'm personally
not convinced that social media activism
actually exists um and that might but at
the same
time so social media is a very important
tool for activists and everybody else to
use and that might seem like a um a
small distinction and and it is a small
distinction but I think it ends up being
quite important because I think a lot of
people in the 2010 perhaps me
included made the mistake of confusing
visibility With Victory um the idea held
somehow you know deep in the
subconscious was if everybody sees what
we're doing and is convinced that it's
good that must somehow help um and it
can but it must not I mean there's you
can imagine cases where the entire world
sees that something very bad is
happening disagrees with it you get
maximum awareness but without any
outcome and I think um Gau is a is a
pretty decent um uh example of this
Dynamic so what I would say is that
social media is a huge part of what
everybody does now not only journalist
not only activists but everybody for
better or worse I think often For Worse
we're kind of living on social media so
what emerges out of this decade as a set
of sort of lessons to to get back to
what you're actually asking is one do
not confuse visibility With Victory two
be very aware of the ways that social
media is constituted and this I think
they're very imperfect and I hopefully
we don't have to accept this particular
type of constitution for a long time but
they are set up to keep people as
engaged for as long as possible so that
they can be shown advertisements and
social media algorith have determined
often also subconsciously what kind of
stuff keeps people glued to their phones
and that's often moral outrage shock or
often things that make them feel bad
about themselves and feel like that they
have to be there so they'll miss out on
something important so these are all
negative Dynamics but um the third
answer that I would give is
to pay very close attention to those
Dynamics and think of the ways that you
can use them strategically to get to do
what you want to do so getting your
message out is something that will
probably require social media but I'm
reminded of an old Nome Chomsky
interview where he says that and he's
talking about 20th century corporate
mainstream journalism that often the
best practitioner sort of play like a
violin sort of use it against itself um
find ways that social media which is set
up to do quite a lot of bad things can
be used in a very narrow way to get
something good done for you and that
might mean not falling for all of the
other traps that it lays for you so you
you don't have to do every single thing
that social media seems to be asking you
to do but to pay close attention to what
it can actually uh achieve for your for
your
movement and I think we're particularly
seeing um this right now as we sort of
witness a genocide going on in Palestine
and the way social media algorithms are
catering to sort of you know what I said
about misinformation pedling
misinformation also pedling certain
kinds of players uh who've been very
vocal uh during this really difficult
time and uh one word I mean that you
that's stuck out to me in what you've
said is visibility also um that to not
mistake visibility for victory and I was
also wondering how well that ties into
uh my second question which is about
participation of people in certain
movements whether it's on online or
whether it's offline in protest and what
I often see as somebody who's been a
participant you know all throughout my
student years in protests and even right
now is the class division that happens
even if you are raising your voice say
on Twitter or X now or um your you know
any kind of activism that you are doing
it does sort of involve this complexity
of your class background and where you
come from if you are able to risk your
life and livelihood um on on such a
broad
platform so to speak and I've personally
have seen people getting arrested as
they are protesting in Delhi right um
and it sort of brings me to this
question about you know what do you
think of this demographic of protesters
you've covered it in you know various
urban areas you know in sa Paulo in Hong
Kong and do you think this demographic
holds broader implications for these
social movements and you know the
objectives that they want to achieve oh
yeah yes absolutely this is the class
composition of the uprisings that I
looked at matter quite a lot in ways
that were often ignored um perhaps even
intentionally by uh media narratives um
so in the
2010s and and the in the class
composition of the revolts matter not
just for the Tactical forms that they
ended up taking but also for their
outcomes the things that they push for
the things that they could actually
possibly achieve um and so often in the
2010s especially the one the the set of
revolts that I look at the middle class
elements take Center Stage um so often
um demographically empirically there is
high middle class participation but
often more importantly than that middle
the middle class is put at the center of
the story by people like me in the
global media um and people in the
western media in the 2010s really love
this right because the middle class is
sort of the the privileged subject of
history for English-speaking liberal
media um the idea that this is the young
middle class Revolt rather than one that
is working class or one that is very
aligned with any particular interest was
was something that allowed for
the positive reinforcement Loop that I
think was often actually necessary for
the scaling up of these protests to
happen so rapidly so Global media loved
the idea that they were middle class and
they often were middle class to some
extent even while the people as you say
that were really taking a lot of the
biggest risks and going to jail or dying
happen to be Urban like youth people um
living close to the result the revolts
that were not educated in a middle class
that were like perhaps even people
living on the streets often the people
dying were sort of a from like
marginalized sectors not even the
working class but like marginalized
sectors of the population and often in
the cases where the Revolt actually
succeeds it's because of Labor action
somewhere so unions are uh and and labor
action are very important in stories
like Tunisia and Egypt and South Korea
and Chile even though they're not at the
center of the story that is told uh in
global media and as to the effects on
tactics and outcomes a Turkish
sociologist uh Gian tual has WR wrote a
really good article in 2015 called
elusive Revolt about this exact dynamic
which I really recommend uh a lot more
happens after this article comes out but
he's really I think he's really getting
to the heart of a lot of what happens
and what he says is that there is an
elective Affinity an elective Affinity
between the middle class elements of the
revolt and sort of individualized and
aestheticized forms of protest um and
one like example that stuck you know hit
home with me is that he said that the
permanent assembly which was often like
a form favored by 2010's protests is
something that like is basically a
permanent grad seminar it's like
something that people that are trained
to talk and like talking and like
hearing themselves talk people like me
will really gravitate towards whereas a
lot of other people in society are not
talk they not they don't love talking
all day long they want to participate in
the struggle in a different way or more
importantly they really care about the
outcome and so he often uh points to a
split between protest that that um
gravitate to more formal or
institutional uh concerns like coruption
rather than
actual uh uh outcomes that change the
material conditions of people and this
is often what workingclass people cared
more about so in the case of Brazil the
main the main
um the main narrative in my book It
Starts about bus Fair Rises which
something is something that really
matters to working-class people in
Brazil but as more and more middle class
people show up these are people that
don't take the bus and they focus on
more abstract aestheticized or um um
institutional formal goals like
corruption uh and the change of rules at
the national level so I definitely think
going forward uh we have to continue to
pay attention to class in a way that
would have it seemed very very natural
in the 20th century but a lot of people
in the 2010s love to say oh no no
there's no more class anymore it's just
a middle class the middle class is all
that exists and that's all we have to
think about ideolog is gone class is
gone I think both those things turned
out to be uh misleading if not
dangerous
and I mean India is no stranger to this
concept also that you know there is no
class and you know especially during the
times of protest we are one but it's it
you can you see this um that this notion
was not really present when um the
farmers protests happened in 2021
because the majority of the people
mobilizing and organizing came from the
farming class the working class and um
the middle class class ES because they
had barricaded the borders of Delhi
where they wanted to March into the
protesters you could see like the middle
class they were just confined to an area
um within the city and um not a lot of
violence was being seen in that area
where everybody had collected but
whereas on the borders where the
protesters were sort of uh
organizing um you saw barricades you got
tear tear gas I mean you see it right
now because they're again marching
toward Delhi as they speak and um the
protesters have been barricaded again um
uh so um I was recently also while I was
reading your book I was also reading
this another book by Wendy Brown
nihilistic times and uh I was reading
her chapter about a charismatic leader
she was sort of um going off Max Weber's
um you know uh Speech the 1919 speech on
uh Politics as a vocation where he'd
examined
uh why we need a charismatic leader and
she was sort of um you know answering
him in a way sort of working through his
speech and she also advocated for uh
charismatic leader and why it's really
important in our times um and then in
your book um you state you how the
umbrella movement in Hong Kong you know
was often described as leader lless and
there were many localists there part of
the protest in Hong Kong who advocated
for removing leaders or leaders ship
structures and just rejecting
traditional symbols of authority so do
these Dynamics between having a leader
as opposed to having a leaderless
movement impact overall trajectory and
outcomes of movements at all yeah
absolutely and there this this question
of leaderless leader fullness
decentralization representation is
really at the heart of of my book um and
and and that's not because I wanted to
put it there it's because because I
interviewed 200 250 people and this is
the answer that I got most often as to
why something didn't go the way that
they wanted it to the most often the the
most common answer I got left right in
center was we were too decentralized we
believe too much in leaderless um before
I get to that I want to yeah what you
mentioned about the the dynamic of
protest in India although I haven't
looked closely at the the protest there
reminds me of a lot of what I saw um in
my work there is a real unfortunate but
real tendency among media to pay much
more attention to protests and to
repression when there are middle class
students involved in the center of big
capitals then when this same thing kind
of happens outside of cities and there
are either working class or marginalized
um um people involved so for example in
Chile you have mapuche revolts happening
throughout the entire um the same set of
years that in which student protesters
are engaging in actions in downtown
Santiago media pay a lot of attention to
the student protesters very little
attention to the mapuche protesters who
are outside of the big cities and are
not seen
as they are not the kinds of victims of
police repression
whose death or uh um um um um who whose
death shocks the public Consciousness in
the way that the middle class uh
violence against the middle class does
so this is unfortunately this again
these one of these elements of of media
that you are are problem and there's
nothing you can't change it by snapping
your fingers but I suppose being aware
of of the limitations of meaning the
senses is is always going to be useful
going forward so how is it that it came
to be that so many of these protests in
the 2010s were said to be leaderless and
that they were celebrated as such and
and and was that good or bad essentially
um I think
that this particular type of
of
configuration of
movements helped in some ways at getting
quite a lot of people onto the streets
at making it difficult for authorities
to understand or control or to stop
uprisings um at getting that positive
reinforcement loop from media that often
was required to getting more and more
people on the streets quickly um and
then that huge amount of people ended up
generating real
opportunities um but what was what we
saw tragically across the decade is that
um that particular configuration of a
movement one that is said to be
leaderless or spontaneous or
horizontally structured failed over and
over to take advantage of those
opportunities and often they they
watched uh in horror as somebody else
somebody worse took advantage of those
opportunities so I think that this
concrete leaderless comes about as a
result of both ideological and material
factors so on the one hand in many
countries around the world and this
varies um depending on the national
context but it's a generalized tendency
I think a lot of the types of
organizations that would have carried
out different types of movements in the
20th century had been crushed repressed
or um really weakened in the era of
neoliberalism so unions political
parties Civil Society associations were
either weakened um or crushed by you
know the the types of authoritarian
governments we saw North Africa so a a
an apparently leaderless protest was the
easiest often seeming even that as the
natural way to respond to Injustice
often in the 2010s and this is
celebrated by some people because there
were some preexisting ideological
elements it wasn't that everyone thought
this but there were some people that
thought well this is a good thing and
often it was people like me that thought
this was a good thing now but what
happens in these moments of opportunity
generated when okay okay everybody's
joined the movement everybody seems to
be on the streets the government is
either literally fleeing to another
country or desperate to give in the
demands on the streets this particular
configuration this particular style of
protest this very specific way of
contesting the future of a Nation or of
the global system failed at least in
this case to offer an answer failed to
either take take power themselves
because it's very difficult for a group
of individuals to take power to form a
revolutionary government or even to
communicate
to the leaders who were if they did not
flee what they wanted or what what what
they would accept in the way that you
know a union leader might or Martin
Luther King might or leaders of the
Civil Rights movements back in the 50s
and 60s in the United States which
really inspired the idea of protest and
and and direct uh uh direct action in at
least especially in in my home country
in the second half of the 20th century
in the ways that they would have had a
clear idea as to what they would take in
order to demobilize or what kind of
outcome they actually
wanted and so in Cas you know you
brought up the Hong Kong example um the
the word that was often used in Hong
Kong was no stage and that meant
concretely sort of something that would
have been similar to horizontalism in in
South America or leaderless in North
America because there was a stage back
in 2014 um and the people that were up
there were often sort of Representatives
of some kind of some kind of Oran
ization Joshua Wong was one of those
that became quite um famous in the
United States in 2019 there was there
was the idea among some people again not
among probably the huge amounts of
people that poured into the streets in
the middle of the middle of 2019 but
among some of the people that continue
to be on the streets until the end of
the the year that those people can't
reject us often because they just
disagreed with them politically um they
often were more anti-china they were
often more an localist often pushing uh
to a greater extent for some kind of
actual independence from China rather
than uh increased democracy or autonomy
within the the the PRC and again as I
said many many people came to me with
this answer that we were too
decentralized we were too leaderless we
were too leaderless about like 50 people
told me that they had discovered the
same text which is a really fantastic um
article from the 1970s called The
Tyranny of structurelessness by Joe
Freeman and what she says is that she
was part of feminist movement ments uh
in the United States at the time that
wanted to be leaderless they sorry that
wanted to be leaderless they wanted to
be structureless but what she found over
and over is that when you insist that
there aren't any leaders leaders leaders
emerge anyways uh and in small groups
this may be sort of the person in the
group that has the most Social Power the
most Social Capital like the Click of
insiders that end up actually deciding
everything for the rest of the group or
in big big big movements you might have
leaders selected by social media or
selected by Foreign governments so in
2019
um while there might have been people on
the ground demand demanding that there
was no representation no leaders in the
Hong Kong movement well certain people
were sitting in front of the United
States Congress and saying this is what
we this is what you can do speaking to
the Trump Administration to to Marco
Rubio um saying this is what you can do
to respond to what the Hong people of
Hong Kong are asking for but actually if
you look at polling in Hong Kong only
something like 15 20% of Hong kongers
ever supported anything like
independence from the PRC vast majority
of Hong kongers actually um wanted to be
in the PRC so the risk of insisting that
you're leaderless is that you get
leaders that are selected by you know
whoever gets the most retweets or who
gets selected by Foreign Media or in
really extreme cases who just shows up
with guns um imposed upon the movement
with very different ideas as to what it
stands for and they end up exercising a
leadership that is not accountable in
any way in the way that you know a
leader of a union can be recalled or
Martin Luther King would have lost his
position at the head of his organization
um had he gone and done things that that
that uh its members I did not agree
with that's that's really interesting
the way you put it and I do think then
the Crux of it just come down to what
you've already said that you don't have
a leader somebody else might choose one
for you in various ways then I mean I do
agree with you in that way that I don't
really believe that certain movements
can be absolutely leaderless in a way
but yeah I mean also you've given me
something new to think about so um yeah
that was really interesting well I mean
I would I would contrast yeah sorry I
just sorry but I would contrast
also a
leader as like a
charismatic guy or woman that is really
in charge with just the idea of some
representational structure so you can
have you can have Collective leadership
like a social movement like the MST the
landless workers movement in Brazil they
have every state elects two
Representatives so there's 80 people
that sit and and mediate between the
mass of of people in the group and the
and the uh in the government there it
doesn't have to be like a leader in the
sense of you know the charismatic leader
in the article that you you discussed
it's it can be something that is more
that is more sort of decentralized and
less about a single individual but often
often and that single individual is
imposed in in moments of chaos whereas
if you can get together and choose who
you want or what kind of leadership
structure you want it often will be a
collective leadership structure or or a
rotating leadership structure that's
those are other options too sorry to had
to jump in no no not at all and I mean I
I do think Wendy Brown had a very
interesting um sort of take on this
whole charismatic leadership where she
does say that you do need a leader at
the end of the day in order to sort of
um make politics more even more
approachable also to people um and also
to sort of mitigate bureaucracy of
structures and connect with people um
but yeah I mean that's Wendy Brown for
you yeah but also it's also you know
Martin Luther King right I mean a lot of
people in the 2010s would have insisted
that we we will never have we will never
grab a charismatic spokesperson in elect
and and and um put him or her forward to
represent us but they all would also say
it was amazing that Martin Luther King
did exactly that or that it was amazing
that the Black Panther Party had sort of
a centralized uh structure which will
allow them to speak on behalf of the the
group yeah and I also think like a lot
of hesitation about uh having having an
absolute leader also comes from the
recent examples such as Donald Trump
right um which was collectively uh
elected uh by the majority in the US he
was he was he was he was I mean I think
you know the tyranny of
structurelessness is I think a real
tendency and you can't you have to deal
with it if you often um when you
have concrete leaderless you often get
hyper
leismo Jagger talks about in his new
book is that you know movements with no
structure whatsoever often give rise to
like a single figure that sort of speaks
for the whole group and a Mystic
um so that's a problem structur
structurelessness is real but so is the
iron law of oligarchy right every time
you create an organization it you might
find yourself in a in a situation where
the top of the bureaucracy cares more
about holding on to their position than
bureaucracy than the original goals of
the movement I mean again these are
difficult question these are difficult
things to deal with but you can't as I
said with media you can't snap your
fingers and and get your get get out of
them you have to I think create
organizations which are both firm and
flex and that's very hard to do but I
think it's the best way
forward yeah and I mean I don't even
know where I went as far as the US when
I live in India and we have Narendra
Modi who is soon going to be for another
term this year yeah there you go I mean
there's history is like history is it's
very un this is something I want to make
also clear in the book and here it's
very understandable why a lot of
activists um and
um revolutionaries even at the end of
the two 20th century and early 21st
century especially in the global North
but all over the world looked at the
20th century and thought oh well there
was too many leaders the big problem is
leaders we need you know it's all it's
all it's I'm very I understand where all
this come from comes from it comes from
as I said a real ideological and a real
material place the good organizations
seem to have been decimated it's only
the bad leaders that Rose to the top it
made a lot of sense to try to insist on
a a movement that was fully leaderless
it just ended up not actually being
fully leaderless in in in the final
outcome and people looked back on this
and said well if we had had a mechanism
for choosing our Representatives we
would have chosen better
ones yeah
true okay so uh the last question of our
discussion um which I mean coming back
to your book um you know after reading
it it was just really it was really nice
to see that interviews within itself
forms such an integral part of the book
um your conversations and how they've
spanned you know five continents
numerous individuals and um them being
really really honest about their
experiences with you I think it there
was a lot to learn about solidarity
especially for me and I think especially
an internationalist solidarity and my
last question to you is how do you
envision the future of this
International solidarity keeping in mind
the times that we live in um the
genocide Palestine um you know the
protests happening in New Delhi right
now as we speak um you know are there
any challenges that you see or any
uncertainties that you feel journalists
will have to mitigate or even activist
themselves for like to work towards an
internationalist solidarity yeah I think
there is a challenge but luckily it's
not that difficult to evade um but I'm a
big believer in the Reconstruction of
internationalist projects I mean I'm a
like a lot of my work features and sort
of like you know elevates in kind of a
nostalgic but also optimistic way some
of the more inspiring movements of the
20th century I think like um the band
doing moment is a big part of um my
first book um and in the second book is
often
about
the difficulty of revolutionary change
in a more fragmented and um um
individualized global system and so what
I found in my uh the research for this
book at least um is that and this goes
back to your first question social media
made it very easy for people to be
inspired by other people that were
taking action around the world at like
one second too like you saw an
acceleration of the reprod reproduction
of words and images
um and you know this already happened in
the 60s and 70s back then they were
dealing with television and newspapers
and this really changed the speed at
which people could be inspired by their
movements around the world but by the
2010s it was like a split second and
this inspiration is I think is a great
thing and I was at this strangely at the
center of this this this these Dynamics
like something that I posted in Sal
Paulo went viral in turkey and then you
had this like back and forth exchange
between um protesters in gizi park and
downtown sou Paulo
um and so I think it's fantastic to take
advantage of the communications tools
that are at our disposal now but a
slippage that happened
a
um something a
phenomenon arose that now a lot of
people now consider to have been
problematic or an error and that is this
inspiration sort of transmutated into
actually just copying and pasting
tactics so not only were people really
really inspired by T Square which makes
a lot of sense because it was hugely
inspirational if you look back at what
it what was happening it's hard not to
be moved now even if you know how it
ends they weren't just inspired by that
by the people willing to risk their
lives for a better world they actually
just Tred to do the exact same thing in
different National and political and
economic context and a lot of people
told me uh in my
book uh that they wish that they hadn't
done that that they wish that they had
more carefully
studied the weaknesses of their local
enemies and the best way to attack them
given local conditions rather than just
to allow inspiration to
become the reproduction of
tactics
so how do you get around that how do you
take advantage of the the tools at your
disposal well I think the answer is like
pretty simple and I'm going to go back
to MST again because I spent a lot of
time with them last year um the landless
workers movement in Brazil what they do
is they they use the internet and they
use the tools available at their
disposal not to
observe activists militants
revolutionaries in some other country
but to talk to them so don't rather than
talking about or
consuming images produced by movements
here or there like directly in like to
enter into direct dialog
and learn from each other like have
actual conversations rather than just be
inspired by
watch uh some other revolutionary or
social movement as if it's like a movie
as if it's like a movie and so the MST
actually you know they have they have
the means at their disposal they're not
like a rich organization by any means
but they like bring people from all over
the world and they have you know they
sit together for weeks and they have
courses together and they they exchange
tips and tactics and information and
then and it's and it's not just about
the it's not just about solidarity it's
about an active exchange of knowledge
that takes place through dialogue um
which is something you know hopefully
that uh you and your organization help
to facilitate um but that's my simple
answer talk to people rather than about
them uh engage with people rather than
consume
them that's really well said talk to
people it's a classic one yeah but it's
it's it's right there and I do think uh
conversations like these need to be
constantly ongoing and they need to
evolve and um and it's like a small part
of what we try to do at the
internationalist we try to sort of bring
people from different movements um so
that they can also tell tell us about
their experience and how their
experience might Inspire others so yeah
thank you so much for sharing your
thoughts and it's been really rewarding
to been able to speak with you today and
pick your brain on all of these
questions that were just just inside my
head until now thank you so much for
having me and really I really truly
appreciate the interest in the book and
I appreciate that you agree with me uh
that the interviews are like the most
interesting part of it I mean I I don't
know anything um I try not to put
forward any sort of organizational or
theoretical Innovations of my own I
think the heart of the book is is the
interviews that I did in and and the
things that people have learned and the
insights that they have sort of you know
sharpened in their heads over the last
10 years so I really thank you for your
for your
engagement yeah I mean after reading so
many interviews it also sometimes it
tends to sort of feel like I am in a
bubble when I'm sort of talking about
movements that are happening in India or
even in South Asia but it just helps to
know that there's a precedent for you
know things that we are experiencing
right now and the things that we are
experiencing right now might in the
future um have a similar effect on other
people you know Scholars and activist so
yeah interviews were amazing so and I I
I it's like one part that I really
enjoyed reading after every chapter so
thank you so much thanks before we sign
off I would like to request our readers
and listeners to share and subscribe the
internationalist with their friends uh
by doing that she'll enable us to host
more conversations like these and as
well as help build our Progressive

International


## Keywords:
