---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0eDTcGkOJj4
---

# Video
The Secret Government - The Constitution In Crisis -Bill Moyers (PBS 1987)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0eDTcGkOJj4)

## Transcript:
and I still to this day Council don't
see anything wrong with taking the
ayatollah's money and sending it to
support the Nicaraguan Freedom Fighters
they have basically said to the entire
United States we don't care what the
people say we don't care what the
Congress says we don't care what the
other oversight organizations say we're
going to find some way to rid the planet
of Communism and we don't care who gets
killed in the process as long as there
is breath in this body I will speak
speak and work strive and struggle for
the cause of the Nicaraguan Freedom
Fighters Freedom Fighters they are not
they are terrorists wait a minute this
isn't the way the Constitution was set
up this isn't what the founding fathers
intended you start outbreaking foreign
laws since most countries have laws
against secretly overthrowing their
governments and then you end up breaking
the law at home
sometimes you have to go above the
written law they were willing to
literally put put the Constitution at
risk uh because they believed somehow
there was a higher order things we have
Liberty and the only way we're going to
keep Liberty is to have people who are
strong like Reagan and North violence is
not the answer uh you don't teach the
Democratic Way by shoving an M16 down
somebody's throat if we continue these
policies to Rob ourselves in order to
feed this National Security monster we
are going to continue to degrade
American Life we're only talking about
subverting the Constitution that's
all what Jackson Brown sings about is
history past and present I'm Bill Moyers
and in this personal essay we'll look at
that government in the shadows next week
Congress will publish a report on the
Iran Contra Scandal my colleagues and I
have been investigating it ourselves in
this broadcast we'll look at what we
learned about the secret government in
the hearings this summer the wars and
tragedies that have been a part of it
for 40 years and where it will take us
if we the people let

it

this is how Americans like to think of
their government its values are
enshrined in beautiful monuments and
Noble inscriptions the temples of our
national
Faith but for 40 years a secret
government has been growing Behind These
stately tributes to American ideals
growing like a cancer on the
Constitution it's what people were
talking about this summer they were
talking about the abuse of secret power
a breach of faith not everybody tells
the truth not everybody thinks the
public is entitled to know the truth and
uh not everybody thinks they should go
by the law but I don't think we'll ever
know the truth about what really
happened I mean I feel like there's
still lies out there and we still don't
know the thing I started thinking was
this must happen all the time this time
they just got
caught people lined up early every day
waiting to listen in person to the Iran
Contra hearings while Millions watched
from home television members of the
secret government had been forced from
the Shadows into the spotlight I will
tell you right now Council and all the
members here gathered that I misled the
Congress I miss at that meeting at that
meeting face to face face to face you
made false statements to them about your
activities and support of the Contra I
did Oliver North had been the secret
government's chronic liar long on Zeal
for his president and the cause but he
was not the only Zealot not the only one
to deceive the hearings revealed a
wholesale policy of secrecy shrouded in
lies of passion cloaked in fiction and
deception but the hearings told only
part of the story so let's begin on day
one I Ronald Reagan do solemnly swear
that I will President Reagan came to
office promising to restore America's
military and moral prestige in the world
voters had responded when heed to be
tough on terrorists a vow he repeated
time and
again let me further make it plain to
the assassins in Beirut and their
accompli wherever they may be that
America will never make concessions to
terrorists to do what the president kept
saying but it's not what he was
doing the story broke one year ago on
November 3rd 1986 in a magazine in
Lebanon the United States had defied its
own embargo on arms to Iran
Ronald Reagan was offering weapons to
the Ayatollah Ki in return for the
release of American
hostages the president went on
television to deny it the charge has
been made that the United States has
shipped weapons to Iran as Ransom
payment for the release of American
hostages in Lebanon that the United
States undercut its allies and secretly
violated American policy against
trafficking with terrorists those
charges are utterly false the president
was not telling the truth and when he
held a news conference the next week the
pattern of deception
continued Mr President I don't think
it's still clear just what Israel's role
was in this could you explain what the
Israeli role was here no because we as I
say have had nothing to do with other
countries or their shipment of arms or
doing what they're they're doing that
wasn't the truth either half an hour
later the White House Press office
corrected the president Israel had been
a key player in the sale of arms to
Iran rapidly now the web of Secrets was
unraveling on November 25th the
president's old friend and Ally Attorney
General Edwin me revealed the deepest
secret of all certain monies which were
received in the transaction between
representatives of Israel and
representatives of
Iran were uh taken and made available to
the forces in Central
America which are opposing the
Sandinista government
there the Constitution is ambiguous on
many things but not on this the
president quote shall take care that the
laws be Faithfully
executed yet President Reagan himself
approved selling arms to Iran and as for
the illegal diversion of funds to the
contr well the president's National
Security adviser said the decision had
been his I made a very deliberate
decision not to ask the
president so that I could insulate him
from the decision and provide some
future deniability for the president if
it ever leaked out but there was no
denying that the President's Men knew
what was in the president's mind and he
had been very
adamant at the time that he says look I
don't want to pull out our support for
the contas for any reason this this
would an unacceptable option isn't there
something that I can do
unilaterally unilaterally in other words
without Congressional approval Ronald
Reagan's message was clear find some way
anyway to help the Contra so I guess in
a way they are counterrevolutionary and
God bless them for being that way and I
guess that makes them contras and so it
makes me a contra
too the contras Ronald Reagan compared
them to our founding fathers in reality
Ronald Reagan and CIA director William
Casey were their founding fathers 2
months after his inauguration the
president approved the funds which Casey
used to create the contras their
ultimate goal was the violent overthrow
of the Nicaraguan government a
government the United States legally

recognizes so the war had to be carried
out covertly as a campaign of Terror but
Americans were outraged when CIA mined
the Nicaraguan harbors and blew up fuel
tanks causing thousands of Nicaraguan
citizens to flee their homes Congress
and protest cut off the Contra
funds when the president refused to give
up on his creation the Contra

cheer but how to keep the Contra war
going despite Congress the law and
public opinion first a small cabal in
the White House took charge of policy
the president CIA director dor Casey
National Security advisers McFarland and
Porter and their aid Colonel North who
did not wear his Marine uniform when he
worked for the secret government to
raise money for the contras the secret
team turned to right-wing governments
that could do favors for the United
States and receive favors in return the
king of Saudi Arabia doled out a million
dollar a month the Sultan of brunai
coughed up $10 million that was
misplaced through a White House
era the secret government also
encouraged the fundrais ing efforts of
General John sing laab relieved of his
command for insubordination in 1977 he
now runs the world anti-communist Le I
represent hundreds of thousands of
Americans who are sympathetic to your
cause and want to help here at home
wealthy right wiers were solicited
directly by Oliver North some of them
were told their contributions would get
them invited to the Oval Office Mr
conservative activist Carl Channel who
later pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
defraud the government worked directly
with Colonel North pumping donors like
investor Joseph AB
Bo I take it your encounters involved
invariably involved both Mr Chanel and
Colonel North and maybe Channel took you
to North and then you met with North and
then subsequently you would meet with
Channel but in a sense they worked as a
team in a sense yes uh Mrs Garwood is
that true in your instances as well I
would say that's a fairly accurate
description all this was being done to
advance the president's policies but it
wasn't enough to get around the law the
White House Then Enlisted the services
of something called the Enterprise the
Enterprise is is the uh group of of
companies that Mr hakee formed to manage
the um Contra and the Iranian project
who controls the Enterprise I actually
exercised overall control General
Richard Secord has been in and out of
covert operations for a quarter Century
one of the first Americans to fly secret
missions in Vietnam he also helped run
the CIA secret war in Laos Secord became
a major Pentagon figure in foreign
military sales especially to the shaw of
Iran that's where he met this man Albert
hakee Not only was I presented with an
opportunity to help my country the
United States and my native land
Iran but at the same time I had the
opportunity to profit
financially Albert hakee was secord's
partner in the Enterprise born in Iran
he made Millions selling americanmade
arms to the shaw often relying on bribes
and illegal payoffs to ease the way now
he handled financial matters for the
Enterprise like any good business the
Enterprise was designed to make money
don't think am I correct Mr Secord that
from December 1984 until July
1985 you were engaged in selling arms to
the contes for
propit that's correct then at the direct
request of the secret White House team
the Enterprise broke at American Arms to
the Ayatollah Ki Beyond SE cour and
hakeim it grew to include a shadowy
network of arms dealers fraudulent
companies and secret bank accounts the
Enterprise was as Senator Daniel inway
put it a shadowy government with its own
Air
Force its own
Navy its own fundraising
mechanism and the ability to pursue his
own ideas of the national
interest free from all checks and
balances and free from the law
itself here's just one example of how
the Enterprise worked with the full
knowledge of William Casey and Oliver
North secort and hakee control secret
bank accounts in Switzerland that
receive those contributions from private
citizens the money was then funneled to
the contras one donor was Joseph KS the
millionaire beer Tycoon KS met directly
with Casey who referred him to
North I told him that I was interested
in um in seeing what I could do and I
asked him for his recommendations and
did North uh subsequent to the meeting
provide you the Swiss bank account name
and number to which your payment should
be made yes he did Joseph Kors deposited
$65,000 into the secret account but that
was peanuts compared to the arms deals
Secord purchased a th000 missiles from
the CIA for $3.7 million and sold them
to an Iranian middleman for $10 million
on that one transaction alone after
expenses the Enterprise made a profit of
$5.5 million almost 200% its overall
profits on the the sales to Iran may
have been as much as $15
million you did in fact use some of
those proceeds approximately and correct
me if my recollection is wrong about
$3.5 million for the Contra effort in
Central America yes sir but most of the
money never reached the contras
including $8 million remaining today in
a private Swiss account operating in
secret the Enterprise was free to put
profits above patriotism they even sold
arms directly to the contras at a huge
markup if the purpose of the Enterprise
was to help the contras why did you
charge cero a markup that included a
profit we were in business to make a
living Senator we had to make we had to
make a living I didn't see anything
wrong with it a time it was a commercial
Enterprise Oh I thought the purpose of
the Enterprise was to was to Aid Cero's
cause can't I have two purposes I did
while profits were being made lives were
being lost Iran has used missiles
supplied by the Enterprise to fight its
war against Iraq that war has already
lasted more than 7 years as many as a
million people killed or
wounded and in Nicaragua the contras use
weapons from the Enterprise against
civilians it's a terrorist War they're
fighting old men women children are
caught in the middle are killed
deliberately as the contras use violence
against peasants to pressure their
government thousands have died even as
the hearings were taking place in
Washington this summer a contra raid in
Nicaragua killed three children and a
pregnant

woman as the casualties mounted the
secret government in Washington knew
that the Contra leaders were not such
Noble Freedom Fighters after all Colonel
North learned that from his own leaz on
with the contas Robert Owen I was but a
private foot soldier who believed in the
cause of the Nicaraguan Democratic
resistance Owen sent a secret memo to
his boss he reminded North that the
chief Contra leader adalo cero is a
creation of the United States government
and he warned North that those around
KERO quote are not First Rate people
they're Liars greed and power motivated
this war he said has become a business
to many of them Owen's judgment has been
supported by disillusion Rebels who quit
the struggle in discuss with contra
leaders people who had never dirtied
their boots people who never went to the
field people who didn't even know how to
pick up a rifle pretending being a
facade for the CIA and whose only
concern was making money Alberto SE is a
former Contra officer who once won the
personal congratulations of Ronald
Reagan but then he discovered corruption
among the
contras they bought shoty goods and put
them at high of prices they bought
lowgrade grains like rice and beans and
corn and sugar and salt and put put them
up uh for sale or build them for
themselves at the highest prices uh did
the same with ammunitions they say the
same with
rifles all this the contempt for
congress the Defiance of law the huge
markups and profits the secret bank
accounts the Shady characters the
Shakedown of foreign governments the
complicity and death and destruction
they did all this in the dark because it
would never stand the light of day
secrecy is the freedom zealots dream of
no Watchmen to check the door no
accountant to check the books no judge
to check the law the secret government
has no Constitution the rules it follows
are the rules it makes up so William
Casey could dream that the Enterprise
might take on a life of its own
permanent and wholly
unaccountable the director
was interested in the ability to go to
an existing as he put it off the shelf
self- sustaining
Standalone entity that could could
perform certain activities on behalf of
the United States are you not shocked
that the director of Central
Intelligence is proposing to you the
creation of a organization to do these
kinds of things outside of his own
organization Council I can tell you I'm
not shocked they were willing to
literally put the Constitution at risk
uh because they believed somehow there
was a high order things that the ends do
in fact justify are justified by the
means that's the most Marxist
totalitarian Doctrine I've ever heard of
in my life Senator John kery of
Massachusetts a veteran of the Vietnam
war is a member of the Senate Foreign
Relations
Committee if you can have a retired
General and a colonel you know in muy
running around uh making deals in other
countries on their own uh soliciting
funds to wage Wars to overthrow
governments and hide it from the
American people so you have no
accountability you've done the very
thing that uh James Madison and others
feared most when they were struggling to
put the Constitution together which was
to create an accountable system which
didn't have runaway power which didn't
concentrate power in one hand so that
you could have uh one person making a
decision and running off against the
will of the American
people what could possibly justify
the fight against communism of course
this nation cannot abide the
communization of Central America we
cannot have Soviet bases on the mainland
of this Hemisphere and what means Dirty
Wars and dirty tricks lying in deceit
these operations were designed to be
secrets from the American
people Mr Neils I'm at a loss as to how
we could announce it to the American
people and not have the Soviets know
about it well in fact Colonel North you
believed that the Soviets were aware of
our sale of arms to Iran weren't
you we came to a point in time when we
were concerned about that since our
adversaries know about covert operations
the only people fooled are the American
people but consent is the very heart of
our constitutional system how can people
judge what they do not know or what they
are told falsely it's something
troubling Americans these
days all the neighborhoods around here
who get talking about politics they all
talk they used to talk about bureaucrats
you know used to talk just about
politicians that kind of slick people
just like Ed car salesman or what else
have you lawyers get thrown into that
whole pack too now we're talking about
the Liars that's what I hear all the
time well the Liars are at it again you
know we do live in a democracy don't we
we do sir thank God in which it is the
people not one Marine lieutenant colonel
that get to decide the important policy
decisions for the
nation
yes it isn't the first time that men who
Express reverence for democracy in
public have violated the values of
democracy in practice the secret
government is an interlocking network of
official functionaries spies mercenaries
ex-generals profit and super Patriots
who for a variety of motives operate
outside the legitimate institutions of
government presidents have turned to
them when they can't win the support of
the Congress or the people creating that
unsupervised power so feared by the
framers of our
constitution just imagine that William
Casey's Dream came true suppose the
Enterprise grew into a super secret
self- financing self-perpetuating
organization suppose they decided on
their own to assassinate gorbachov or
the leader of white South Africa could a
president control them and what if he
became the Enterprise's Public Enemy
Number One Who would know who would say
no During the bolic Revolution in Russia
linen created something called the ca a
secret organization run by eight
lieutenants reporting directly to him
and filled with zealots who sabotaged
and terrorized opponents they made up
their own rules they chose their own
missions and they judged their own
operations you say it can't happen here
well before deciding for sure let's look
at the history of our secret
government World War II was over Europe
lay devastated the United States emerged
as the most powerful Nation on
Earth but from the rubble Rose a strange
change New World a peace that was not
peace and a war that was not
war we saw it emerging from the Soviets
occupied Eastern Europe the Cold War had
begun an iron curtain has descended
across the
continent behind that line lie all the
capitals of the ancient states of
Central and Eastern Europe the Russians
had been our Ally against the Nazis an
expedient Alliance for the sake of War
now they were our enemy to fight them we
turned to some of the very men who had
inflicted on Humanity the horrors of
Hitler's

Madness we hired Nazis as American spies
we struck a secret bargain with the
devil one that I know real well is Claus
Barbie he was wanted by the French as
their number one war
criminal and somehow we employed a man
like that as a very secretive in
informant aart dabing house was employed
in the US Army Counter Intelligence
Corps and assigned to work with Nazi
informants spying on the Russians one of
them was clouse Barbie The Butcher of
Leon who had tortured and murdered
thousands of Jews and resistance
Fighters during the time I learned that
Barbie was really such a brutal murderer
I reported this to my headquarters and I
thought I was going to get a
promotion I thought there was a big
picture of a deal I had here you know
and the answer was dabing house keep
quiet until he's no longer useful then
we'll turn them over the French under
those conditions I thought well okay
let's work with them you know if you're
an intelligence officer you work with
the Devil the Americans did not turn
Barbie over to the French when they
finished with him they helped him escape
to Bolivia other top Nazis were smuggled
into the United States to cooperate in
the war against the new
enemy ding house still remembers the
attitude of his superiors the new enemy
was the only
enemy they seem to have had a
preconceived program of what the
Communists are up to and if I send in
the report that there was a Nazi walk
criminal running around over there
forget it we're not interested in the
Nazis anymore we're concentrating on the
Communist so began the morality of the
Cold War anything goes the struggle
required a mentality of permanent War a
perpet ual state of
emergency and it meant a vast new
apparatus of power that radically
transformed our government its
foundations were laid when President
Truman signed into law the National
Security Act of
1947 now that National Security of act
Act of
1947 changed dramatically the direction
of this great nation it established the
framework for a National Security State
admir Jee Lorac Rose through the ranks
from from inen to become a strategic
planner for the Pentagon and now heads
the center for defense information a
public interest group The National
Security Act of 47 gave us the National
Security Council never have we had a
National Security Council so concerned
about the nation's security that we were
always looking for threats and looking
how to orchestrate our society to oppose
those threats National Security was
invented almost in 1947 and now it has
become the prime mover of everything we
do is measured against something we
invented in
1947 the National Security Act also gave
us the Central Intelligence
Agency this is the house the Cold War
built the CIA the core of the new secret
government its Chief legitimate Duty was
to gather foreign intelligence for
America's new role as a world power soon
it was taking on covert operations
abroad and at home as its Mission
expanded the CIA recruited adventuresome
young men like Notre Dame's All-American
Ralph
McGee I looked back to the individual
that I was when I joined the agency I
was a dedicated cold warrior who felt
the agency was out there fighting for
Liberty Justice democracy and religion
around the world and I believed
wholeheartedly in this um I I just felt
proud every day that I went to work
because I was out at the Vanguard of the
battle against the international uh evil
Empire International comist the evil
empire Iran 1953 the CIA mounted its
first major covert operation to
overthrow a foreign government the
target was the Prime Minister of Iran
Mohammad masade he held power
legitimately through his country's
parliamentary process and he was popular
Washington had once looked to him as the
man to prevent a communist takeover but
that was before MDC decided that the
Iranian State not British companies
ought to own own and control the oil
within Iran's own borders when he
nationalized the British run oil fields
Washington saw
red Kenneth love was a young New York
Times Reporter in teron that summer this
was in McCarthy's time in the whole Cold
War paranoia was running wild in
Washington and everybody was saying that
crazy old musak was falling under the
influence of the Communists this was not
true he did not receive an aota of
assistance from the Soviet Union moner
Fong was a young student activist in
Terron and a madc supporter he now lives
in the United States as a teacher and a
writer in those days in early
50s the idea of an independent neutral
state was not at all acceptable to
either the West either the United States
or the Soviet Union madik was the victim
of this eastwest rivalry the Secretary
of State John Foster Dulles and his
brother Allen director of the CIA
decided with Eisenhower's approval to
overthrow madc and reinstate the shaw of
Iran Kenneth love recalls the work of
one American agent named George Carroll
he was the one that paid the money to
the street gangs he was the one that
invented the idea that make everybody
identify himself as a Shaw's partisan so
therefore the opposition will not be
able to group in the streets that was
why everybody in a vehicle and anything
else had to put a Shaw's picture in the
windshield and put the headlights on and
that you had to do or you would have
your windshield clubbed in and be
dragged out and beaten up and killed or
whatever the mobs paid by the CIA and
the police and soldiers bribed by the
CIA drove madc from
Office Crown Prince Abdullah greets the
Sha as he lands at Baghdad airport after
a 7-hour flight from Rome the king of
kings was back in control and more
pliable than madc American oil companies
took over almost half of Iran's
production us arms Merchants moved in
with $18 billion of weapon sales over
the next 20 years but there were losers
nearly everybody in Iran of any
importance has had a brother or a mother
or a sister or a son or a father
tortured jailed uh uh deprived of
property without due process I mean an
absolutely buccaneering dictatorship in
our name that we reported savak was
created by the
CIA savak the Shaw's secret police
tortured and murdered thousands of his
opponents General Richard Secord and
Albert hakee whom we met earlier were
among those who helped Supply the Shaw's
insatiable appetite for the technology
of control but the weapons and flattery
Heap by America on the shaw blinded us
to the growing opposition of his own
people they rose up in 1979 against
him
death to the shaw they shouted death to
the American
Satan for many is a direct consequence
and the hostage crisis is a direct
consequence and the Resurgence of the
Shia is a direct consequence of the
cia's overthrow of mosc in 1953 it cited
often as a a wonderful example of an
efficient CIA accomplishing something
good in reality
Edwin fermage is a professor of law
former White House fellow and
constitutional scholar you create a
nation uh who hates you enormously who
views you as a devil an evil force uh
you create in that state sufficient
forces of unrest that you don't have
stability uh and those those chickens
come home to roost you end up with a a
violation of the Constitution and uh a
hatred that is propagated today until
you have embassies taken hostages held
hatred engendered hatred simply doesn't
come to
rest Guatemala
1954 flushed with success America's
Secret government decided another
Troublesome leader must go this time it
was hobo arbin the democratically
elected president of Guatemala Philip
reinger was recruited from the Marines
to join the CIA team it was explained to
me that it was is very important for the
security of the United States that we
were going to prevent a Soviet Beach
head in this hemisphere which we've
heard about very recently of course and
that uh the Guatemalan government was
Communist and uh we had to do something
about it president arbin had admired
Franklin Delano Roosevelt and his
government voted often with the American
position at the United Nations but in
trying to bring a new deal to Guatemala
our bin committed two sins in the eyes
of the Eisenhower Administration first
when he opened the system to all
political parties he recognized the
Communist too well of course there was
no no even a hint of Communism in his
government he had no Communists in his
cabinet he did permit the existence of a
very small Communist party our BS also
embarked on a massive Land Reform
program less than 3% of the land owners
held More than 70% of the land so our
bins nationalize more than 1 and A2
million Acres including land owned by
his own family and turned it over to
peasants much of that land belonged to
the United Fruit Company the giant
American firm that was intent on keeping
Guatemala quite literally a Banana
Republic United Fruit appealed to its
close friends in Washington including
the dullis brothers who said that ARB
was openly playing the Communist game he
had to go this was sudden death for him
I mean there was no chance of him
winning this this fight because of the
fact that he had done this to the United
Fruit Company plus the fact that he was
over overthrowing the hedony or hegemony
of the United States over this area and
this is dangerous it could not be
tolerated we couldn't tolerate it from
Honduras the same country that today is
the Contra staging base the CIA launched
a small band of mercenaries against
Guatemala they were easily turned back
so with its own planes and Pilots the
CIA then B the
capital arbin fled and was immediately
replaced by an American puppet Colonel
Carlos Castillo armis he overturned all
of the reformist activity of President
arbans he he gave the land back to the
United Fruit Company that had been
confiscated he took land from The
Peasants and gave it back to the land
owners the CIA had called its covert
action against Guatemala operation
success military dictators ruled the
country for the next 30 Years the United
States provided them with weapons and
trained their officers the Communists we
saved them from would have been hard
pressed to do it better peasants were
slaughtered political opponents were
tortured suspected insurgents were shot
stabbed burned alive or strangled there
were so many deaths at one point that
coroners complained they couldn't keep
up with the
workload operation
success
what we did has caused succession of
repressive military dictatorships in
that country and has been responsible
for the death of over 100,000 of their
citizens success breeds success
sometimes with dreary repetition Mario
sandal alakan began his career in the
cia's adventure in Guatemala today he's
known as a Godfather of the death squads
in 1981 after lobbying Ronald Reagan's
advisers for military aid to Guatemala
SVO aracon danced at the inaugural
ball Richard Bissell another veteran of
the Guatemalan coup went on to become
the cia's chief of covert operations I
looked him up several years ago for a
CBS documentary he talked about a secret
report prepared for the White House in
1954 by a group of distinguished
citizens headed by former president
Herbert Hoover quote it is now clear
that we are facing an implacable enemy
whose avowed objective is wor world
domination there are no rules in such a
game hitherto accepted Norms of human
conduct do not apply if the United
States is to survive long-standing
American concepts of fair play must be
reconsidered we must learn to subvert
sabotage and destroy our enemies by more
clever more sophisticated more effective
methods than those used against us was
that the prevailing ethic I think that's
an excellent statement of of the
prevailing View at least the view of of
those who'd had any
contact uh with covert operations uh of
one kind or another in other words the
nature of the enemy is such that any
tactics are necessary are justified in
order to board him and defeat him I
believe that was the view and certainly
was my view at the
time Cuba 1961 7 years after operation
success in Guatemala
Bissell was planning another CIA covert
operation the assault has begun on the
dictatorship of Fidel Castro on April
17th 1961 Cuban Exiles trained by the
CIA at a base in Friendly Guatemala
landed on the southern coast of Cuba at
the Bay of Pigs the US had promised air
support but President Kennedy canceled
it the Invaders left defenseless
surrendered seven months after the
disastrous Invasion Kennedy delivered a
major foreign policy address we cannot
as a free Nation compete with our
adversaries in tactics of Terror
assassination false promises counterfeit
mobs and crisis the president was not
telling the truth even as he spoke his
administration was planning a new covert
war on Cuba it would include some of the
dirty tricks the president said we were
above the secret government was prepared
for
anything at one time the CIA organized a
small Department known as executive
action which was a permanent
assassination capability it wasn't just
an assassination capability it was a
capability to discredit or get rid of
people but it could have included
assassination and it did there were at
least eight documented attempts to kill
Castro he says there were two dozen and
there was even one effort to put LSD in
his cigars to help us get rid of the
Cuban leader our secret government
turned to the mafia just as we once made
use of Nazis the gangsters included the
Las Vegas mafioso John roselli the dawn
of Chicago Sam Gian and the boss of
Tampa Santo
traficanti I think we should not have
involved ourselves with the the
mafia I think uh an organization that
does
so is losing control of the security of
its of its
information I think we should have been
afraid that we would open ourselves to
Blackmail if I read you correctly you're
saying it's the involvement with the
mafia that Disturbed you and and and not
the need or a decision to assassinate a
foreign leader correct it's a chilling
thought made more chilling by the
assassination of John Kennedy the
accusations linger in some Minds The
suspicions persist of a dark unsolved
conspiracy behind his murder you can
dismiss them as many of us do but
knowing now what our secret government
plan for Castro the possibility remains
once we decide that anything goes
anything can come home to haunt
us the sad thing of the last few years
is both with regard to Central America
where our covert activities have
included assassination manuals as well
as uh what may have occurred in Libya
with regard to a bombing raid on Qaddafi
a person no American can sympathize with
is that the assassination issue has
reared its head again as an extreme
example of a covert kind of activity my
own sense is we make a great great
mistake and we endanger one person above
anyone else and that's the president if
we engage in assassination types of
techniques because no foreign government
can defeat the the United States
Army but a lot of foreign individuals
can come up with ways of killing an
individual American
citizen Vietnam 1968 American soldiers
are fighting and dying in the jungles of
Southeast
Asia but the Vietnam War didn't start
this
way it started secretly off the books
like so many of these Ventures that have
ended
disastrously the CIA got there early
soon after the Vietnamese won their
independence from the French in
1954 Eisenhower warned that the nations
of Southeast Asia would fall like
dominoes if the Communists led by hoi
men took over all Vietnam to hold the
line we installed in Saigon a puppet
regime under no den Jim American train
Commandos were used to sabotage Bus and
Rail lines and contaminate North
Vietnam's oil supplies Vice President
Nixon brought moral support to Jim but
the situation kept getting worse
President Kennedy sent the green beray
to Vietnam and turned to full scale
counterinsurgency he had once said
Vietnam was the ultimate test of our
will to stem the tide of world communism
by the time of his death there were
15,000 Americans there they were called
advisers the secret war was leading only
to deeper involvement and more
deception it is my duty to the American
people to
report that renewed hostile
actions against United States ships on
the high seas in the Gulf of tonin have
today required me to order the military
forces of the United States to take
action in
reply this president was not telling the
truth either the action in the Gulf of
tonan was not unprovoked South Vietnam
had been conducting secret raids in the
area against the North and the American
Destroyer ordered into the Battle Zone
had advanced warning it could be
attacked but Johnson seized the incident
to Stampede Congress into passing the
Gulf of talken resolution he then used
it as a blank check for the massive
buildup of American
forces you have always had presidents
who as an aberration will
act uh on their own and and then
afterward look to Congress for
authorization retrospectively of their
act but in this case you had a fullress
defense of inherent Presidential Power
inherent executive power and the power
as commander-in-chief to use the Army
and the Navy whatever way they
wanted the Constitution is clear on this
too Congress shall have the power to
declare
war April 1965 two battalions of Marines
land in South VI Vietnam the first of
more than 22 million Americans to fight
there with no Congressional declaration
of war the dirty little war that began
in secret is reaching full
Row free fire zones defoliation the
massacre at mili Napal and the cia's
operation Phoenix to round up torture
and kill suspected Viet
Kong we were murdering these people
incinerating
them Ralph McGee was there for the CIA
and helped set up South Vietnam secret
police my efforts had resulted in the
deaths of many people and I I just for
me it was a period
when I guess I was I consider myself
nearly insane I I just couldn't
reconcile what I had been and what I was
at the time becoming uh and and it was
so painful for me it's just hard for me
to uh express it because I became
completely antisocial I couldn't deal
with anybody I I just was dealing
mentally it was an internal battle every
night I would lay in my bed and think
well this can't be true why are we doing
this why don't we stop why don't why
can't we accept and I just a battle all
night long all day long every minute of
the day I fought this battle over and
over again and it and it to me suicide
became a long for way out of this
turmoil that I could see no other exit
from and finally when I got over that I
wanted to jump off the agency's hotel
the Duke Hotel out there and kill myself
uh and hang a banner the CIA or the CIA
lies or something like that just to try
to bring home to have my death serve
some purpose
to make the American people realize that
the the truth they were being lied to
many of the secret Warriors in Southeast
Asia had no such doubts or
regrets some of the team that later
joined the Iran Contra Enterprise helped
to run the secret war in Laos coming in
from an altitude of about 2,000 ft as
general Richard Secord later put it Laos
belonged to the
CIA American planes blast of the
Communist in the
jungle and on the ground we had our own
secret army the Hong
tribesman the Mong fought the Communist
for 15 years while our secret government
made grandio promises to them about the
future but we abandoned them to the
Communist path at Lao in
1975 oneir of the mountain people died
religious groups helped survivors to
escape and brought some of them to Wasa
Wisconsin I wouldn't be here if my
father and my brothers were involved you
know during this secret War I am here
because I have no choice of being here I
would be let's say an example here right
now know 27 years after you know of a
CIA you know goof up because they
weren't willing to carry through their
you know goals
they think that it was so simple that
people are just like the pawn of a game
like a chess game you know that you can
move them around anywhere you want but
you have to understand that human life
is very different from you know playing
with human life is different from
playing a game because a game you know
once you lose there's nothing at stake
but when you lose a person's life or
devastate whole country as they did to
my country and that is very important
yeah please during the hearings this
summer Oliver North repeated something
we've heard often in the last 40 years
from presidents and the President's Men
I want you to know lying does not come
easy to
me I want you to know that it doesn't
come easy to anybody but I think we all
had to weigh in the balance the
difference between lives and
lies but these memories suggest a
different equation the lives lost
because we lie to ourselves and to
others some one always pays for
decisions made secretly in
Washington looking at such pictures
brings to mind the words of an old Ally
a Vietnamese official who survived the
fall of Saigon and escaped to America
life and death issues for us he says
were merely bargaining chips in the
American pursuit of global
policy I played a minor role in the
Kennedy administration and a much larger
one for half the Johnson years I saw the
Peace Corp go go forth one day and the
Green Beret is the next Once I wrote a
speech for LBJ which implied a striking
coincidence between the president's wish
and God's will a wise older man from my
past called to gently upgrade me he
reminded me that it's very important how
we talk about God because there can be
disastrous consequences to what we say
just so we've learned that presidents
must be very careful talking about what
they want this nation to do because the
United States can unhinge whole
countries simp by shifting our weight we
suffered then the passion of the time
that America's defense and security were
at stake in Vietnam but our Obsession
was the real threat Vietnam pushed the
Cold War morality to its extreme
conclusion exorbitant means to
accomplish limited ends anything goes
the wounds still run
deep there are 58,000 names on this wall
58,000 men died in Vietnam their deaths
and all the deaths in Southeast Asia the
names not on this wall raise painful
questions about our secret government
and our role in the world were we
certain what we ask people to die
for the men who wrote our constitution
tried to make it hard to go to war human
life was at stake they knew and the
character of our Republic War should be
soberly decided publicly debated and
mutually determined by The People's
Representatives it is the people after
all who must fight pay and die once the
choice is made the Constitution was to
protect them from dying for the wrong
reasons it was to protect them from
killing for the wrong
reasons I don't know the public still
don't want to understand what the hell
really
happen but maybe one day they will as
where Central America
I see the same damn thing happening
there in Central America that happened
in Vietnam I think the country has
learned uh very graphically that we
better be really assured that if we're
going to send our young men and women
off to die like this that it better
really be in the interest of every
citizen of this United States to
sacrifice somebody like that so that we
don't have more blood on this wall or
other walls and I think that we ask a
lot of questions now that we didn't use
to ask we want to know why and we'll
we'll hear uh Ali nor uh analysis of
what's happening with the contras and a
lot of us say we want some more
verification of that we want to know
just what are we involving ourselves in
when we go to do
that looking back it's stunning how
easily the Cold War enticed us into
surrendering popular control of
government to the National Security
State we've never come closer to
bestowing Absolute Authority on the
president setting up White House groups
that secretly decide to fight dirty
little Wars is a direct assumption of
the War Powers expressly forbidden by
the
Constitution not since December 1941 has
Congress declared war since then we've
had a police action in Korea advisors in
Vietnam covert operations in Central
America peacekeeping in Lebanon and loow
intensity conflicts going on right now
from Angola to Cambodia we've turned the
War Powers of the United States over to
where we're never really sure who or
what they're doing or what it costs or
who is paying for it the one thing we
are sure of is that this largely secret
global war carried on with less and less
accountability to democratic
institutions has become a way of life
and now we're faced with a question
brand new in our history can we have the
permanent Warfare State and democracy
too a shellfish toxin in 1975 as the war
in Vietnam came to an end Congress took
its first public look at the secret
government senator Frank Church chaired
the select committee to study government
operations the hearings open the books
on a string of lethal activities from
the use of electric pistols and poison
pellets to Mafia connections and Drug
experiments and they gave us a detailed
account of assassination plots against
foreign leaders and the overthrowing of
sovereign governments yes it do we
learned for example how the Nixon
administration had waged a covert war
against the government of Chile's
president Salvador yendi who was
ultimately overthrown by a military crew
and
assassinated like Caesar peering into
the colonies from distant Rome Nixon
said the choice of government by the
Chileans was unacceptable to the
president of the United
States the attitude in the white house
seemed to be if in the wake of Vietnam I
can no longer send in send in the
Marines then I will send in the
CIA but the secret government had also
waged war on the American people the
hearings examined a long train of covert
actions at home from the bugging of
Martin Luther King by the FBI under
Kennedy and Johnson to gross violations
of the law and of civil liberties in the
1970s they went under code names such as
chaos cable splicer garden plot and
leprechaun according to the hearings the
secret government had been given a
license to reach all the way to every
mailbox every college campus every
telephone and every home
you start out breaking foreign laws
since most countries have laws against
secretly overthrowing their governments
and then you end up breaking the law at
home and coming to feel a contempt for
the law for your colleagues and
Associates for the Congress and the
public and for the
Constitution Morton Halper worked for
Henry Kissinger on the National Security
Council in
1969 critical of policies in Cambodia
and Vietnam he resigned he later
discovered his telephone had been bugged
for 21 months he is now the director of
the Washington Office of the American
civil liberties Union which you have is
a growing gap between the perceptions
inside the executive branch about what
threats are to our national security and
the beliefs in the Congress and the
public about the threats to National
Security and that leads to secrecy that
is what drives the policy underground
that's what leads the president to rely
more on covert operations what leads the
president and his officials to lie to
the public and lie to the Congress about
the operation precisely because they
cannot get their way in public debate
they are driven to seek to circumvent
the Democratic process and the president
ought not to be in a position in my
humble opinion of having to go out and
explain to the American people on a
bi-weekly basis or any other kind that I
the president am carrying out the
following secret operations it just
can't be done it is said that the
Constitutional system of checks and
balances has so prohibited the president
so hamstrung him that he cannot
effectively lead foreign policy that he
has to be resorting to clandestine
covert
secret he needs to do that only when he
wants to subvert Congress if Congress
says don't do that and the President
says but I want to I want to I really
want to the conclusion from that isn't
that the president is right it is that
the president is considering being an
outlaw
it's been said that the secret realm of
government is the deformed offspring of
the modern presidency presidents take an
oath to uphold the Constitution but then
they find the cumbersome sharing of
Power with Congress an obstacle and
start looking for shortcuts to silence
their critics and achieve their
objectives and it goes back to the
beginning I mean there is a famous
letter which uh Madison wrote late in
his life in which he said perhaps it is
a universal truth that the loss of
Liberty at home home will be charged to
dangers real or imagined from abroad and
that is the lesson of History was the
incentive so great but we don't seem to
learn the lessons of History just 14
years ago another senate committee
listened to another string of witnesses
the names still Trip off the tongue
Holdman Erman Mitchell and Dean I began
by telling the president that there was
a cancer growing on the presidency and
if the cancer was not removed move the
president himself would be killed by it
the White House crimes known as
Watergate cover would be taken off of
the
telephone and two of the
wires connected with this crimes against
democracy would be to harass opponents
the Nixon White House had set up a
secret team called the plumbers they
bugged phones open mail and burglarized
the president's critics Senator inway
read the Watergate committee a secret
White House memo containing the Nixon
enemies list and how the plumbers
intended to punish them stated a bit
more bluntly how we can use the
available Federal Machinery to screw our
political enemies in both the Watergate
and Iran Contra hearings there was
contempt for congress I believe Congress
set up the FBI to determine what was
going on in this country didn't it among
other things Mr chairman it set up the
CIA to determine what was going on in
respect to foreign tells us didn't it
yes sir and a number of others it didn't
set up the Plumas didn't of course the
Congress doesn't do everything Mr no but
Congress is the only one that's got
legislative power and I don't know
anything any law that gave the president
the power to set himself up what some
people have called a secret police name
of the
diplomas what was the reason to withhold
information from Congress when they uh
inquired about it I simply didn't want
any outside interference
now the outside interference you're
talking about was
Congress and I take it the reason they
were
inquiring was precisely so that they
could fulfill with
information their constitutional
function to pass legislation one way or
the other isn't that
true uh yes I suppose that's true and
that you regarded as outside
interference that even the king of there
was contempt for the law if the
president could authorize a covert break
in and you don't know exactly where that
power would be limited you don't think
it could include murder but other crimes
Beyond covert break-ins do you oh I
don't I don't know where the line is
Senator during your discussions with Mr
Casey Mr McFarland and Mr Poindexter
about the
plan did a question ever arise among you
as to whether what was being proposed
was
legal oh no I I don't think it wasn't I
first of all we operated from the
premise that everything we did do was
legal I'll go back to the and there was
contempt for the
truth Mr Mitchell do you draw a
distinction between not volunteering and
lying well it depends entirely on the
subject matter when you asked the direct
question and you don't volunteer the
direct answer you might say you're not
volunteering but actually uh you're
lying on those well I think we'd have to
find out what the specifics are of what
particular occasion and what
case could you explain to me the
difference that you think there is
between knowing that you've left the
false a false impression or a wrong
impression and lying to use an
oldfashioned
term yeah I think lying we we really
mean uh I mean a deliberate effort to
mislead people uh uh
to a deliberate effort to leave them
with a misleading impression what I
hoped to do was to avoid the question
and duct the question as I President
Reagan's men did learn one thing from
Watergate Richard Nixon said it only
last year just destroy all the
tapes where are these
memoranda which memoranda the memoranda
that you sent up to Admiral po Dexter
seeking the president's approval I think
I shredded most of
that did I did I get them all I I'm not
trying to be flippant I'm
just well that was going to be my very
next question Colonel North isn't it
true that you shredded
them I I believe I
did do you think that what we've seen of
The Secret sale of arms to Iran and the
private war in Nicaragua is on a par
with what we saw at
Watergate oh the substance of it is far
above Watergate you have the sale of
armaments to terrorist groups which can
only forment more kidnapping and more
terror and and finance it you have the
doing of this by members of the Armed
Forces a very scary thing uh you have
the government at part in least put in
motion doing things that Congress has
forbidden direct illegality you have
constitutional abuses that are enormous
what gate did Drive Richard Nixon from
office I shall resign the presidency
effective at noon
tomorrow the imperial presidency was
down but not
out Ronald Reagan ran in 1980 with a
strong and clear message the world was a
hostile place and closing in on America
Russian troops were in Afghanistan
sandinistas were in Nicaragua and
Americans were being held in Iran
President Reagan wanted to reinvigorate
the CIA and he chose a tough director to
run it his campaign manager William
Casey they were ideological soulmates
true cold warriors on the offensive in
seven years Ronald Reagan approved over
50 major covert operations more than any
president since John F Kennedy Reagan
and Casey set the agenda but it was this
man's job to carry it out in Oliver
North they had their dou
07 North primary mission was to keep the
Contra war going despite the
Congressional ban on aid for 2 years he
masterminded a privately funded airlift
to Honduras According to some reports
criminal elements use the secret airlift
to smuggle drugs back into the United
States with profits being used to buy
more weapons for the Contra two
congressional committees are
investigating those reports were there
contras who relied on the profits of
Narcotics in order to buy arms and to
survive yes I'm convinced of that
Senator John KY of Massachusetts head a
foreign relations
subcommittee once you open up a
clandestine Network which has the
ability to deliver weapons or other
goods from this country leaving Airfield
secretly under the sanction of a quote
covert operation uh with public
officials DEA Customs law enforcement
whatever pulled back because of the
covert sanctioning you've opened the
pipeline for nefarious types who are
often involved in these kinds of
activities to become the people who
bring things back in Oliver North had
been told the airlift was using
questionable
characters Robert Owen his contact man
with the contras wrote from the field
that some of the leaders were running
drugs in February of ' 86 Owen advised
North that a resupply plane had been
used for shipping drugs in Owen's words
part of the crew had criminal
records the second sentence says nice
group The Boys
choose who are the
boys
CIA so what happens is the president of
the United States says this is the
National Security you must step back and
let these people do their job and
therefore a lot of Smugglers drug
traffickers others go through the back
door I don't think the president of the
United States saids specifically look
the other way to these things I don't
think the president of the United States
knew these things were going on but the
president of the United States did
encourage to such a degree the
continuation of Aid to the conference
and it was so clear through Casey and
point exter Etc that this was going to
please the president if it happened it's
clear that there were those who turned
their heads and looked the other way
because they knew that this major goal
was out there and it was part of it and
if there happened to be these minor
aberration as people referred to them
that was a price you were paying in the
effort to accomplish the larger goal
which larger goal obviously was against
the law and against the wishes of the
Congress and against the American people
how does it happen that to be
anti-communist we become undemocratic as
if we have to subvert our society to
save it this is partly the answer the
powers claimed by presidents and
National Security have become the
controlling wheel of government driving
everything else secrecy then makes it
possible for the president to POS as the
sole competent judge of what will best
protect our security secrecy permits the
White House to control what others know
and that's power how many times have we
heard a president say if you only knew
what I know you would understand why I'm
doing what I'm doing but it's a
self-defeating situation someone said
everything secret degenerates even the
administration of justice so in the
bunker of the White House The Men Who
served the president put loyalty above
analysis and judgment yields to
obedience just salute and follow
orders this Lieutenant Colonel is not
going to challenge a decision of the
commander-in-chief for whom I still work
and I am proud to work for that
commander-in-chief and if the
commander-in-chief tells this Lieutenant
Colonel to go stand in the corner and
sit on his head I will do
so that notion trouble Senator inaway a
combat hero of World War II he reminded
Colonel north of the military code of a
soldier's Duty the uniform code makes it
abundantly clear that it must be the
lawful orders of a superior
officer in fact it says members of the
military have an obligation to
disobey unlawful
orders this
principle was considered so important
that
we we the government of the United
United States proposed that it be
internationally applied in the Newberg
trials and so in the Newberg trials we
said that the fact that the
defendant may I please uh
register I find this
offensive I find you're engaging in a
personal attack on Colonel North and
you're far removed from the issues in
this case colon North's lawyer deflected
Senator inaway but some of North's
fellow officers watching on television
took issue with the colonel I'm 2 years
senior Oliver North out of the Naval
Academy and the only thing he's got on
me is a SilverStar and six more years in
the core and when Oliver North started
to say the things he started to say I
literally wanted to throw things at my
TV set by seriously considering mailing
my Naval Academy ring back to the Naval
Academy and denying ever having gone
there I was so embarrassed and
humiliated that a professional military
officer would stoop to the dishonor and
disgrace and war
mongery that Oliver North and point
Dexter and McFarland and the rest of the
crew did selling arms to the Iranians
after they blew up the Beirut Barracks
after they blew up the Beirut Embassy is
the most immoral thing that's like
selling zeyon B to the Germans after you
found out the Holocaust is underway one
of my drill instructors the Marine Corps
by the way we're talking about at that
time there were a lot of protests in
Washington DC and somebody said while
those commi lovers or whatever and
instructor told us something as we were
about to graduate he said what you're
fighting for might be wrong or right
nobody really knows but he said there's
a constitution that allows those people
to be out in the streets protesting he
said that's what's worth fighting for
that's what the Constitution is he said
that's what you took an oath to when you
put those bars on as a second Lieutenant
you better remember that I don't think
Oliver North had that drill
instructor
it was career military men who managed
the Iran Contra debacle under Reagan and
Casey North porn Dexter McFarland Secord
sing laab were all trained to fight Wars
not run foreign policy in war the aim is
absolute and simple destroy the enemy no
matter what they had little
understanding of politics in Iran
Nicaragua and most important in
Washington our foreign policy has has
increasingly become a military policy
Ronald Reagan has doubled the number of
military men on the staff of the
National Security Council what was
created in 1947 as a civilian Advisory
Group to the president has become a
command post for covert operations run
by the military far removed from public
View and congressional oversight they
are accountable only to the one man they
serve the framers of the Constitution
feared a permanent state of war with the
commander-in chief served by an elite
private Corps who put the claims of The
Sovereign above the
Constitution this is the first page of
an
order uh signed and approved by
President Reagan this is the Ultimate
Weapon of the secret government the
National Security decision directive the
NSD every president since Harry Truman
has issued them they're not published in
any government register Ronald Reagan
has signed at least 280 such directives
they cover everything from outer space
to nuclear weapons to covert operations
in Iran and Nicaragua in essence by an
arbitrary and secret decree the
president can issue himself a license to
do as he will where he will and the only
ones who need to know are the secret
agents who carry it out the Knights of
the Oval Office agency you have
testified that as a member of the
National Security Council staff you
conducted a covert operation and my
question is um did the president
specifically designate the National
Security Council staff for that purpose
I think what I have said consistently is
that I believe the president has the
authority to do what he wants with his
own staff that I was a member of his
staff that Mr McFarland was and that
Admiral Poindexter was and that in
pursuing the president's foreign policy
goals of support for the Nicaraguan
resistance he was fully within his
rights to send us off to talk to foreign
heads of state to seek the assistance of
those foreign heads of state to use
other than US Government monies and to
do so without a
finding without a finding there's a law
which requires presidents to make a
finding that the national interest will
be served by a covert action and to
report it to Congress in a timely
fashion the idea is to make sure that
both the Congress and the executive each
elected independently by the people are
accountable for what is done in our name
but President Reagan gave himself
permission to ignore the requirements of
the law and when he sold arms to our AOW
enemy in Iran he signed the finding
after the fact and then ordered that it
not be reported to Congress the
president becomes his own Arbiter of the
law in matters of national security or
in Richard Nixon's words when the
president does it that means it is not
illegal I think it is very important for
the American people to understand that
this is a dangerous world that we live
at risk and that this nation is at risk
in a dangerous world the issue here is
not whether we should pursue a foreign
policy that guards against the Soviet
Union that's not the issue because
obviously in significant ways the Soviet
Union represents a threat to our
interests around the world and to our
values the problem is is the P the
excessive American perception of that
threat the pathological ways we canr
that threat and what it leads us to do
because in addition to distorting our
domestic priorities to undermining our
Democratic civil liberties at home in
the end arguably it actually does damage
to our national security there is a
Doctrine called the reason of state that
whatever is necessary to defend the
state's
survival must be done by the individuals
responsible for it
doesn't that take precedence over this
18th century set of values I think the
survival of the state is what the
Constitution is about the reason of
State argument is a very slippery thing
and at heart at best aoral the idea
imoral oh you bet I would say it ranges
from amoral on the good side to just
just basically immoral assume I'm
president I'm going to say Professor
fermage that's all wonderful but I deal
in an ugly world the United States is a
wonderful Place relatively because of
this document because of the values the
founders uh inculcated in US but the
world Beyond these borders are pretty
ugly world people don't like us people
don't share those values people are out
to get us and if I don't do the ugly
things that are necessary to protect us
from an ugly world you won't be able to
exercise the right of free speech out at
that University I would say poppycock Mr
President that is that is simply
nonsense the whole fight is over means
not ends every president with every good
intention and every Tyrant with whatever
his intention has used precisely the
same argument that is don't constrain Me
by means and I will get you there safely
and well and I think anytime we accept a
reason of State argument to justify
means that are totally in congruent with
the values of our state we're on the
high road to tyranny and we deserve to
be
there our nation was born in Rebellion
against tyranny we are the fortunate
Heirs of those who fought for America's
freedom and then Drew up a a remarkable
Charter to protect it against arbitrary
power the Constitution begins with the
words we the people the government
gathers its Authority from the people
and the governors are as obligated to
uphold the law as the Govern that was
revolutionary listen now to the voices
of some people who believe the fight for
Freedom isn't
over I'm a citizen of this country
that's the highest thing you can be and
you better tell me the truth because we
don't run secret country and we don't
run a secret government and Roger
Wilkins he and his family have long
battle for a more just America if we
continue these policies to Rob ourselves
in order to feed this National Security
monster we are going to continue to
degrade American life that's real
National Security National Security for
the United States is making the United
States a good place to live where people
want to be active intelligent involved
citizens for people at the top to say
this world is so complicated in so
dangerous just a few of us need to
govern it and hold the secrets in and we
will tell you what's good for you that
is moving down the road to
dictatorship represents roughly two
weeks of the National Security argument
now interferes with every American's
right to understand its government
that's what secrecy is all about these
days Scott Armstrong is director of the
National Security archive a public
interest group devoted to a more open
government he has poured over the Iran
Contra evidence and believes Congress
has failed to deal with the fundamental
constitutional issues inability of
Congress to interpret the article one
powers that they have over foreign
policy in relationship to the
president's powers under Article 2 and
to say wait a minute this isn't the way
the Constitution was set up this isn't
what the founding fathers intended the
founding fathers never intended for
George Washington to be able to go to
George III and say I don't like what
Congress has done here give me some
money I'll hire some mercenaries and
we'll call it American foreign policy
that would have been
treason Gail Jensen marily Lee fian and
Nancy Jones live in Minneapolis last
summer they organized citizens around
the state to monitor the Iran Contra
hearings as a way of increasing public
awareness the church I go to we we have
a hymn that words go something like uh I
wish that my eyes had never been opened
because if they'd been opened I'd have
to do something about it and I think
that that's a problem with a lot of
people in this country is that they want
they don't want their eyes to be opened
because they're very comfortable very
secure and if their eyes are open
they're going to have to do something
the people that we're talking to have
quite uh they recognize that we're only
talking about subverting the
Constitution that's all the American
people are part of the checks and
balances it's not just the executive
branch and the Congress and the judicial
branch the people have a role
too
I grew up just feeling as though the
system out here is pretty hunky dory all
you have to do is admire it and respect
it and let it keep operating we'll
always have freedom we'll always have
democracy we'll always have free
elections I've got a question you know
that that's going to continue unless I
decide to go for it and keep on
affecting
change Pete edstrom is a Dairy Farmer in
Wisconsin a believer in the American way
with his pastor and other Farmers he
started a newspaper to Rally their
neighbors to Community
Action if there's anything I want my
children to understand it's it's the the
concept of the old town meeting type of
politics where people do it people are
involved people are
informed uh I think that probably the
problems this country are in right now
the hearings are a classical example are
clearly a case of of an American people
not having been
involved I would like to welcome all of
you here this afternoon to the Wisconsin
Valley
Fair Walter John Chilson is a Republican
state senator in Wisconsin a popular
conservative who says the hearings this
summer forced him to reconsider his
support for US policy in Central America
when you've been a republican for 20
years and you you like to say that the
Republicans are the best guys the guys
in the white hats and uh the uh
recognition that uh it a deed in this
very important situation that wasn't the
case that uh the policy was dead wrong
uh I felt an obligation to uh to speak
out Senator Chilson's change of heart
was personal and political at the urging
of Liz their daughter he and his wife
went to Central America to see for
themselves when they returned he was
still critical of the Sistas in
Nicaragua but convinced that an American
backed war on peasants was not the way
to stop
communism there's a great danger that in
this country we would accept
automatically uh things that are said to
us in a in a doctrinaire fashion you
know that we've got to be fighting
communism and so that can uh be the
whitewash that uh can cover up a
multitude of sins I think that's a
strong evidence of that is what was
going on and uh we can't uh be fighting
uh
uh for democracy in uh Central America
and uh seeing it lost back here at home
you know and being it seeing it shredded
back here at

home it doesn't have to be the people
who wrote this constitution lived in a
world more dangerous than hour they were
surrounded by territory controlled by
hostile powers on the edge of a vast
Wilderness yet they understood that even
in perilous times the strength of
self-government was public debate and
public consensus to put aside these
basic values out of fear to imitate the
foe in order to defeat him is to shred
the distinction that makes us different
in the end not only our values but our
methods separate us from the enemies of
freedom in the world the decisions we
make are inherent in the methods that
produce them an open Society cannot
survive a secret
government constitutional democracy you
see is no romantic notion it's our
defense against ourselves the one foe
who might defeat
us I'm Bill

Moyers


## Keywords:
