---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PwHTd7AnZ7c
---

# Video
The failure of Neoliberalism and how to solve it | George Monbiot interview
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PwHTd7AnZ7c)

## Transcript:
foreign States own our Public
Services it it's it's hard to get your
head around that and this is the party
of sovereignty but people who most
loudly Proclaim their patriotism are
always the first to sell us down the
river it is literally a show yeah
there's no other way of describing it
and and it's it was bound to happen so
when Mrs thater said there is no
alternative meaning there's no
alternative to neoliberalism in that
case she was describing what is has
become the political reality in this
country we can overthrow against the
odds these powerful and nefarious forces
of
neoliberalism and restore Harmony to the
land George Mia hello how's it going
great yeah great to see you great to see
you too very glad you're here um welcome
back to the politics Joe basement and
congratulations publish day as well
thank you yeah it's a bit scary but but
something to celebrate no less um The
Invisible Doctrine by yourself and Peter
Hutcherson um out today and we're going
to talk about neol ISM we're going to
talk about mental health
well-being but before we get into
matters of such importance um for people
unfamiliar perhaps with your work or who
you are tell us what you do um I'm a
journalist and activist professional
Troublemaker or so I'm told um I've been
in this business for 39 years now
amazingly um and have failed at just
about everything world even more
than it was when I started great work
yeah well done something to be proud of
um
let's let's let's start with mental
well-being then let's um let's get into
it I mean in terms of by global
comparison I think there's only really
one other country that Pips Us in terms
of how poor mental well-being is and
that I believe is usbekistan according
to Global so we beat usbekistan y good
good stuff as we knock them knock them
into last place wonderful um survey of
71 countries and we are second to bottom
on mental well-being overall mental
health and that people might say might
find that not particularly surprising
perhaps but I would suggest that when
you combine a statistic like that with
the level of economic development that
exists in a country like Britain you
kind of go well if we're talking
about material gains in terms of GDP
standard well maybe actually not
standards of living anymore but
certainly from a historical perspective
you know peace dividend Etc what on
Earth is going on what do you what do
you see driving this the things we were
told would make us happy but what's
happened through the past 4 5 years is
that we've been living under this system
which tells us that we are alone
effectively you're a consumer you're not
a citizen anymore you're a consumer and
you're sitting at home and you're making
your economic choices you don't really
have any political power anymore we
don't really have any psychological
power anymore there's no such thing as
Society just men and women in their
families as Margaret thater said um and
we are being good little citizens good
little consumers um obedient
unthreatening to power disconnected from
each other and we're falling apart and
the thing is that social solidarity is
essential to mental well-being we stand
together or we fall apart
mentally and social solidarity has been
smashed in this country and it's been
splashed quite deliberately because from
thater onwards the program was to
atomize and Rule and when she said there
is no such thing as society that was a
Manifesto that's that's how she wanted
it to be cuz there is such a thing as
Society but you can basically destroy it
and she said you know the purpose of
Economics is to change the heart and the
soul and she did that and tragically
subsequent governments have sustained
her program you know she saw Tony Blair
as her greatest Legacy Tony Blair saw
her as perhaps his greatest influence
and it just continued and it grinds down
our minds that separation from each
other that sense that we're not all in
it together that sense that we're now an
Us and Them society and that the US has
to be suppressed perpetually if we step
out of line if we protest if we do
anything a bit different we're
immediately demonized attacked perhaps
prosecuted we're frightened and we're
alone so is it any Wonder M that we got
a mental health crisis well you probably
have to say no wouldn't you and I I
would love we will talk more about that
the sort of the sovereign individual and
the consequences of that when it comes
to questions about well-being but I
would just like to probe further this
point about the kind of the uniqueness
of the UK's position there because yes
okay Margaret Thatcher wasn't the
president of France but equally you
would you you would think you'd be able
to say well the economic consensus
broadly there is a degree of alignment
between these nations what is it that's
different about the UK I and it's true
that this sort of overarching ideology
called neoliberalism has has spread
around the world you know it has
affected every country but the UK was
its principal laboratory in the rich
world it's where in the rich World it
kicked off in
1979 in in in poorer Nations like
Indonesia and Chile it had already got
going through coups through military
force but this was the first country
where it was done through a nominally
democratic system and part of the
purpose of neoliberalism is to
individuate blame the individual is to
blame for their circumstances or can is
to be credited with their circumstances
if you're rich it's all down to your
hard work and Enterprise never mind that
you were born rich never mind if you got
advantages of class of color of whatever
it might be a small learn from your
father exactly it's it's entirely down
to you you know so like Donald Trump is
like the epitome of this you know the
self attribution fallacy I did all this
myself yeah apart from the couple of
billion you got from your
dad um and but if you're poor it's also
internalized you're to blame for being
poor it's because you're effectless it's
because you're unenterprising if your
kid is fat it's because you're a bad
parent not that we've got this
obesogenic industry um these
corporations which are the vectors of
obesity pushing junk food at us not cuz
the school playing playing fields have
been sold off for the development uh by
government no it's your fault and the
blame is drilled into us all the time
until we come to believe it we
internalize it and you think yeah I
really am a person I'm a useless
person and that in combination with what
I was discussing before that atomization
of society is devastating to our psyches
yeah I think that uh M Fisher writes
about that right capitalist realism the
sort of on WE the fatigue that send in
and how uh politically corrosive that is
because if you can destroy people's
imagination if you can destroy the
capacity to imagine a better world a
better future you essentially destroy
your political opposition yeah um in
terms of younger people in our society
because certainly um here in the UK if
we're looking at sort of the um density
frequency severity actually of mental
health issues we we do see a a high
degree of pronouncement in that younger
population and much of the the rhetoric
around it is very similar to what you've
just described basically you know uh
your your generation is soft you know
you didn't have to go through rationing
whatever it is you take take your pick
of the excuses and if we do actually
apply that structural contique if we
reject the idea that the individual is
responsible and go okay so what is the
the system that the young person is now
going into is it um an insecure um labor
market yes it is uh I would go further
than saying it's insecure I would say
it's a a broken housing market you know
in terms the the classic things a
society typically promises its citizens
Improvement of life better standard of
living we we've essentially broken those
promises I I I don't think it's
surprising that we then look at them and
go well they're depressed and they're
anxious well as a young person you just
bait now you you adjust a profit making
unit which can be moved around and
exchanged and extracted from So You
extract rent from housing you extract
rent in the form of interest payments
for your student loan um you uh have um
how you extract labor in the most um
fragmented and um and and undermined
sense so that you know young people have
got no labor security at all um and you
effectively trade young people as if
they are units and this reaches its
apery in children in care and young
people in care because they are now
tradable um a young person in C changes
hands amongst private equity and
Sovereign wealth funds for 100,000
that's what they're now worth because
each of them uh represents a profit of
Â£910 a week on average to one of these
corporations and these corporations have
have fixed the system so that it can't
be reformed in effect because they Lobby
against any reform of the system
everyone knows what's wrong with it
everyone knows that it's in total chaos
that it's bankrupting local authorities
local authorities because they can't set
up their own provision are having to
make Emer Mercy spot purchases of
provision from these private Equity
companies these Venture capitalists
these Sovereign wealth funds at enormous
outrageous prices their business model
um is based on um building or renting
houses in the cheapest parts of the
country and then when a a a local
Authority um puts out a market demand
saying we got we got a child needs care
say yeah we we can provide that place
which means the child could be moved
hundreds of miles from their home
breaking all their bonds with family
with friends with teachers with
everything that might give them any
sense of trust and belonging so they're
uprooted purely in order to serve this
corporate machine it's not in the
benefits of the child it's not in the
benefits of public finances it's just in
the benefits of profit making and these
companies are making 20% a year that on
average that's that's a average profit
it's a stupendous level of profit from
these tradable assets called children in
care so yeah that's the extreme end of
it but there's a whole spectrum of young
people being exploited in in ways which
s end up with that logical
extreme so tell me more about that kind
of um the most striking part of that to
me was the relocation right hundreds of
miles you end up disconnected
disassociated
almost in and particularly in a broader
societal context in which the
proliferation of digital technology
means that our day-to-day interaction
whether it's just conversation face to
face spending time with each other
particularly again I'm speaking from a
younger perspective here but we've
outsourced a great deal of that to these
ginormous digital corporations and I I
wonder if you could talk a little bit
about the consequences of that for
social fracturing social atomization so
when social media came along I thought
this was the best thing that's ever
happened to us because I thought a we
can break the strangle hold of the
mainstream media which was essential
because most of my mainstream media is
owned by offshore billionaires whose
interests are the polar opposite of ours
but they spend their whole time trying
to persuade us that what's good for them
is is good for us um but also it's going
to bring us together into bigger and
more powerful citizens movements than
we've ever seen before you you look back
at history and you look at the levelers
revolts or the diggers revolts in the
164s If Only They had social media they
could have all risen up at the same time
instead of being picked off one by one
by the newy that's right exactly and
that was that was what I thought social
media was going to deliver but of course
as usual I was naive about these things
and it's taken over or created by
billionaires who again have got the
opposite interests to ours and it's just
another form of predatory
exploitation and of course it fits very
well with the neoliberal ideas of
constant competition and comparison ah
he's got more likes than me more friends
than me you know you're just always
comparing
yourself a to other people but B to a
sort of transcendental form of yourself
that you can never asart to so you know
you've got all this sort of digital
manipulation which can make you look so
much more beautiful than you really are
um and and that's the image that you
present but of course you can never live
up to your own image so you end up
consuming yourself competing with
yourself and on top of everything else I
mean I don't think it's a loot cause but
I think it ex exacerbates all these
other tendencies that we're talking
about it just Raks your mind out I think
because when I when I talk about this I
think on the one hand right it C it
could and has I think still has the
possibility to be actually quite a
democratizing force right you know
whether it's uh well I was I don't think
the Arab Spring is necessarily the best
example of these a powerful um you know
uh all-encompassing change making
revolutions but they made a good start
yeah yeah some they start they got there
they started get getting towards it
right but you know the fa has changed
the regime stays the same but I don't
know um School climate strikes or black
lives matter yeah particular actually in
the wake of George Floyd and the way the
sort of the global reach of that
execution
okay it it isn't as simple for me as
saying you know that this is a net
negative there I think there are clear
whether it's Civic engagement direct
democracy initiatives participatory
budgeting could be an idea for example
and that actually if we were to I think
challenge the kind of the power bases
the concentration of power and capital
that own these companies there is a
model there that could be that could be
useful and enrich our society the it's a
set of tremendously useful tools which
if they were not in the hands of
billionaires but they were in our hands
if social media were controlled by
cooperatives if it was a Commons in
other words owned by the community that
uses it that would be the most powerful
Commons that humankind has ever invented
and we could do amazing things with it
not least transforming democracy because
digital tools give us the opportunity to
intervene in decision making every day
whenever we want to to be permanently
politically active citizens shaping the
decisions that shape our lives and
instead we have this 18th century system
I mean it's quite amazing that in the
21st century we should still be laboring
under this system where every 5 years
the parties put themselves forward for
election they publish a Manifesto with
several hundred items in it which nobody
reads and then they campaign on the
basis of one or two of those or even on
a three-word slogan get brexit done the
party with the most votes then gets into
office even if it's got a minority of
the total vote and assumes a mandate for
everything that was in the manifesto
plus everything that wasn't in the
manifesto that it can get through
Parliament for the next 5 years it
presumes consent for its entire program
we don't accept the principle of
Presumed consent in sex why should be
accepted in politics it's a powerful
Point really powerful Point uh we we'
we've
covered the doctrine aspect I think tell
me more about the invisible part of this
what what makes this ideology we we're
pointing at multiple examples here I
mean how how invisible is it yeah well
that's the amazing thing we could say oh
this is going wrong that's going wrong
and oh yeah and all those other things
are going and we don't connect them we
don't see that it's all part of the same
Doctrine and it's a Doctrine with a name
or it used to have a name neoliberalism
that's what they called it in 1938 the
people who promoted this Doctrine came
up with this new term neoliberalism it's
not a very good word for it but that's
the word they gave it and um and it was
a very different Doctrine to the
prevailing ones at the time um people
many people thought thought it was
absolutely disgusting and outrageous
they were horrified by it except very
rich people thought it was the best
thing they ever come across because yeah
this is everything we want fantastic rip
down taxation rip down redistribution
rip down regulation rip down Public
Services rip down the economic safety
net destroy trade unions destroy protest
effectively destroy political choice and
just have this thing called the market
which everyone is going to make their
choices in the market and through buying
and selling we will work out who the
worthy people and the Unworthy people
are because the the worthy people will
have the grace of the Invisible Hand
bestowed upon them and will know who
they are because they're rich and the
Unworthy people will know who they are
because they're poor so the rich people
loved this but it was otherwise really
really unpopular so it had to operate
below the radar and it had to build
what's been described as a neoliberal
international network of think tanks of
academic Department Departments of tame
journalists of tame government officials
who would quite secretly build this
program which they did very very
effectively and you get these little
glimpses from the odd autobiography and
the odd um incautious comment about how
they did it and we just weren't supposed
to see this and within a couple of
decades they dropped the name for it and
they the whole story they told us was
well this is just the way things are
it's just just a natural order humankind
we're just selfish and greedy and that's
a good thing and the Richer people at
the top get the richer everyone will get
because the wealth will trickle down and
if you're going against this natural
order you know you're thwarting the way
that human beings should be and so by
getting rid of the name and not
replacing it with any other name a they
left us totally confused but B they were
able to create the impression that this
wasn't an ideology at all that there was
nothing new about it there was nothing
odd about it there was nothing
outrageous about it it's just the way
things are and so we end up with the
extraordinary
situation that an ideology that was as
dominant is as dominant as communism was
in the Soviet Union is unknown to most
of the people in our
society can we talk about this in the
context of um our two main parties here
in the UK right because I've actually
I've made the made this point before and
produced some sniggers I think when I
was on the BBC and said it on Laura kbur
show that essentially you know the
thatcherite consensus has continued
since the' 80s and there'll be people
you know um sort of I don't know how to
describe them holders of acceptable
thought opinion makers shall we shall we
say who sort of say well how on Earth
can you look at the policy programs of
let's say uh the new labor government
and at the time the conservative party
that was competing it how can you look
at David Cameron's conservatives and um
Ed mban for example and say these two
people have the same political platform
is it are they kind of um the people
that argue in that way are they missing
the point that there is essentially a
broad socioeconomic consensus that sits
behind this and that we're just
twiddling around the edges or am I kind
of being simplistic and naive to suggest
that no there's this whole scope of
political thought that exists beyond the
Realms of this actually very narrow
place that our electoral politics
occupies well I'll go for option one I
thought you might yeah yeah so so so if
you take a look at new labor Tony bl's
government yeah in opposition they had
promised to renationalize certain
privatized public services such as
Railways for instance they had also
promised um to bring prisons back into
the public sector which were being
privatized um and a whole load of other
things which you know made them look
pretty good and you think yeah okay we
want that that's great soon as they get
into power they dropped those pledges
and instantly start privatizing more
prisons we've had Mariana matsuko in
here who's spoken at length about sort
of How It's capitalism for the rich and
essentially sort of
statism I wouldn't say communism but you
know Central planned economy for the
state in that programs like that
essentially you socialize the risk it's
not the the the fallacy of capitalism is
like you take the risk you reap you reap
the profit but in actual fact what we
were seeing with something like PFI or
otherwise um or you know 2008 financial
crash okay the the the capitalist
response to that is always say well I'm
afraid your bank is collapsing but uh
the game's the game you know obvious now
obviously it's not far more reaching
consequences and there's I think not a
world really where you can just allow
the financial system to collapse but
nonetheless you sort of go well yeah
we've been making it big for decades and
yes um you know uh Gordon Brown the bank
is collapsing now but you really you
really have no choice but uh but to bail
us out and and thus the risk is
socialized exactly they they reap the
profit well and this is particularly the
case in public services because a public
service can never be allowed to collapse
completely there'll be a revolution you
know if if if the NHS simply collapsed
and hospitals just shut their doors yeah
people would be out on the streets
despite all protest and all you could
you could put that back in its bottle
there'd be some nuisance noise yeah yeah
there'd be some and maybe some bad
smells yeah I think so yeah and and I so
so you have to bail it out you know
however bad a public service gets it
can't be allowed just to fail completely
it can allowed to get be allowed to get
really really bad but not to completely
collapse and that means that the
corporations can simply walk away they
can milk away enormous levels of profit
we're seeing this in the water industry
at the moment you know they've extracted
72 billion in dividends since
privatization most of which was
extracted with the help of debt so they
loaded themselves up with debt took the
money out as dividends and then left the
debt in the system knowing that one day
they're going to collapse and they just
walk away from the debts leaving the
state is not just a whole W and debt but
Rivers full of sage and a totally
failing water supply system you know
everything just literally go into
could we talk a little bit about see
you're talking about the waterways right
now I mean there's been some headlines
in the last couple weeks about the
environment and youcy planning to do
these test tests a variety of different
sites I think there's about 400
different swimming locations around
country saying they're going to monitor
things like eoli other harmful bacteria
to ass whether these swimming spots are
safe I mean Beyond uh possibly being
closing the bar door after the horse has
bolted is there a a solution to this
problem that doesn't include public
ownership doesn't include wholesale
reform of the sector I mean I I don't
think I I asked you about the waterways
last time so I've interested to hear
your thoughts on it well it I mean when
Mrs Thatcher tried to justify water
privatization in 198 9 she said she said
you know you you people on the labor
benches you're just talking rubbish
you'll wait and see you'll see what the
outcomes are and you'll see it'll be a
much better system than it is at the
moment now In fairness to the water
companies you know at least 90% of the
water coming out of our Taps is actually
water so you know trium for
privatization um and some of the water
flowing down the rivers is water as well
yes you know so it's not a total failure
failure now oh total failure the rivers
are seem strangely warm and L of the
time but that's great for swimming isn't
it yes it is yeah yeah I me it's just I
mean it is literally a show yeah
there's no other way of describing it
and and it's it was bound to happen and
the thing is that you know people like
Bob cry this labor MP at the time were
predicting exactly what was going to
happen and describing it correctly as
legalized theft from the public realm
because these invaluable assets were
flogged off for a fraction of of what
they were really worth and people made
massive fortunes overnight who had
bought up those assets and then dumped
them now they're in the hands almost
entirely of foreign capital of the
private Equity companies but also
Sovereign Capital so this
extraordinary situation where the
government has banned the telegraph from
being taken over by the United Arab
Emirates because the telegraph is
absolutely essential to our National
character and identity and well-being as
as we all know so well but it's
perfectly permissible and indeed it has
happened now it is a case that UAE
countries have taken over large parts of
our water system and large parts of
residential care for children and care
as well that's just fine perfectly
acceptable the railways as well great
example right a lot of European powers
own own the franchise and foreign States
own Public
Services it it's it's hard to get your
head around that and this is the party
of sovereignty these are the people are
constantly going on about their
patriotism they love for the country
Britain comes first we keep the
foreigners out you know the people who
most loudly Proclaim their patriotism
are always the first to sell us down the
river yeah what the benite idea of
sovereignty right the pen The Sword and
the purse and we've well we've
outsourced defense the sword to the
Americans um we've we've we've we've
recently reclaimed our sovereignty from
from the EU over over our um lawmaking
and and we've lost economic sovereignty
in in the sense you just describing um
to backtrack a little bit and we were
talking about the labor party and I I I
I'm asking about Tony Blair but I'm
doing it with an eye to the conversation
we will have about K ster and labor in a
moment's
time about whether or not an opposition
party has ever been more radical in
government than it was in opposition
because what you described there with
with labor was bold bold well may not NE
actually that bold or radical ideas but
ideas like public ownership that get
moderated in government whether by the
sort of the soft touch of the Civil
Service uh the reality of the situation
they encounter when they actually sort
of get under the Bonnet and say okay
this is how things are set up how they
work all political imperative and at the
moment there's this sort of dance going
on where you're told well yes um you
know the the the the the lab party as it
stands right now isn't promising the
world because it would be irresponsible
to do so but just wait until they get
into power and then and then you'll see
you know the power the power of Reform
the power of the the radical things that
we're going to do and and I look at for
example new labor and I go well the
complete opposite is is is what what you
just described and I don't know if there
is an example of of an opposition party
that once it gets into power is actually
more radical than when it was in
opposition if an opposition party wants
to do radical things in power it has to
prepare people for that it has to
explain it it has to lay out a clear
program for radical change if you just
drop it on people without any
preparation then people will be
horrified and and won't know what to
make of it they won't understand it and
so they'll react against it that's a
simple R of politics we have to prepare
people but also if this story were were
correct which clearly that suddenly when
start is in office the true radical
Karma will emerge that none of us have
so far been able to detect if that were
true then his opposition the
conservatives and others would be able
to
say a perfectly reasonable way well this
wasn't in the manifesto you don't have a
mandate to do any of this stuff you know
if this wasn't the package that you sold
to the public and it wasn't anywhere in
that package and you suddenly land this
on people after the election ction well
then that's illegitimate it doesn't even
Accord with our extremely weak and thin
system that we call
democracy conform to the the bare
minimum standards that we've set yeah
yeah um okay we we'll talk about that
more detail a moment but let's go go
back to the text go back to the book I
mean something you wrote about is how
neoliberalism has kind of led to this
loneliness epidemic could you talk about
that in a little bit more detail so we
are the ultrasocial mamal um uh with the
possible exception of the naked mole rat
which is technically a you social Manel
bit like be and was but we'll put naked
mole rats aside and probably best best
not to talk make it the expirated
version is that the human beings are the
ultrasocial manal yes um who are more
connected to each other than any other
species certain making and and that con
is absolutely essential to our
well-being now the neol liberal myth is
that we're Prim faily selfish and greedy
right and we haven't got a bit of
selfishness and greed in us you know we
can't deny that the value surveys show
that very clearly but there's are not in
the great majority of people our
dominant characteristics our dominant
human characteristics are empathy
altruism kindness towards others Family
feeling Community feeling wanting a
better world not just for yourself sure
for yourself but also for other people
that that really marks us out and that
is a very strong determinance of our
Humanity but we've been persuaded all
this time that we should be selfmade men
and women as if such a thing were
possible it's a complete pipe dream that
you could be such a thing and that in
order to become that thing you must cut
yourself off from other people and that
state of Splendid isolation is certain
to Aspire
towards and all the time what we see in
public life is that selfishness and
greed being modeled because those who
dominate a societies are actually very
different psychologically to most of the
people in those societies broadly
speaking we're a society of altruists
governed by
Psychopaths and
so here we are in our little bubbles
being the good consumer SL Citizens
We're supposed to be the good subjects
but it that way uh doing what we're
meant to do being consuming stuff in our
own rooms um scrolling on social media
watching the Telly cut off from each
other and lo and behold it has
devastating effects on us who would have
guessed and it it reaches third spaces
as well right it's sort of this war on
it might just be as simple as the pub it
could it could be well formally it would
have been a youth center you know Town
Hall village hall places like that it
sort of degrades on that public sphere
public realm as well yeah yeah um and
and we're losing that Civic life that
Civic it's a very oldfashioned term
Civic life Civic Society people don't
use it anymore but actually is a really
important term because that's where our
humanity is really best expressed is is
in the places and the events for which
we come together you know we come
together we meet each other we we make
common cause we connect and you know you
can do so in quite a negative way you
know you can have fascist marches which
is a very negative form of you could
call that a sort of bonding Community
where the same sort of people come
together and they exclude difference but
you can also have your bridging
Community where very different people of
different backgrounds and different
experiences come together and form
community and you know millions of
examples of doing that really
successfully but the sort of neoliberal
effort is a war against that it's an
attempt constantly to thwart that coming
together is there a world in which you
see um work actually connecting to
fixing this problem it's it's very easy
to kind
of um reduce e it down to sort of
economic activity you know the the the
drudgery drone work etc but is is there
a world in which meaningful fulfilling
work actually connects to a kind of
reinvigorating Rejuvenation Improvement
um of of these things that we're talking
about Civ Civic Society for example yeah
well first let's not forget that the
longstanding promise was that we all
going to be working much less yes we'd
be having much more interesting jobs
we'd be able to do away with drudgery
and we'd have a lot more Leisure Time
that almost every Economist like 50 60
years ago was predicting that was going
to be the case when you reach a certain
level of wealth we all have to work much
less well we've reached we've exceeded
that level of wealth and we're working
like ants we're working our asses off
despite that or because you know the
neoliberal plan was never that you
stopped working you become ever better
drones for
capitalism um and so you know yes you
know you can absolutely we should all
aspire to fulfilling work ideally much
less of it and many other fulfilling
activities in our lives but the kind of
work which does make you more whole
which does give you a sense of utility
and purpose which we really need
everyone needs to feel useful that's a
really important aspect of the human
psyche you want to know that what you're
doing means something will improve
things will make things better other
people will benefit from it from it
people will see you positively for what
you do all of these things are very
important to us but for millions of
people that opportunity is being cut off
with the gig economy with with with all
these models of making work insecure
with the sort of fake freelancing that
we're forced into with the the lack of
continuity in the workplace you know and
I don't
romanticize the sort of mass working
environment we used to have which could
often be incredibly boring very
oppressive danger sexist racist
dangerous lots of lots of bad stuff
going on uh but at least it did help to
engender some forms of social solidarity
not not the ideal form sometimes but it
helped now you know I've always been a
bit suspicious of building our politics
around the workplace because
automatically very large numbers of
people are going to be excluded from
that I mean even at the height of
industrialism in in in 19th century
England there were more people working
in domestic service than there were in
factories or mins and of course those
people being fairly isolated were cut
off from the labor movement of course
the labor movement was absolutely
essential but it could never be the be
or and endle it could never be the
answer to all your problems because only
some people people by definition can be
part of that movement so I think we we
need to find our political roots in
community in in the neighborhood uh an
inclusive neighborhood which brings
together anyone who wants to join within
that neighborhood but investing in
meaningful participatory deliberative
democracy starting at the neighborhood
level and participatory economies as
well based on the commons local
resources which we control rather than
allowing some um private Equity company
based in the Cayman Islands to control
or some Sovereign wealth Fund in Abu
Dhabi to control that actually this is
in our hands and then we start to build
something that we we can belong to and
that belongs to us I don't want to get
back down the road of we spoke last time
roughly about kind of agrarian localism
and and these ideas but and so I would
just direct viewers to that conversation
if they want to uh see that those ideas
discussed but is is a logical conclusion
of the things that you're advocating for
so you know communitarian
local would that end up sort of being
the the pretty radical idea of a kind of
degrowth economic platform right that is
well it is radical it's certainly a
departure from from the Orthodoxy and in
a way that there the people who say you
know whether it's I don't know you know
4 day week three-day Bender whether it's
we're we produce our own food and it
stays in the local community what
whatever it is it's it's still in a way
is quite U I wouldn't say
extreme but it's it is a radical idea
isn't it you you'd have to say so yeah
look we also need Global action and
Global activism yeah because we are
facing Global issues like yeah the
distribution of food yeah we can't do it
I mean most countries can't do it all at
home it's just they simply don't have
enough fertile land enough water to do
it climate breakdown is a global issue
um
um security War and the peace these are
Global issues you know we can't just
just focus inward we have to build
outwards uh and I I'm very keen on some
of the ideas of maray Bin um the great
social ecologist um he he was himself a
neighbor organizer foundryman um who
wrote some very powerful arguments in
favor of building your National and
ultimately your global politics from the
neighborhood up Wards um and and yeah
into that you can incorporate degrowth
or rather the dethroning of growth that
we don't we we're no longer dependent on
growth uh to prevent economic collapse
which is currently well we are you know
you don't you shouldn't need to have
Perpetual growth to stop economic
collapse from happening you need to have
an economic system which is robust which
can sustain itself without sucking in
resources from all around the world
which basically growth depends on it's a
colonial model I mean this thing we call
capitalism is basically Colonial looting
you know I following the geography Jason
Moore I think there's a very powerful
argument for tracing it back to the
island of madira in 1450 the roots of
capitalism that's when a first
capitalist system um was was established
and that system then went on to take
over the world and from the very
beginning it was reliant on slavery on
ecological destruction on the exhaustion
of local res sources on highly
exploitative relations uh right the way
along the chain and then on quitting
when you out of resources and moving to
the next Frontier which was SantÃ© and
then the coast of Brazil and then the
Caribbean and that was a new economic
system you know people one of the things
which amazes me is that you see people
on the Telly who spend their lives
defending capitalism well it's the only
system there's no other way of do and
you think they don't know what
capitalism is this is really weird
they're talking about a system and they
obviously don't know what it is and then
on the other side you see all these
people say I hate capitalism and anti
capitalism I'm not quite sure you know
what capitalism is either you know it's
it's a very weird thing we all talk
about this thing without actually
defining it and when people do produce a
definition sorry that doesn't
distinguish this economic system from a
all the Alternatives that were around
ROM be what was there before capitalism
came along which was also buying and
selling but in a very different social
and cultural context and with very
different constraints attached and with
all its own oppressions and all the rest
of it but with very different social and
ecological outcomes this is a a a was a
new system in the 1450s which has swept
the world with devastating consequences
and um what it's done is to enable a
one-off exploitation of the world's most
accessible resources and now it's
working its way down the entropic food
chain so in ecological ways you can see
this very clearly you know you'll start
by targeting the big fish the tuna the
Marlin the Swordfish the Patagonian
tooth fish and then go smaller and
smaller and smaller until you're
catching Bak fish and then feeding them
to farm salmon to try and get back up
the value chain um you could see it with
Timber you know they'll go in and take
the mahogany the Ironwood the Rosewood
the PO Brazil and then they'll go for
the less valuable species and then
they'll go right on down until they're
turning all the rest into pulp right and
this happens again and again it happens
in Social terms as well you know they'll
they'll they'll loot societies and take
the most accessible resources in terms
of Labor in terms of everything that
that people have built you're like we
build up the NHS and then they come in
and they loot it and they they wheel off
what they can from the NHS and then
they'll go for the next most valuable
thing and the next most valuable thing
and they're just degrading the common
stock of wealth they're degrading
natural wealth and this is supposedly
making us richer it's not you know in
terms of the wealth that counts is
making us much poorer even while it
generates more
GDP you um you mentioned potential
economic collapse in that answer so you
I'll make a reference to Liz trust which
you right that she's kind of her
politics was almost a the purest
expression perhaps right of of
neoliberalism or was following it to the
letter and we saw the consequences of of
what that meant um for our political
economic system and I'd like us to have
the starma conversation now and as we
sort of come to the end of of the
interview about how much you believe him
to be a departure from said system said
ideology if we say if we say that it's
defined British politics in that how
much do do we view the likely next Labor
government as representing a departure
from that consensus yeah well we
shouldn't we we would just be
disappointed if you'll only be let down
he'll only be let down I mean you know
In fairness you know he's you know he's
keeping us in our safe space of you know
lying two-faced politicians who break
every promise they make and so you know
we feel a bit comfortable about that
because that's what we're used to um but
yeah of course he's not breaking with
that consensus
because he knows what where the
discipline lies and the discipline comes
from the billionaire press mostly owned
by offshore billionaires um it comes
from the corporate donors
it comes from the whole other
infrastructure of corporate power it
comes from the junk tanks these TFT and
Street dark money think tanks um it
comes from this whole panoply of
persuasive tools which are used to tell
people that if a government or political
party steps out of line we saw this with
Corbin they are the devil incarnate and
they must be destroyed and yeah he saw
what happened he saw what he had to do
um he stands for election stands for
precious little else and he knows that
to have a chance of shot of power in
this country you have to do what you're
told there was um his he made a speech
today right um six first steps for a
labor government and the policy pledges
they're going to go on and this
discussion at least in the immediate
aftermath it was very recent a couple
hours ago right but the sort of
discussion has been is it right to sort
of assess him as an heir to Blair is it
is it right to understand starm ISM and
I think there's still some pretty
significant questions over what that
actually means but there's a couple of
pieces actually I think last week one of
the new Statesman maybe one on unheard
trying to Define it and whether or not
we can understand it as a departure from
continuation of and I guess in a way
it's a way of having a conversation
about to an extent the connection
between the two you know how how
involved Tony Blair is in the labor
party to this day or certainly as a
possible source of inspiration for K
dama so there's a spectrum of possible
which is this white right yeah there's a
spectrum of acceptable politics which is
this white so sorry
here pretty close to the far right yeah
um you know and and it moves a little
bit further over that way every year and
and The
Savvy um technocratic politician knows
where they have to be if they're going
to get into Blair knew that and starma
knows that and you have to be basically
conservatism light that's that that is a
test you need to pass if the people who
really sort of make the big political
calls which are the newspapers they are
the BBC um they they are the political
donors um they are the infrastructure of
economic power in this country if
they're going to allow you to pass
without throwing everything they've got
at you and they've got a lot they have a
lot they've got plenty of weapons of
that they can use to make sure people
don't vote for you and that you don't
have a hope unless you're in that tiny
Spectrum so when Mrs thater said there
is no alternative meaning there's no
alternative to
neoliberalism in that case she was
describing what is has become the
political reality in this country can
can we understand that political reality
that window that that crevice that crack
of political sorry electorally I was
going to say politically electorally
cable electorally successful
politics do we view that as a
consequence of neoliberalism how do how
do the two connect to each other sure so
so what tends to happen is that a story
dominates
politics um and if you tell a persuasive
story that is in the interest
particularly of certain powerful
factions that story will come to be
adopted by almost everyone and the ne
liberals very successful Y and
consciously told a powerful Story the
world has been thrown into disorder by
the overweening state which crushes
human freedom and drives us towards an
eventual totalitarianism it might look
benign now the welfare state but you'll
end up with Joe Stalin that's the only
way it's going to go um but the hero who
is the brave entrepreneur will rise up
against this oppressive State and
against the odds will overthrow it and
by bringing back freedom and bringing
back Enterprise will restore Harmony to
the land and that story captured the
whole political Spectrum just as the
Keynesian story which used the same
narrative structure but with the
opposite message did before it um I
think it was Richard Nixon who said
we're all keynesians now well we're all
neoliberals now so in order to change
this we need to change the story we need
a new story The only thing that can
replace a story is a story and this is
what the left has spectacularly failed
to deliver this was why in 2008 when
neoliberalism collapsed collapsed
financially it collapsed politically it
collapsed intellectually it collapsed
morally with the financial crisis it had
caused we stepped forward of nothing and
we ended up saying well maybe we should
have a little bit less near your
liberalism or how about going back to
keynesianism there's an idea you know as
if you could go back as if capitalism
hadn't worked out how to destroy
keynesianism already as if keynesianism
stimulating consumer demand was a to
relevant um solution in an age of
environmental crisis you know we have
failed to produce a new story we've got
lots of great new ideas we've got lots
of great new policies but it's like
trying to weave a tapestry without a
loom you know you just got a whole pile
of thread and no one can see it no one
can see the picture you did a story
which says this is where we are and
where we stand and why we stand here
these are the people we oppose these are
the people who prevented us from having
the better life we could have these are
the heroes basically us you know we the
people coming together the middle and
working classes coming together um to
reassert our sense of community our
sense of humanity our our amazing human
capacities of empathy and altruism
rebuilding Community both political
Community economic Community social
Community rebuilding Community to
rebuild a new
poity we can overthrow against the odds
these powerful and nefarious forces of
neoliberalism and restore Harmony to the
land George Mambo thank you so much for
taking the time to speak to me I really
appreciate it thanks so much
Le for


## Keywords:
