---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D8ogHGasmBc
---

# Video
The renaissance of the commons discourse - An Interview with David Bollier
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D8ogHGasmBc)

## Transcript:

foreign
this is the mall in Washington DC I
worked here about 30 years ago and
worked in the Capitol I saw how close up
how the government was really not a very
good Trustee of our common resources it
mismanaged them it didn't collect the
rent for all sorts of things like public
lands and the airwaves and it abused
them it gave them away to corporations
for free or for discounted prices so I
started to look into
what are our common resources what
should belong to us and how should they
be stewarded and that's what brought me
to the commons the idea of us owning
many things morally or legally and
finding the proper ways to protect them
not only for ourselves but for future
Generations
and this is the big challenge of the
commons how do we protect our shared
resources

I think the the Renaissance of the
commons has come about partly because uh
two reasons the internet has given
people a greater awareness of the limits
of traditional Market thinking and
property rights they've seen how shared
cooperation is functional is productive
is socially satisfying and two I think
they've seen that market culture has
become so Advanced and so aggressive and
so predatory that they want a language
to express the desire how they can
protect their shared resources so people
have sort of come to the commons almost
naturally as a way to reassert control
over things that matter to them at a
time when the political mainstream has
little interest in discussing this so
the commons is coming from many
different corners and starting to
converge as a shared discourse for
talking about these problems so we now
have a international movement of people
from hackers in Brazil to subsistence
farmers in the Philippines to Europeans
concerned about the right to the city in
many many the others who see the commons
as a
scaffolding or template for
understanding abuses of the market and
their own capacities to build manage
control shared resources
foreign

was very influenced by the consumer
Advocate Ralph Nader for whom I worked
in the late 70s and early 80s because
many of the projects that he was
sponsoring were trying to protect
resources that belonged to all of us
what we would Now call Market enclosures
where companies were in entire
industries were privatizing and
commodifying resources that belong to
all of us
pharmaceutical research the airwaves for
broadcasting public lands of all sorts
of different resources and
my friends were working on these
projects trying to protect them and so
20 years later when I had certain
skepticism about the ability of the
democratic process to protect these
resources through government
I came to realize that we needed to find
different forms of governance and
provisioning for our to meet our needs
and I discovered that there were many
self-organized projects of natural
resources of digital resources on the
internet
in community local communities food for
example where people were taking control
of the resources that belonged to them
in 1980 Ralph Nader had a conference
called controlling what we own and it
was very influential to me because it
was a survey of the many resources that
we the unorganized public own or depend
upon for our daily lives but are
frequently being privatized by
corporations and controlled by them and
then being sold back to us for
exorbitant prices
so this helped me see that there's a
whole realm of of topics that mainstream
politics just doesn't want to talk about
uh and so the commons is really about
enlarging the conversation of mainstream
politics for things that are neglected
well much of the history of the
Industrial Revolution for the past 200
years has been about the enclosure of
shared resources starting with uh with
land and exploitation of it for minerals
for example or forests to nowadays such
things as the patenting of genes
one-fifth of the human genome is now
patented all sorts of Nano matter
meaning very microscopic synthetic
matter is being turned into proprietary
owned product there's all sorts of of
this
what one might say property grabs going
on that uh is part and parcel of the
industrialized process and now the
untold history is how the commoners have
been dispossessed of their resources
over this time it's probably most
notable with indigenous peoples who have
been just that had their lands and uh
natural resources taken from them but it
happens to all of us today the way for
example a lot of our cultural heritage
songs images even words are now being
copyrighted and trademarked meaning
taken private so this is really part of
the modern capitalist system and so to
talk about the commons is really to talk
about things that the modern capitalist
system doesn't want to talk about
because they're profiting from enclosing
our resources
there's a whole narrative we tell
ourselves about progress and human
advancement that is filtered through the
prism of economics and economics says
that something has to have a price to be
valuable if it's not traded in the
market through private property rights
it has no value so a whole range of
phenomena that are part of the human
condition are life on planet Earth
are the atmosphere our genetic
inheritance are not seen as valuable and
that's why this story is not told and
part of the challenge of the commons is
to resurrect this neglected history and
to make it more visible because we're
really reaching a point that we can't go
on this way our ecosystems are
deteriorating because we are pondering
them so much we're exploiting them
beyond their carrying capacity so this
is really a rather profound challenge we
face in
reconceptualizing human culture to take
better account of our natural resources
and shared inheritance
foreign

the commons can't be seen it's kind of
invisible is because it's talking about
flows and relationships between people
as opposed to objects and stocks you
know Capital will talk about this object
or this product that it will sell as if
that product can be taken out of its
context but the comments says no all
these things we deal with in life are
part of interconnected interdependent
flows and that's what we need to focus
on so it's a more Dynamic uh
intersubjective sense of value then
the economics tends to think about part
of the challenge is to understand that
we are connected to these resources we
are connected to Nature we are connected
to each other which means that we can't
simply think that some external force
can control this we have to work in
tandem with them not and get Beyond some
of these dualities

for decades there's been this
presumption that economic growth as
measured by gross domestic product or
GDP is really the end goal towards which
everything should go and that that will
provide greater human satisfaction
greater progress for civilization but
we're increasingly seeing that this is
just uh this is incorrect it's a fallacy
that we're we're cannibalizing and
consuming the very natural Capital that
we depend upon and we need to find a way
to get beyond the sense of value that
GDP proposes the commons is valuable
because it helps us gives us a
vocabulary and helps us talk more
intelligently about things that are
qualitative that are subjective and
social things that can't necessarily be
measured but are nonetheless very
important to us so this is a very it
sounds very subtle but it's very
profound in terms of how we approach the
world how we deal with each other but
it's a different world view a different
ethic that we need to cultivate
foreign

well a lot of people want to say what is
the commons as if there's a single
definition but the truth of the matter
is the commons has many many
manifestations that we some of which we
haven't even imagined because a Commons
occurs whenever a community decides that
it wants to manage a resource for the
benefit of everyone in an inclusive way
with a special eye towards long-term
sustainability and stewardship that's
maybe a nice general definition
yet the reason that if there's no single
definition is because it takes any
Commons will take on its local context
and history and culture and manifest
those differences so if you take them
the metaphor of DNA DNA a scientist will
tell you is under specified so that it
can adapt to local circumstances which
means human beings vary immensely around
the world yet you could still say
they're all human beings and the point
is that human being adapt to the local
geography they have different histories
they develop different cultures yet
they're all human beings and I think
it's this Unity with diversity that
characterizes the commons
foreign
Hardin in his famous 1968 essay the
tragedy of the commons said that if you
had a shared resource such as a pasture
that individuals would naturally over
exploit it because they would have no
rational reason not to do so
there's a couple of problems with his
analysis however one he wasn't
describing the commons because a Commons
consists of a community with rules and
governance and monitoring for Free
Riders and people who abuse the resource
and so on he was describing an Open
Access regime or a free-for-all in which
anybody can do whatever they want and
one might say that that's really the
tragedy of the market where people
presume that they can do whatever they
want without consequence he was right
that we can and often do over exploit
resources it's just that that is not a
Commons that's I think more as I say an
anarchy or sadly the market is describes
it more often
of the market which is basically the
description of neoliberal capitalism
today
is based upon some very profoundly
incomplete Notions of value that the
price system can adequately Express
value well of course that's only
expressing something that can be
converted into money and traded in the
market through private property rights
which excludes vast amounts of The Human
Experience and natural wealth which
can't necessarily be put into private
property rights or traded or even put up
an accurate price on so we need to
really sort of go down to some very
basic
flaws in our thinking to understand how
the market doesn't take account of this
and moreover the attempts to compensate
for this through the regulatory State
through government trying to
make the market take account of its
externalities is failing the past 40
years show that regulation is a
generally failed system for making the
market uh ecologically responsible and
uh in socially socially responsible
so we are kind of at a Crossroads where
the conventional governance systems are
not uh adequately controlling the market
which is out of control often and has
resulted in tremendous inequality uh
natural resource destruction
um and one might say cultural
deformities in human life as consumerism
commercialism invades every nook and
cranny of everyday life the tragedy of
the market really is quite complex but
it defines the Human Condition in modern
industrial society

clearly our economic system of thought
needs to take greater account of the
carrying capacity of Nature and
especially of renewable flows because
those are the outermost limit of what we
can safely consume at the same time
it's not going to get us too far if we
still remain committed to maximum uh
economic growth and consumerism in some
ways we must understand that is a total
aberration in the history of the human
species that human beings have Limitless
appetites that ought to be satisfied if
possible this is a cultural aberration
if not a pathology that we need to get
out of
and our economic thought simply reflects
that pathology right now so yes let's
get within the limits of carrying
capacity but also let's think about
different cultural forms and practices
that are satisfying to us

foreign I think it's a mistake to think
that we can just enact a law or get a
treaty and this will happen this is
going to have to happen over a great
deal of time and it's going to have to
be based on local Regional and even
National types of Commons
which are quite different from a lot of
the institutional structures we
currently have
I don't think we can fully Envision that
right now and part of the challenge is
we don't have much time to try to deal
with these things so I I won't presume
to have the answer but I do know that
the traditional forms of governance
nationally and internationally and
globalized commerce are not going to be
the solution that we need there's some
people who think that we can use
geoengineering to work our way out of
the climate change crisis but this is
the height of arrogance because it
presumes that we really understand the
complex ecosystem of the globe and that
we have a Time Horizon that can take
account of the length of time to improve
the system it presumes a procedural
Integrity of bureaucracy it presumes a
wisdom about human life on Earth to the
the arrogance to try to control that and
it presumes that
you know that we can manage the world's
ecosystem as opposed to be being part of
it uh so geoengineering has has limits
to what it can achieve for getting us
out of the solution it's really I think
more of a diversion than something that
can save us

worked with nature to try to improve it
for human use agriculture is all about
that and many indigenous peoples
throughout history have uh worked with
nature what's different today I think is
that our Technologies are far more
disruptive and intrusive into nature
rather than working with nature the
presumption that we can and should
create new species without the benefit
of evolution
which helps
integrate species within to the the web
of life there's all sorts of arrogance
built into our technologies that I think
is really over the long term destructive
and we're starting to have a reckoning
to pay a price for our aggressive
Technologies as opposed to learning to
work with nature as a partner

many people wonder what makes a
successful Commons well Eleanor Ostrom
who was a professor at the University of
Indiana University and later a Nobel
Prize winner for her work in this area
helped Identify some key design
principles for successful Commons and
among these are boundaries around the
community so you know what resource
you're managing and who's in the
community and who's not
a certain capacity to Monitor and punish
those who are Free Riders or somehow
abuse the resource you have to have a
certain transparency people need to have
the ability to make their own rules that
they will then see as legitimate and
consent to
so there's a number of different general
principles they're not a blueprint or a
formula but they tend to be present in
successful Commons ranging from Commons
of Fisheries or forests to Auto online
Commons like Wikipedia or open source
software communities now obviously there
are different Dynamics if you're dealing
with a resource that is depletable that
gets used up versus something that can
be reproduced for almost free like on
the Internet or software code
that said there are certain shared
principles of a community developing an
ethic and rules and certain governance
structures for preserving the resource
preserving the community and allowing it
to be sustained into the future
but this is a very different Dynamic
than the market which is often
impersonal
transactional as opposed to
relationships and tries to make as much
money as possible so the commons is kind
of a counterpart form of social
governance and production to the market
which has many different manifestations
um just as the market has describes
everything from lemonade stands to the
Commodities Futures Market to retail
stores a Commons has many different
manifestations so there's no single type
of Commons or Master inventory there's
all sorts of different Commons that
exist because communities vary immensely

thank you
any Commons requires that the community
members negotiate among themselves what
rules they see as appropriate both for
them as as a community as well as for
protecting the resource over time and
these will vary depending upon if you're
dealing with water or digital code or a
community resource like a festival or
something like that a social Commons
one could say that the market is a kind
of Commons in which we've just decided
that the community will govern Itself by
market prices and private property
rights and contracts uh it's kind of a
highly specialized form of Commons
because there is an agreement and a
certain form of trust once you agree to
that but you could say that the market
is a subset of the larger universe of
Commons the problem is many people think
that the market doesn't require trust
cooperation oversight regulation to
function that was the fallacy going into
the 2008 financial crisis that markets
were self-regulating and didn't need any
external oversight socially or through
government of course they do so that's
what I mean that markets are a kind of
type of Commons a very specialized
Commons The Economist Carl polanya wrote
a book called The Great transformation
about how the market emancipated itself
or disembedded itself from social
context from religion from a community
from moral ties to each other and became
this
ordering principle unto itself and that
is what we're struck he called this the
great transformation which occurred in
the 1800s we've been struggling ever
since to try to recontextualize markets
in the social and ecological contexts so
that they could be responsible and we
we've generally failed because
regulation has not done an adequate job
of making sure markets are accountable
and
ecologically limited

thank you
the next step in trying to tame the
market will not come through more
technology or more market-based quote
Solutions it will come through a shift
in culture and we can in which we can
start to have a different relationships
with each other different relationships
with nature which are not going to be
driven by money or market exchange
they're going to be driven by a whole
host of
qualitative social factors and this is I
think the Great
Adventure the great challenge that we
have to come to to realize that our
Market culture is the problem

there's there's a natural tension
between
the private ownership
and Market behavior on the one hand and
the concerns of the commons I think that
they can be made compatible and
constructive but it requires that the
market respects certain limits which
historically it has trouble doing
um
so it means that the new products and
inventions and Technologies of the
market don't necessarily upon being born
have to be cleared through some Commons
registry or governance structure I think
there's room for lots of so-called
private Innovation but I think once it
reaches a certain scale and starts to be
disruptive uh once it becomes something
everyone depends upon say the internet
there are certain natural imperatives
for the community to have control and
accountability over these kinds of
Innovations technologies that we that
are so important so you know yes there's
a tension between the market and the
commons but I think there are ways to
negotiate them and respect the private
creativity and Innovation that often
comes through business while saying at a
certain point this starts to be
disruptive of nature of communities and
we need to find ways to limit and
control them thank you
it's from a very human-centric way I
think that really it gives us a great
possibility for getting beyond that
because the commons is about
these relationships and a certain
humility about where The Human Condition
fits in the in the cosmos and so for
example I think we have the opportunity
to think intergenerationally we have the
opportunity to see human beings in this
interdependent web uh as opposed to
being the master of all things and this
is uh why I think that the commons ethic
can help us ReDiscover these different
values these different relationships
which currently we just have
very little opportunity or
framing cultural or intellectual framing
to understand

whites are an important part of the
commons because the human right to have
one's everyday subsistence met is really
a basic human right and this for me
means the right to Common meaning the
right to participate in a Commons to
have one's everyday needs met and I
think that one of the big challenges is
for our legal system to recognize the
human right to belong and participate in
the Commons to meet one's needs right
now if you have to have your basic needs
met through the market it often means
you won't have water you won't have food
you won't have shelter to talk about the
commons as a human right means that
basic needs will be met

foreign
there's a huge resistance to having a
new interpretive framework of the
commons because it means that many of
the existing investments in Market
behavior and culture
both economic Investments as well as our
cultural cultural and personal
Investments
will have to change and so there's a lot
of resistance to trying to adopt a new
way of orienting ourselves to the world
into each other which the commons
implies so this is really I think the
part of the major challenge we face it's
not simply a matter of changing policies
or enacting new laws it's about changing
ourselves changing how we Orient
ourselves to each other in the world




## Keywords:
