---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JjCw5zuBH7s
---

# Video
The hard problem of consciousness is a red herring from the actual underlying metaphysical paradox
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JjCw5zuBH7s)

## Transcript:
greetings welcome to Manny be and I'll
just jump right back into the monistic
idealism video with Bernardo castrop
um and this segment will be about the
meta problem of Consciousness so let's
hear
it yeah so we're going to be jumping
into philosophy of mind now uh this is a
tricky
one there is a meta problem in the sense
that
curiously there is a minority of people
who do understand what physicalism is
and entails and what idealism is and
entails they do understand all that and
yet they do not recognize the hard
problem the hard problem is the
following there is nothing about
physical parameters or properties in
terms of which we could reduce the
qualities of experience in principle in
practice I think personally this is a
strong man presentation of the heart
problem in order to get rid of it's It's
almost like and and you know I'm just
guessing here right I'm sort of second
guessing the incentives but but a a
number or quantification is not an
experience that is something you
interpret or or or or
or derived from some kind of comparison
of what you experience it's sort of
second order from the actual experience
so by saying there's nothing there's
nothing about the numbers and the
parameters and the constants or whatever
that is sort of interpreted from physics
that gives you the the smell of roses
for instance
right no but that's not the point the
point
is
that when you when you think of it's the
the it it deres it arrives from the idea
of you have direct access to an external
world that's because that's why you
think if you are suffering so to say
from the heart problem that's why you
think there is a problem you can
solve because if you think you have an
outside world you have direct access to
and then that that your body your skull
your brain and your mind inside that
brain is a part of that story of that
external world right so somehow when
that that external world if you think
you have direct access to it and it's
described by all these various laws that
he refers to then that should be able to
explain that
mind that is responsible for those
particular
qualia as they're called usually like
smell of roses or the the color red and
so on
right
but it's yes it's because materialists
think of an external world as a direct
access the the what I usually call the
the the physicalist Paradox or
materialist Paradox right that they
think they should be able to explain
mind at some core Center Point uh sort
of
the the ex the

um what's the the center of
this reality solar system right where
that reality you are referring to you
are always in the center in the middle
of that it's always around you so to say
right in in in in in the physical maybe
I'm rambling a bit here right I I Ste
right into it right
but it's because of the inside outside
dichotomy problem that ends up being a
paradox in
physicalism that physicalists think that
that they have to explain mind from that
external world that Bernardo Casto
correctly points out is just taking the
territory out of the map or the map out
of the territory and then thinking you
can extract the territory from that map
you just extract it to an you know
imagined external world that's correct
he goes about violating that same
principle later in his philosophy but
that's another
story so if you think you have direct
access to some external world of course
there should be it's not of course but
if you're not too stupid you will end up
thinking my God I have I mean how does
that become my experiences right
and it's it's
like if you're a materialist you
actually think of the world
as a kind of
solipsism I would say it it's it's close
enough right where you are actually
having a direct access to the whole
universe you might not be aware of it
all the time all of it all the time
right obviously I I wouldn't think that
but it's kind of limited solipsism in a
way right but I I'm having a direct
access to this little particular aspect
of a complete
Universe whenever I'm
aware I'm aware of that particular
aspect of the universe but they don't
realize but I had to be aware of it I
have to be there right I had to be down
at the grocery store in order to
experience that Apple I say is outside
myself right and they don't correlate
the or don't think of the problem in
saying well why do I always have to be
there in order to be aware of that
external world I already know is there
right that that's the Paradox they
pointed to the Paradox that they don't
realize they always have to be there to
experience whatever they claim is out
there right why can't they just claim
it's out there without experiencing it
and if they have to come around always
to experience and then say it's outside
myself
then they are sort of saying whenever
I'm experiencing something it must be
outside myself that's the problem how
would you get to
that how how would you possibly how
could you jump out jump take something
out of your own experience and say now
that which I'm experiencing is outside
my experience that's the Paradox
right but because they do that they all
of a sudden downgrade the the importance
of their own experience and saying I am
experiencing an objective external world
how does that become my
experience and of course
correctly uh Bernardo cop says that
that's that's uh stupid right and and I
would agree with
that but it's not because they come up
with how to quantify that experience
they say say this outside themselves
right just because they have meters and
androm and and you know hers and
whatever units and measure measuring
 right doesn't mean that that is
what they expect to be a
color that's a straw man I think in
order to make it even more ridiculously
sounding I I'm I'm just you know it's
like h no no no no no the problem is the
paradoxical treatment of this kind of
metaphysics usually known as physics ISM
I I think right it's the inside
outside Paradox in physicalism that is
the problem that's the deeper problem um
the heart problem is merely a symptom of
bad metaphysics I would say right but
because they don't as he also points out
they don't realize the
Paradox they what is left is the hard
problem and then they pound on that hard
problem with all sorts of Neuroscience
and all sorts of linguistic epic cycles
of of terminology and they become
illusionists and all this that gets
more and more weird right not realizing
there's a foundational problem in the
metaphysic metaphysical approach to
it and and what I'm trying to say is
that's what Berard cast should point out
I guess he does that but it's a kind
of straw man to say that physicalist
expect
may maybe I'm wrong I I I I can't rule
that out but
they that's why illusionists I think
talk about qualia and what it's like you
have the what is like but the qualia is
is a part of that external world they're
describing right so they take the qualia
outside and say you have a what it's
likeness of it that's not really that
important it's the real color the real
elephant and whatever
right now I I I'll admit I have I have
struggled with trying to figure out what
the hell Illusionist actually trying to
convey I'm as confused as anybody I
suppose right except for the actual well
maybe The Illusionist are even more
confused than I am right um other people
trying to understand illusionism but I I
I would just try to point out that it's
um it sounds to me a bit like strawman
the way he phrases it here
right can deduce those qualities just by
looking at the correlations between
brain activity and experience we don't
understand we we don't understand how
one leads to the other and if it does
that at all but if we see enough
correlations we start being able to to
to deduce the link between the two in
practice but not in principle there is
not nothing about Mass charge spin
momentum geometrical relationships
frequencies and amplitudes in terms of
which we could logically deduce that
those no no
but it it's it's a maybe it's not as
strong as straw man as maybe as I
first alluded to but there is some straw
man about it
because if you're an
empiricist as I that any decent
physicalist would be right you are not
saying they wouldn't be saying I'm
experiencing numbers right they they
would say I'm experiencing something
that I then quantify using particular
standards for coming up with these
numbers right where I'm comparing the
elephant with a meter stick for instance
right object meter stick compared to
Elephant object right and there are so
many meter sticks that compare to the
elephant and so on that creates a number
but that's the number or the
quantification
is not empiricism it's a calculation
based on empiricism right and these
numbers and standards and and particular
descriptive aspects of physicalism or or
physics maybe you should say right
scientific method and so on they're
they're not the they I would say unless
they I mean maybe there are some
physicalist who would State this but I
think it's kind of a straw man this it's
sort of a stra man
argument but that doesn't really matter
because it what it doesn't he doesn't
even get he doesn't get to the
foundational problem here or point out
the foundational metaphysical problem or
Paradox buil into physicalism it's not
the numbers we interested in it's this
inside outside dichotomy problem that's
the foundational problem that then has
the side effect that because they suffer
from this problem they think think that
you should able to pinpoint an answer to
this so-called
problem called the heart problem
right so it's the foundational it it's
merely a
symptom than a problem
right if you think that you can jump to
the moon for instance right and then you
try to come up with what clothes should
I wear and what shoes should iar wear
and like the shoes maybe right or or you
know athlete shoes and then there's this
a athlete shoot shoe problem that you
are trying to solve because you think
you can jump to the Moon right so you
should come up with the an answer to the
the uh the shoe problem or the the
jumping to the moon shoe problem right
but the problem is not the shoe the
problem is the jumping to the Moon p
right just like the problem is not the
heart problem the problem is the
metaphysics is up right it's a
paradoxical that's the
problem amplitudes and frequencies
correspond to the color blue or to the
feeling of
heartbreak the bridge is logically
arbitrary and there is a reason for that
I can elaborate on later if you guys ask
but that's the hard problem now
curiously some people do not see it some
people people who do understand the
thing no but the the correlation isn't
stupid right I mean if you we if the the
the problem is not that you can't
correlate you can correlate all you want
the problem is the inside outside
problem that I don't think Berard CB
actually fully understands the
significance of because he seemed to
violate it himself right by just taking
some my external world for granted
just like the physicalists
do you have to argue for it
somehow right you can't just say there
is an external world because I can't
refute it no but just because you can't
refute something doesn't mean it's there
I can't refute there's an elephant
outside my that wall here right but it
doesn't mean there is an elephant just
because I can't refute it
right I mean it's it's it's weird that
he seemed to be unable to actually get
he can see the hard problem because he's
he's talking about this straw man of of
various
quantification methods right but it
doesn't seem to realize that that
external world is
imaginary it can only be imaginary in
the sense that if you can't get to
something you can only imagine that it's
there and because it's in imagination
it's a part of your experiences then
right right then it's not if you imagine
as as in my map or my ontology map or
diagram above me here right shows that
external world is also an abstraction
within your ontology so to say within
within that which is described by my
onology so just because you imagine an
external world doesn't mean you all of
all of a sudden have an external
world because an external world is not a
part of your autology
right so is your starting point that's
your toolbox so you can imagine all you
want but that doesn't mean that that
imagination is all of a sudden that
which you imagine if I imagine an
elephant doesn't mean that all of a
sudden pops an elephant out of my
imagination
right that's the same problem he doesn't
seem to
realize involved uh do not see the high
problem and and and that's curious It's
like a blind spot in one's mind that is
very curious
now I think most uh yeah but but I think
that
it's it's so ingrained
in in my mind or was until I realized
the problem right it's the default
setting of your I I I I'm reminded of is
it Toy Story 3 or what where boss lier
all of a sudden changed setting and he
starts to speak Spanish right but his
default set
is Spanish for some reason right and if
you sort of reset uh to to default
setting you go back to speaking Spanish
right but he has changed his idea to
speak English to stay with a metaphor
right but if you sort of reset yourself
if you were to reset yourself and forget
everything you have philosophized I will
bet you you will start out being a
materialist or physicalist because
that's the default understanding of your
experience experience right uh just
ignoring that particular contradiction
in in your understanding
right and you can get away with it
because there's nothing to there's
nothing about the experience that
contradicts the
understanding because you don't have
access to that external world just
pretending that what you experience is
an external world will never be refuted
by it because there's not there's no
access to that external world so you
pretending it your experience to be an
external world will never be refuted by
your own experience and that's why you
have to come up with an explanation for
why you are all of a sudden think you
have an external
World why don't Berard Castro understand
this is that's difficult for me to
understand that he can't see the the the
problem he's so close to supposedly
understanding most of the people
that do not see the heart problem do not
see it because they actually don't
understand what physicalism implies and
entails they just do not understand what
the heart problem is so they don't see
it because they don't understand it
that's not a meta problem that's just
shortsightedness that's just ignorance
it's it's not a meta problem there is a
meta problem but I think it's much less
widespread yeah but if the default
setting is that you understand your
experience as an external
world and and you act as if
right and that external world is never
available to to you to contradict your
experiences so to say right then you can
go around all the time doing this and
that's why you you are not if you have
trained yourself uh as a default setting
and and gotten used to understanding
this way and is never contradicted by
that that actual external world if there
is an external world
right then there's nothing to tell you
other than some part of your experience
called Bernardo Castro or Manny P who
says no no no it's it's uh it's it's
um it's uh paradoxical to think that way
right if you're working from an inside
outside dichotomy then unless you're a
solipsist about it right there's a
problem you can't both be inside and
outside your own experience at the same
time right
so I I I I I think that there's a there
there are problems with I mean there are
problems with the Paradox it ends up
creating problems among individ human
beings and that's that's possibly a very
deep and and significant problem that
ends up in some kind of totalitarianism
because people think well I experienced
this don't contradict my experience
you're weird right if if you if you're
not in agreement that there is if they
were working from the idea of an
external world and other people are
working from
a an the idea of an external world if
they think they have access to that
external world and they disagree with
somebody else who think that they have
access to an external world what how do
they go about
changing that or getting to an agreement
of some kind right they can't because if
I experience an elephant and you say
there isn't an elephant you're weird and
you better go to the goux
right I'm sort of a slightly hyperbolic
but that's where it goes that's where it
goes and then some crazy idiot like
Adolf or or Joseph
will take over
right
than people think let me give you an
example a lot of educated people out
there who are not philosophers and
haven't spent time thinking about this
um they make the following assumptions
or they have the following unexamined
understanding of physicalism they think
that according to physicalism our
thoughts and our
emotions uh I'm you know jumping in here
right um I try to think back to before
the point I realized this inherent
Paradox right and first of all I tried
to understand how the hell was I
thinking back then right how did I make
sense of
this and I think I agree with Berard
cast that I didn't realize the problem
it was because I didn't realize the
problem I was living in this kind of
internal external limbo uh uh
state and the rest of my All of My
Philosophy suffered from it right I
thought I have some insights I couldn't
possibly have when I realized the
Paradox built into the you know
foundations so the rest of my because
this foundational was paradoxical
there would be all sorts of in the
further down the line of My Philosophy
back then that would also be flawed
because of this foundational problem and
all sorts of you know if you look at
acade academic philosophers right quote
if 80 90% of them are physicalists no
wonder that all this philosophy is
 up because they are working from
different potentially different
foundational understandings that
influence the rest of their philosophy
no wonder that philosophy in in history
basically is one seemingly one big pile
of contradictions right yeah on the one
hand you can do this but on the other
hand you can see it this way you you
hear that all all the time when you hear
sort of academic philosophers oh you can
see it this way but on the other hand
you could also see it this way and they
can sit and talk like that for 3 hours
right getting nowhere getting nowhere
basically just confusing people
basically implicitly gaslighting them
into thinking well this is so
complicated that if if academics can't
figure it out why should I be able let
me go back to my you know Breck and
mortar job
right so it's it it ends up being some
kind of uh hugely over complicated
problem that nobody seems to be able to
get a grasp on it's because of the
foundational problems
right and that's why the heart problem
is is important but it may be a red
herring it's you're getting close to
solving the problem and then you're
taking a left turn into trying to solve
the hard problem and you're getting
nowhere fast
right so you have to dig down to the
core problem you have to don't put on
plasters right bandages you know fix the
the wound so to say
right are in here inside our heads but
the colors we see the flavors we taste
um The Melodies we hear they are really
out there according to to materialism
perceptual experience in its qualities
is really out there according to
materialism they think and it's only
thoughts and emotions and endogenous
experiences that are in here well no
that's not materialism materialism would
also say the colors you see are not up
there they are in here they are
qualities experiential qualities and th
they are generated by your brain side
your
scope I am not partic I'm completely
convinced that materialist actually
think that way or
physicalists I think they are basically
confused about it right I think that a a
run-of-the-mill
materialist thinks that colors are both
in there and out there at the same time
it's like that too I'm just having a
copy of what is out there in order to
know it's out there right not realizing
that well if you have an if you already
know what's out there why would you need
an experience of it and that's why they
tend to go in the direction of Illusion
because they want to actually get rid of
your experience in order to only have
that external world because they if they
have it's sort of a a compass some and
nuisance to have this yeah yeah you have
some whatever what it's like in there
right but the actual thing is the
external world but how did they get to
that external world but they needed to
be there to experience it
right so maybe the experience is the
starting point and that imagination of
an external world is something you
imagine and attach to your actual story
right oh so are the flavors so are The
Melodies the textures uh the smells
there is nothing out there that can be
visualized out there is just pure
abstraction so you need to understand
this in order to understand the heart
problem because the there's pure
abstraction out there
what what's that pure abstraction
abstraction is that not something going
on in your so so-called
mind there's pure abstraction out there
abstraction is something that is pulled
out of something else otherwise it's not
abstracted right so what is that
abstraction where does that abstraction
come from because you're calling it
something implying it's coming from
something else otherwise it wouldn't be
an abstraction right so it's pure
abstraction yeah it's just pure it's
owned there's no there's no dirt in it
it it's not lumpy no no no it's
Perfection when you say when people use
the term pure right they're appealing to
some kind of
perfection right I get kind of
worried
right it's all of this uh woooo language
we're going into it it's pure
abstraction right whoo there saying
something that you cannot possibly pin
down what the hell it is
right our problem is precisely how you
go from those pure abstractions into the
actual qualities of experience so if you
think that there are real qualities out
there you cannot understand the heart
problem you will be blind to it but
that's just a misunderstanding of
materialism there is no version of
materialis so he's basically saying
those who call themselves materialist
physicalists whatever right they don't
even understand their own metaphysics I
mean it might be the case and there
might be various different kinds of
physicalism maybe right understanding of
where the hell are the colors and where
are where are my my what its likenesses
and where are the concepts and where and
you know if you listen to some of the
illusionists I mean I have no
clue what what they're doing right I
deconstructed uh uh a presentation by
Keith Frankish at some point and I I
sort of had to put in in the towel at
some point as far as I recall right
where I just say I I I I can follow this
I don't know what the hell is doing I
have no I I don't understand this
right this doesn't work the it's the
epicycle problem right if you have to
create another epicycle and another
epicycle and another epicycle in order
to explain something that should be
fairly decently simple right I can get
around my house and so on I don't need
all these epicycles you know in order to
get around right so it seems like it's
more complicated than it needs to be so
it kind of falls for the uh when when
when complexity compounds as you go on
in your
philosophy there might be a problem
somewhere
right ISM that can be internally
consistent saying that there are
fundamental qualities out there and
derivative qualities in here that this
divide is completely arbitrary either
qualities are fundamental everywhere or
they are all derivative and they are all
inside your head it's one or the other
but most people who casually would refer
to themselves as
physicalists do not understand this and
it's surprising even people with
doctorates in computer science or people
close to me uh they fall for well well
how about the problem of collective
Illusions right a collective illusion
is fundamentally I think think the idea
that there's something out there that
binds it together
right and that something is a part of
that external world but how can people
talk about that Binding Together if they
don't have access to that binding so
it's it's an the collective illusion is
what fuels the idea of that external
world as a direct access there must be
somebody even if I don't have access to
it because I'm not experiencing all of
the universe right now right so it might
just be out of my reach at the moment
moment right so this Collective illusion
about this the society at large is one
of those terms being used right somebody
show me what the Society is show me
show me I'm supposed to be obedient to
society but nobody has ever been able to
clarify what the hell it is but it's
this Collective illusion that sort of
gives you a notion that there's some
externality
that you're a part of will actually able
to be being able to pin it down but it
fuels the idea of the access to an
external world right I think that
Collective Illusions is the biggest
problem for human
beings that would be my problem the my
statement it is based on bad metaphysics
right but it ends up with Collective
illusions one one of the bad side
effects is collective
Illusions that's where it goes really
bad
right it always goes to when people
believe in Collective
Illusions all through history
right they're part of the group they're
part of society
civilization right the there's a podcast
called fall of civilizations it just
tells you about all all the times this
Bel in Collective Illusions end up with
a pile of dead people right and people
build up and build up build up over
generations and generations like uh just
like you know the first world
war Europe was basically a happy place
for a century right there were a
few mishappenings here and there right
the franor Prussian war and a few others
right but basically in you know overall
terms compared to the Napoleonic Wars
and what came from 1914 and 14 and
onwards right is basically a happy place
right but how can it go so wrong
in one you know the the July crisis of
1914 it goes from nobody thinks that's
in a until a few days before Total War
people believe there will be peace right
and all of a sudden this Collective
illusion ends up in people
killing each other left and right I mean
it's the problem of collective
Illusions right and whether or not
Collective Illusions fuels the idea of
direct access to an external world or
the it's the direct access to the an
external world that fuels the idea of
collectivism or Collective illusion uh
I'm not particularly sure about that
right but they work together in some
some
fashion that usually ends up being a
problem and that's one of the reasons
why I'm so obsessed with
Bernardo cast because he does not
address how he gets to that external
world and he will inevitably end up in
some kind of collective illustion
right that will fuel some stupid
going on down the road that might not be
easily traceable back to to this
particular misgivings in a
foundational metaphysical
aspect but it is it's a part of how you
approach your ontology right if you
think that metaphysics is a part of your
ontology well you're going wrong
mate for this it's it's quite
interesting so there is a meta problem
but it's not widespread it's quite
limited and it's a psychological problem
not a pH philosophical
problem
okay so you're appealing to that the
psychology might very well influence how
you think what you are willing to accept
in your thinking how you approach you
have a if you have a psychology your
psychology becomes some kind of Proto
onology Proto metaphysics and you are
influenced by what you like and what you
don't like because you have been pounded
since childhood with all sorts of weird
 all sorts
of you Collective Illusions right that
are a man manifest in all sorts of
like religion and and scientism and
whatever
right so if you if you have where I mean
no no human being can possibly work
alone right you you will have a shitty
life if you're trying to make it
everything on your own right I I can
make yeast for my bread right I can't
how the hell would I make yeast right
but I can go down to the grocer store
and buy it for what what it takes me
like 30 30 seconds uh or less of my
everyday work in order to finance yeast
that I can possibly make on my own
right it will take me forever to make
some fun but just reasonably functional
yeast of some kind right and I possibly
probably won't eat whatever the result
would be of that yeast
right so when you think about it that
basically nothing you can do what what
what would I do right would I
eat
grass you would I roam this street to
find the dead animals or would I be a
scavenger how the hell would I survive
right so you're dependent on other
individuals
that Collective
illusion aspect of human beings is what
makes what's the word I'm looking for
working together possible Right the the
collective Illusions is how you get into
agreement with it it's a it's a it's a
monkey way of being in agreement with
other people it's our group who suffer
from these Collective Illusions against
the other group over there who suffer
from some other Collective illusion
right and we'll kill each other right
but in order to we we are solidifying
our own understanding by pointing out
those who are different over there right
it's sort of a monkey level of
philosophy right it's it's it's probably
it's it's Advanced stupid monkey level
right and that's is one of the reason
why I'm sort of riffing a bit here right
but that's a one of the Glorious aspects
of a free market if you want something
that somebody else
has and they want what you have
you know you don't need to go into all
sorts of collective Illusions right you
don't need to whe it doesn't matter if
they're green or they're yellow or they
Brown doesn't matter if they're Jewish
or or or or or Sanskrit or their their
Mayans or what it doesn't matter you
have a carrot I have an apple let's swap
right doesn't matter right you are
interested in the object you're not
interested in the person carrying the
object but if if you have to lump people
into these Collective
Illusions then all sorts of start
to go down right and there will be
infighting and there will be all sorts
of crap going on right that's why there
were all the problem is human history is
the collective utions that's why the
free market is the best bet in
in in there's a few words I'm I'm
missing my vocabulary is not fully
functional at the but in in the getting
getting getting
um not getting together but
getting having proping free interactions
with other people right is the a free
market is the best bet and I guess that
because people suffer from all these
Collective Illusions they consider a
free market or what they call capitalism
in the old Marxist way it's like yeah
it's a system it's a collective illusion
that you have to adhere to right no no a
free market is Just Produce some
and and you
know offer it up for for trade
right I
mean you can't you can't feed yourself
with a collective illusion right you
can't eat some communism right you can't
drive around in
communism
or whatever ISM you want to adhere to
right at the end of the day it's about
some objects and some you need
right I need some yeast I need some
wheel for my bicycle I need a battery
for my laptop I need a you know I would
like to see a movie now and then or have
a bottle of wine right basically that if
if if you think
that I think that maybe that's why
people are so confused about the free
market because they expect to get into
some kind of collective ISM of some kind
I am being a on the free market now so
it should make me happy no it's about
getting done right it's taking care
of the Practical
 it's not about Collective Illusions
right and the collective illution is is
the collective Illusions is the
problem is the is the close thing to not
it's the it's the it's the what clouds
people's
ability to get to the foundational
problems of
which the heart
problem is a symptom it's not a problem
to be solved it's a deeper problem from
which the heart problem is a symptom and
it's a deeper problem you need to get to
but because of various like
Collective Illusions they won't get
there you won't get there because you're
not sufficiently willing to trust your
own ability to think you are living in a
collective illusion the collective think
uh you
know uh what's it called
um it's the sort of the collective
thinking I'm I'm I'm supposed to be
thinking this way because other people
seem to be thinking this way sort of
Emperor news new clothes kind of
scenario right so maybe it's enough I
suppose you understand why I'm trying to
get
it okay perfect so and and you know
what's interesting this actually ties
right into the this next question quite
well in particular with the first uh
part of your answer there so there's
What's called the phenomenal concept
strategy as you know sometimes they call
it the phenomen cope strategy it's um
it's in which they uh they hold that
there's only an
epistemic but not an ontological gap
between physics and subjective
experience so what would be your
response to the phenomenal concept
strategy okay so this is a good point to
start sorry facing for the noise a sorry
about the noise
init stop
this so this is um phenomenal cons I
think this is what I covered in another
video so I'll I'll jump over this one uh
to in the next video so I think this
this is enough for for this particular
part so see you in the next one


## Keywords:
