---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NtqPv8Wt-9k
---

# Video
The Roots of Our Political Divide | Ronnie Janoff-Bulman | Ep. 24
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NtqPv8Wt-9k)

## Transcript:
hey everybody my guest today is
Professor Ronnie janov Bulman and we're
going to talk about the morality of the
left and the right all right Professor
why don't you introduce yourself I'm
Ronnie Jan bman um I am a social
psychologist by training I was at the
University of Massachusetts for 40 years
I am currently Professor amerita early
on in my career I did a lot of work on
victimization and trauma but uh the last
couple of decades I spent actually
researching morality and because I'm
interested in po politics I recently
wrote a book my second book um and this
book is on um morality and politics
thank you so much okay so your your book
is called the two moralities and I was
hoping that you could tell me about it
yeah um so I um have tried to apply some
some of my research on morality to
politics to understand the moral
underpinnings of the left and right and
what divides us now I do know Jason that
um in our current poit climate trying to
claim that morality on both sides would
be very
unpopular or would not go down well with
many people but I do think um there is
something to be gained for understanding
each side or each of us understanding
the other side of the political Spectrum
I also want to claim or want to you know
have a disclaimer right up front that I
am not talking about when I'm talking
about liberals and conservatives I'm
talking about mainstream liberalism and
mainstream conservatism I'm not making
any kind of claim that Trump and his
minions are moral in any sense that
trying to lie and steal an election
um really does not count as morality uh
so um I am talking about liberalism and
conservatism and what I do in the book
is I make a distinction um or in my own
work I've made a distinction between two
forms of morality and I don't know how
deeply we want to get into this here I
think we'll be you know having questions
um and we'll be having a conversation
but the book basically applies these two
forms their natural forms of morality to
the left and the right and makes a
distinction between our um our two
political ideologies based in this
morality and uses the distinction to um
better understand the policy preferences
on each side the kind of um the actually
psychological differences between that
have been found between the left and
right the political messaging that works
on each side etc etc so so um I guess
we'll get into the book in more detail
if I'm understanding you correctly
you're trying to or at least one of the
things that you're trying to do in your
book is explain if there's some sort of
cohesive moral explanation for the
different positions that each side takes
on things am I am I correct yes so um if
you look at Psychology the fundamental
psychological distinction in motivation
is approach and avoidance everybody
understands approach and Aid voidance we
all want to approach the good avoid the
bad when you take this distinction and
in Psychology it's been applied to
various domains but if you apply it to
to morality which is where I started um
you find I I made this distinction
between two forms of morality one is
proscriptive morality which involves the
things we should not do the other is
prescriptive morality which involves the
things we should do okay um when we
think about what we should not do we
should not lie we should not cheat we
should not U feel Etc do not those are
all based in constraint and if you think
about it motivationally it starts with a
motivation to do something improper and
then we need to inhibit that motivation
okay proscript that's proscriptive
morality prescriptive morality involves
approach so the proscript morality is
related to avoidance prescriptive
morality involves approaching the good
doing what we should do there the
motivational problem is not inhibiting
it's actually act trying to activate a
new motivation to help or to to to do
something good for another if we think
about proscript and prescript of
morality simply we can think of it as
not harming others and helping others
okay and people might think these are
just opposite sides of the same coin
they're really just you know the same
thing if you just flip flip it over but
but in fact they're quite different
because um think about a toddler we
actually can um parents teach toddlers
not to take others toys that is to do
not how to engage in proscriptive
Morality don't don't take another's toys
that's not the same as sharing your own
toys okay um sharing your own toys
involves something prescriptive doing
the doing the right thing so not doing
the wrong not doing the right thing are
not the same and in fact you research
developmental research shows it's much
harder for children to learn to share
their own toys than to not take anothers
um so these there are these two forms of
morality one involving not harming and
the other involving um helping more
generally I like to think of it um as
protecting others from harm or
protecting versus providing for the good
of others okay and protecting and
providing are the kind of kind of uh
short shorthand terms that I uh used to
think about the these two moralities
prescriptive and prescriptive are very
wordy and clunky um now and in the book
what I claim is that and and I'm
painting with a very broad brush here
and and I realize that and social
psychologists often do to try to
understand differences in the world my
claim is that uh conservatism is based
in a proscriptive morality based in
protecting from harm and and liberal the
liberal ideology liberalism is based in
prescriptive morality uh providing for
others and these differences um they
they manifest in very different ways so
if you're interested in protecting from
harm um this puts an emphasis on
strength and power on Authority on um
adherence if you look at concern
adherence to strict Norms that's what
prescriptive morality involves uh to
clearly Define social roles and a
prescriptive morality is much more um is
not based in order and constraint it in
Restraint it's based in activation um uh
if you think about liberalism it's about
creating greater equality providing for
General Welfare things of that sort so
that broad brush stroke involves Pro
protection versus providing as the moral
bases of these two um sides of our
political Spectrum interesting
interesting okay thank you for that
let's dive a little deeper because I I
think if we go through some examples it
would help me understand so let's start
with like the conservatives let's start
with like maybe a few issues that seem
to be uh supported by conservatives and
maybe maybe they fit into this
proscriptive model okay so um one thing
is um there in support of traditions
they're in support of like um perhaps
like more ritualistic right like the
institution of marriage they're against
gay marriage or that would be one thing
tradition yes you're quite right custom
and tradition are very important here
very important okay another another
thing is uh their SEC uh Pro Second
Amendment right thing U another thing is
their pro-life right so those three
things yes yes no absolutely um
so let me first back up and say there is
a domain and maybe we can start here and
then we'll get into these specific
policies because I think the policies
extremely important but I think it's
very important to recognize that for
both the left and the right there are
domains of Regulation where the state
should be involved we should have
government interference and and
involvement and their domains for
autonomy and these flip so if you look
at conservatives and you do look at um
being against samesex marriage abortion
there being for guns although we'll get
to that in a minute um being against
trans rights you know so forth and so on
um Even book Banning right now if you
think about it there Mo most of what is
involved are um constraining change okay
that's a lot of what conservatism is
about and sticking with traditional
roles strict adherence to social roles
and social norms is very much a part of
conservatism now it often also involves
constraints now the different the the
exceptions actually in terms of
inhibition and and constraining are guns
where they want guns and defense
spending but in fact those two things
basically um are the exceptions that
prove the rule that it's about
protection because it's about protecting
the society and people on the right
believe guns protect there's a great
deal of evidence showing they think the
guns protect them even though there's no
evidence at all that having guns really
do protect you at all okay in fact they
make um uh suicides and and domestic VI
they make death in the home much more
likely it turns out that liberals of
course those are the domains of autonomy
for liberals that those are social
domains you know typically involve
personal behaviors these are social
domains that conservatives really do
want the government involved in again
the exceptions would be like defense
spending um but if you look at abortion
and you know uh gay gay and samesex
marriage and um even if you look at
things like invidual fertilization
things like this um there's a great deal
of emphasis on not changing on
traditional social roles Etc now if you
go to go to liberals the domain of
social regulation is not the social
domain not where social norms and social
traditions and how social hierarchies
are think it's the economic domain why
because providing involves resource
distribution right so what Liberals are
opting for is the government involvement
in the economic domain um providing
Welfare Services
education um housing um looking trying
to get greater equality across the board
in terms of um all sorts of resources th
those things of course are frequently
involved entitlements welfare um uh look
at Obamacare these are things that the
the right has found are anathema to the
right okay
the right is looking for non-regulation
in the economic domain typically okay so
you get this kind of interesting cross
hatch Crossing where the left wants
government regulation where you have um
in the economic domain wants autonomy in
the social domain the right wants
autonomy in the economic domain and they
want government regulation in the social
domain in in hopes of maintaining the
they see the the Norms as a protection
against sort of what they see as a
self-gratification on the desires on the
on the left okay so you have these
differences and and so you brought up
these policies they all F they fit there
right you have abortion and um abortion
is not just about protecting the fetus
which I I respect for many people that's
what it is but there is also something
about the social role of women behind it
okay that I think it's it's
fundamentally important and it's clear
when it comes to um same-sex marriage
clearly you know um again a matter of of
conservatives believing that marriage
should be between a man and a woman um
guns we talked about um so these things
on the left on the right are very much a
matter of maintaining social roles it's
a matter of maintaining what was
regarded as a protection they see this
as protecting Society okay the the you
go with tradition you go with the old
ways you go with custom interesting the
left is quite entitlements on the left
which have been you know if you look at
Social Security you look at Medicare you
look at Obamacare and how they've been
maligned by the right um on the left
these are essential um programs to try
to at least Foster or facilitate a more
equal Society but on the left we would
not and I I do I look I find I I am on
the left so I I don't want to you know
no pretense that I'm not here we see
abortion same-sex marriage things of
this sort as matters of equality and
justice I I was wondering if um if we
could talk about something like climate
change right because that may be an
exception I'm not entirely sure right
conservatives tend to be not as
supportive of climate change policy but
in a way I mean like at least the way
that I view it is no this is this is a
protection thing we're we need to
protect ourselves and our kids right and
it should be and interestingly um when
when people in the laboratory have tried
to to to kind of frame it that way
conservative the more more accepted but
when you look at what what has what's
climate change has been about on the
right on the left it is all about sort
of protecting but also providing for the
welfare of the planet the right reaction
to climate change has been focused on
the economics of it and not wanting to
basically shut down business or get
businesses involved hurt business
eventually I think we're going to get
past that because when you start seeing
the real that you know that hurricanes
and and and fires and everything else
shut down businesses as well somehow
with there's going to have to be a
learning curve right involved here I've
had conversations with others about kind
of like
what like how we would describe the
moralities of like the left and the
right and I keep coming back to this
metaphor of fences right conservatives
tend to want to respect the fences that
were put up by our ancestors right and
the idea is like look like there's a
reason why our ancestors put up these
fences and if you want to tear down
these fences you better have like a
really good reason to do so if not then
we should honor the vences right whereas
perhaps uh a comparable metaphor for the
left may be that the left is focused on
building ladders for people right like
helping the disadvantaged right and
these fences is well I mean yeah we have
them but we maybe they were there
because the oppressor put them up right
and it's our job to kind of tear down
these fences and so there's kind of like
this Clash I don't know if you would
agree with that yeah no I I mean I think
those are interesting metaphors and I
think they're broadly applicable uh
fenes can apply in many different ways
um I think as a social psychologist one
of the ways we would think about it is
in terms of um how you want to define
the group of okay and it for for
conservatives common identity is
extremely important okay having common
identity because in fact the whole a lot
of it is based on vigilance for threats
right you want to protect so you're
always vigilant for threat and there's a
very notion of particularized trust you
trust those who are most like you okay
and that very much defines um sort of
how conservatives think about the group
if you look for example um and and let
me go on and say what what for liberals
um the group is defined by Common goals
we if we want the same things you know
we want to go after the same things the
goals are much more important than my
having the the same identity so Fen is
put up are basically about sort of
separating me from others based on who
is like me and who is unlike me in terms
of similar um identifiable qual uh
features often so for example one of the
interesting um phenomena that had been
talked about by Brooks and others had to
do with um differences in Shadow will
giving and there was a big deal you know
20 years ago uh a book written by Brooks
you know about how it despite what the
the left says the right gives much more
money and they try to you know look at
rights or more charitable in fact what
you find is the right is more charitable
because they give more to the wrong
churches okay they're not m in fact
they're not moreable when you look if if
if you um control for income also you
don't find these differences okay but
what's important to note here the only
difference I want to say is the left
gives to groups that are you know
interested in equality but don't
necessarily look like them or share a
religious affiliation with them um but
um much more broadly sort of a in some
ways recognize is a much more plist
pluralistic society okay um the
experiment that is the United States of
we're all supposed to be all these
differences should be able to kind of
come together for common purpose if you
look at the psychological differences
found between liberals and conservatives
you find that conservatives are very
threat sensitive okay if you look if you
look at ey tracking studies where you
have positive and negative features when
people are reading the conservatives pay
much more attention to negative stimuli
for example um and and then and liberals
do not
um they um see the world as a much more
pessimistic place they see things you
know they're much more pessimistic um
than than liberals um there's some very
interesting surveys run by The Economist
on the world going to pot basically
looking really terrible versus doing
well and you see two-thirds of Biden
supporters looked optimistic and
two-thirds of trump supporters look very
pessimistic this threat Sensitivity I
think is very very important and many
people there there whole there's a group
of psychologists um who believe that
there's actually a gene conservatism
it's a you know it's it's genetic I
don't believe that but I do believe that
people who are sensitive to threat are
much more likely to be probably become
conservative right and how you're raised
by parents has something to do with that
where you live how you hang out who you
who you hear from Etc liberals the the
psychological trait that most defines
liberals is openness psychological
openness willing to um sort engage in
novelty um new things in the laboratory
you see um liberals approaching
unfamiliar stimuli much more readily
than conservatives for example I do
think if you look at problem solving
differences in general in terms of
society and you could argue that protect
and provide are both important in a
society right we're not trying to argue
that only one should exist but we can if
if Society needs to be protected and we
need to provide for others they're also
problem solving orientations that cohere
with each with each of these where where
if you are conservatism or anything
involving threat will often involve
coordination and Michelle gilan has
written some very wonderful things on a
loose and tight societies loose
societies look tight societies excuse me
look very much like conservative
societies where you have strict Norm
adherence and so forth again those are
societies which historically have
experienced threat open societies have
been have often been less um subjected
to to stresses and the the problem is
Sol strategy for providing and by the
way loose doesn't a liberal Society is
not necessarily loose it's just uh you
can have a loose or a tight
Society um and that involves social
order whether you have high or low
social order higher low social justice
is actually a different dimension if you
have a society that's higher social
justice what you want is the problem
solving strategy there really is
cooperation it's not coordination if
there are threats you want actually a
leader which is one of the reasons
Authority is important you want a leader
to say this is what you do this is how
you deal with it that's how you
efficiently deal with the problem
cooperation is much harder it's it's a
more difficult task it's a it's a much
more help it's a helpful one over time
if you can get people to cooperate but
that will be the um problem solving
strategy of of um a social justice
oriented Society I'm wondering if you
think that both sides have the same
goals but just approach them differently
or that we actually do have different
goals and we approach them differently
no I actually I want to say you could
you could I could argue either depending
on the level of goals okay so I mean the
goals of protecting versus providing are
very different goals okay I do believe
though when you look really at that real
superordinate level both want a good
society that I don't I one of the
reasons I wanted to look at morality is
I do want to say that both sides are
coming from a place of genuine concern I
think about the society I I I'm by the
way I'm not talking about Trump and his
minions I I right now I don't I'll put
them in a different category at the
moment but I do think that in general
liberals and conservatives both want
America to work they want a society that
is a good Society where people can
Thrive where people can have a sense of
well-being I kind of believe that okay I
don't think we hear from each other very
much we yell at each other we demonize
each other but if we got into a room
together I think many of us could see
that we care about the same thing we
care about family we care about health
we care about loving relationships you
know we want I mean there are many
things and we want people to be able to
thrive in a society how you get there
though I think is really um we differ
and that's where the goals differ in
terms of methodology sort of the method
the systematic ways of getting there one
sense it's about protecting feeling like
um you know we've got to protect the
nation protect what we have the
conservatism is a bullwark against the
the you know self selfishness and
self-gratification that they see exists
on the left and the left feels that the
right basically doesn't recognize the
real needs of people the the the the the
the inequalities that are so problematic
um that it's not about um
self-gratification it's about freedom in
certain domains for both so yeah I mean
I think we have good people here's the
thing I think there are good people on
both sides I may disagree so vehemently
with people who you know are
anti-abortion anti-gay rights anti-am
seex marriage but I I could I believe
that I could be in a room with many and
get along well we could understand that
we want a good society and maybe by
talking to each other we could even we
probably won't change each other's minds
but we could actually learn to respect
each other yeah understand that what we
have in a society are differences and
what politics is about is negotiating
and debating them not screaming and
insisting on our own way even when we're
sure that our own way is the right right
yes yes I completely agree I wish there
was a lot more civil discussion and a
lot less yelling yeah I actually have a
lot of conservative friends you know and
um and I find those relationships very
fulfilling and I like the fact that can
hear them out and actually hear the
arguments that they have to support
their positions you know a lot of them
are are pretty devout Christians right
so that plays a lot into it you know and
like once you hear them out you know
like I feel like it's easier to respect
them you're like oh like I I see what
you're coming from like I see it you
know like you're not a monster you're
not a demon right you're like and I
don't see them as my enemy right
absolutely Jason you're are so right and
and part of the problem is that we we we
don't look at the we demonize and one of
the way we demonize we say they're bad
they're selfish they're immoral they're
terrible they don't agree what I you
know one of the interesting things about
morality is that moral convictions are
unlike any other attitude do I care what
ice cream somebody likes or what kind of
food they want to eat or where they want
to go to a movie theater we don't care
about that what we do when it come comes
to moral convictions social social
psychology just like just skitka and all
wonderful social psychology have shown
that these don't work the way others do
there's a sense of right and wrong and
if I'm right you're wrong and there's a
sense of um distancing there they high
emotional arousal in the laboratory
people with different moral beliefs even
try to sit further apart they put their
chairs further
apart yeah I mean it's quite something
um and groups based on morality you know
when you look at big group not only love
their own group have ingroup favoritism
but they have more outgroup hate it's
one of the reasons why when they do all
these polls about how much people like
Biden how much they like that you in
fact that probably isn't going to make
as much a difference in any election we
know this than who you don't like hating
Trump is a more powerful motivation than
liking Biden or hating Biden is a more
powerful motivation than liking Trump we
know that for research on on morality
okay um so there's something fundamental
about morality and moral convictions
that make make us Clash so much but if
we could
understand that these moral that these
differences come from a morality of
actually caring about the right thing be
trying not you know that that that we
want a world that's good for everybody
um that um we disagree on how to get
there and politics is about working that
out yeah negotiating I you know I I I
often think about the what I call now
the Lis Cheney effect I think Lis Cheney
and I probably disagree on most things
most liberals would not agree with LZ
jany on most things but I think now most
liberals would sit at the table with Lis
jany and be happy to talk with her about
politics why because for liberals she's
shown that she is moral okay how by Say
by being able to sacrifice her own
position
and do the right thing in in countering
Trump right I mean um it's kind of
interesting to me that it had less to do
with policy there and then once you
recognize the morality people can get
past it right yeah we've got to
recognize that these differences we have
don't make mean we're immoral people as
you have already said Vis your friends
I'm wondering if so this is a
conversation that I've had with a couple
of other people and it's about kind of
like the the left losing supporters okay
and I don't know know if you think if
you would agree with this but I some
people think that the left is losing a
lot of supporters because it's not
focused on the traditional economic
goals that it used to be focused on it's
it's more focused on like race and
gender like those things have been
Amplified and a lot of people are turned
off by that and so they've kind of moved
to the right and this is why some people
think that Bernie Sanders would have
attracted those voters because Sanders
is just so big on inequality economic
inequality yes I think there's a
the focus on race and identity politics
and so forth and so on has certainly
impacted the support by sort of working
class by by workingclass wives right
that certainly has been the case we
talked about that a little a little
earlier on both the left and the right
there are D there are vulnerabilities
that come with the moralities okay the
moral the vulnerability on the and I'm
going to get to the the the emphasis on
race and so forth in through through
this okay one of the problems I think
the vulnerability on the right is
clearly authoritarianism which we've now
seen with Trump you can't because what
what the focus on protection does is it
focuses on strength and power on strong
leaders on this strict adherence on
whatever and if you push that enough and
people are fearful enough you push that
enough you get authoritarianism you get
a trump cult okay a trump cult where you
know the focus is all on this incredibly
strong leader who's idealized now it's
US versus them in a major way
The Authority matters um Conformity
overtakes takes over um and we know this
has happened because if you look at vam
if you look at um Global surveys our
Republican party and by the way these
are 2,000 International Specialists who
who focus on um parties and democracy
our Republican party is no longer
considered a mainstream rep conservative
party so a Republican party has become
an ult ultra right party like Law And
Justice um in Poland or fidz in Hungary
um it is no longer considered a
mainstream conservative party so the
vulnerabilities have pushed it towards a
more authoritarian route and the
vulnerabilities are playing up the
threats in society particularly things
around immigration for example that that
really that was Central on the on the
left the vulnerability actually has to
do with um group identities I think the
problem identity politics which can lead
to a fragmented Society right one of the
reasons is a focus on identity if you
actually are trying to provide resources
in a society if you're trying to get
Justice if you're trying to provide get
equality you have to know where to where
to provide the goodies right or where to
provide the resources how to re how to
distribute resources and one way you do
this is not individually but you do it
by group right you try to look at groups
that need more need to have um you know
special special concerns about not
getting ahead in society not having
opportunities not having equal
opportunities um so there's tends to be
a focus on groups and group identities
and now the problem with having strong
group identities is that first it leads
to uh competitive victimhood so you can
you know one group then feels necess
that it may deserve more than another
group so instead of bringing people
together it could keep people could push
people apart more right yeah yeah and it
also can fragment a society in this in
the sense of it's my group that matters
and uh and and you forget the whole now
social psychologist will tell you it's
good to have a group identity if you can
also have the overriding subordinate
identity if we all could all could care
equally about being Americans and not
just about being you know white black
Asian Latino you know Christian Jewish
whatever you're you know whatever
Buddhist Muslim um that that there's
something very important about seeing
we're in this great experiment together
and we've lost sight of that if we have
that having a superordinate a
subordinate identity work terrifically
those identity politics wouldn't be a
problem but we've lost that overriding
one um so the vulnerability on the left
I think is really this identity politics
that can lead to competitive victimhood
and
fragmentation rate of fragmentation and
on the right it's
anti-democratic um more authoritarian
stuff um and I think that's really
an issue and as we've gone to the
identity PS I think you're right we lose
people who feel that their particular
identities white working class for
example is not what the left is
attending to sufficiently yeah exactly
right and I think what's unfortunate is
that because there's such that there's
this such strong focus and emphasis on
group identity those people who are not
selected as the ones to be protected
feel like they're demonized somehow
right and I think this is particularly
true when it comes to something like
race I think unfortunately the left
perhaps the the the vocal minority on
the left give off the impression that
white equals bad right white people are
the oppressors and and so then a lot of
white people are like oh okay well I
mean you say I have this privilege you
also say like I have this privilege
because I'm I'm a guy too well you know
I'm super poor you know like I grew up
in a really crappy neighborhood that's
exactly right no I think that's right I
think that that that there's a sense in
which um yeah I I I I I there's no
question and I do think that that stat
what I talked about earlier is a status
anxiety the fact that I mean you know um
if Haw Childs has written the beautiful
book about about rural Americans in the
bayou who just feel like they've waited
online waited online waited online and
they've gotten nothing everybody else is
cutting in front these are not nasty
mean ugly people that are you know
immoral they feel like they're they've
wor worked hard their whole life they've
given everything and they're getting
nothing right what's interesting is
though that welfare politics who Could
That could actually help these people
okay entitlements of various sorts you
know they're actually against those
because they think that those are only
relevant that only goes to certain
groups okay um so but but I mean you're
right I think the the the the Democrats
are waking up to this the loss of the
working class I mean um look at unions I
mean unions are a have been always a
democratic issue and they they are and
Biden is a very strong union person but
supposedly you know a lot of union
members now like Trump there you know
they because now how how unions are
going for the Republicans it's just
that's a that's a new world right um you
know but but it's exactly as you're
saying they feel like um they've been
ignored you know white these are white
Union Meers feel they've been ignored
and um that is something our society
should
be dealing with this but it should be
dealing with because people at the top
have so much now we have forgotten it's
not about the it's not about you know
blacks and Latinos who are are taking
the money from the white it's a the
money is all going to the top I I wonder
how much of this difference between the
left and the right comes down to
empirical
disagreements right so so for instance I
mean both sides can look at a chart that
shows all this inequality right and I
can imagine the conservative saying yeah
but that's not necessarily bad right
because maybe it lifts all the boats
right a rising tide lifts all the boats
so maybe there's a disagreement over the
effects of this inequality that's right
but there is empirical evidence that it
doesn't lift all the boats that's right
I mean you know there that's right there
is you know I think you know we know it
doesn't lift all the boats because you
know it hasn't really help but but you
but but your point is very well taken
that we can look the people don't agree
on the facts anymore right people don't
agree on the facts you know for on the
on the right is this sense of it's all
about hard work and making it yourself
etc etc although I like going back to um
it's like pulling yourself up by your
own bootstraps kind of thing and I like
going back to Martin Luther King's
comment well you know some people don't
even have boots you know there's a sense
in which what does that mean you know
people talk about equal you know
everybody can make it because we have
equ we have equal opportunity in this
Society there's no equal opportunity you
don't start from the same place you know
you if people don't have you know most
people in the society um who have been
able to F buy buy a house has had
government support from FDA or whatever
in non redlining dises of parents that
have helped them you know when you start
with very little you don't have the same
opportunity as somebody that starts with
more you know until everybody starts the
race at the same starting line you don't
have equal opportunity okay people the
monetory of equal opportunity is very
popular on the right but equal
opportunity without equal wealth to
begin is is just it doesn't make any
sense um on the other hand this notion
that hard work and everything pays off
the love doesn't believe that hard work
doesn't matter it's just hard work isn't
enough like people you know in our
society held three jobs and are still
poor and living below the poverty line
and I guess I want to go back to what
you're saying that I don't I do think
some of it's an empirical question but
even with the same same we don't share
the same facts so it's empirical in the
sense of people pick their facts or
ignore the ones that you know um don't
don't don't work I mean we now have our
our silos our social media silos or our
news silos big sword in terms of where
people live I live in a place where 94%
of the people voted for Biden okay a
college Massachusetts right um this is
you know that's what's happening in this
country people are sorting even in terms
of where they live 50 years AG the one
of the biggest problems when it comes to
this notion of morality and under
underpinning our our politics is that
right now our political parties are
perfectly aligned with those moralities
with proscript or prescript or Pro
provide protect or social order social
justice so so that 50 years ago or when
I was a child you know you had Jacob
Javit n Nelson Rockefeller who these
were Republicans they were moderates
right you had St Thurman Who as a
Democrat I mean you these Southern
Democrats who are as conservative as you
could possibly get now you couldn't find
a moderate Republican very easily right
a liberal Republican and it's very hard
to find conservative Democrats so we'd
now have this realignment so that the
social order and social justice
moralities moralities are totally
aligned with our political parties which
has made for the polarization
that is incredible because when you had
a mix within party you didn't have as
great a polarized Society because it was
much more dissension within the parties
much more discussion within the interp
party dissension was there but it was it
was modulated by what was happening
within party as well right so as a last
question then um what do you think is
the way forward how do we move away from
such a polarized Society you know social
psychologist would say the way get
people who are who disagree completely
to get together if something horrendous
has to happen you know some alien other
attacks us we got you know obviously um
that's not the way we want to go right
and um inou contact you know we talked
about that somehow seeing getting to to
meet each other to know each other which
is again harder because to the big sort
because of the silos we even get
different information but my little
optimism here is that I believe actually
conservatives a lot of conservatives
care about democracy too I don't think
the trumpist trumpists care about the
Democracy which is why it's become this
alt-right sect okay but as people are
continuing to beginning to write more
and more now the Republican party is two
parties right you still have your your
your mainstream conservative and those
people do care a great deal about
maintaining the democracy and you have
the left that presumably cares about the
Democracy if we could get together
recognizing the put of the Democracy we
might be able to move forward right we
won't lose the Democracy but that
doesn't mean that we're going to get
along a lot better right we're gonna
have strange bed fellows possibly
because we're running scared now
everybody's a little frightened about
what's happening in this country you
know Trump takes over again you read
about what Millie wrote and what you
know John Kelly wrote These are people
in the military who are not you know
famously liberal right um worried saying
that this man you know Trump was
actually pretty crazy and dangerous and
whatever he comes in again there are
real there are real reasons to be
concerned and people on the left and the
right are concerned about this so maybe
he won't be elected right um that's our
first step in going forward that's that
you know that's our first step in moving
forward how we then start talking to
each other getting along realizing once
we realize that we're not hearing from
mainstream liberals Main Republicans
what we hear is a lot of noise on
extremes right maybe we can calm down a
little and start actually conversing and
talking and meeting and thinking that
you know Intergroup contact really is
the answer we know that from social site
how do we meet how do we get together
how do we talk no thank you so much I
think it's a good place to wrap things
up thanks a lot


## Keywords:
