---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EeRSXrcU-10
---

# Video
The New Scarce Resources | Not Goods & Services, but Attention and Governance for the New Economics
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EeRSXrcU-10)

## Transcript:
economists of the old Enlightenment
focused their attention on goods and
services as the main scarce resources
they were trying to think about in
designing the economy and if you open up
any economics textbook you will find
that the focus of Economics is scarce
resources like that's our specialty but
goods and services continues to be the
the type of scarce resources that is the
primary focus I believe we're in a
moment in history when we are in a new
Enlightenment meaning we're going to see
Paradigm shifts in economics governance
and knowledge systems that I think will
parallel that the magnitude of those
Paradigm shifts from the old
Enlightenment and I actually think that
there will need to be a new type of
scarce resources that becomes the main
focus of sort of the redesign of the
economy so what are the new scarce
resources that will and should be the
focus of an economic redesign
and I think this is going to be
attention as a scarce resource like
human attention governance energy
Community bonds or Community Development
and adversarial energy such as uh the
law corporate governance policing things
like that and to be clear obviously
allocation of energy resources and
physical resources of the earth as well
as labor resources will be really
important in the economy moving forward
it's just that in the old Enlightenment
we kind of thought of attention as being
secondary and sort of following up where
the economic resources go in terms of
goods and services
in some ways I think that order could be
flipped because where the attention goes
where people's Focus becomes that will
ultimately shape where scarce resources
like energy and labor go and so I think
thinking of attention as in some ways
the main scarce resource of the economy
that will shape values and institutions
and things moving forward I think that's
going to need to be a new way of
thinking about things and to place this
into context we might imagine the
thinkers of the old Enlightenment they
thought a lot about markets and
centralized planning whether that came
from a monarchy or a Democratic Republic
or whatever they thought about how
resources moved in the context of sort
of the structures these meta structures
like markets and money of the economy
and I think there's going to be new and
different tools that come into the
conversation
as we start to think about restructuring
the economy but in the thought
experiments that came from people like
Adam Smith and Ken tillyan they were
actually thinking more about sort of
physical Goods like corn and wool and
wheat and how those goods had this
relationship with money and the way
things were circulating and of course
they had services in there too like
shining your shoes or whatever in their
image in their thought experiments and I
like to do thought experiments on this
channel but in some ways I think the
thought experiments need to start to
include more thought experiments that
are kind of about what are the ways that
these different mechanisms Channel
people's attention and how how do goods
and services move in following that
attention how do real things like
governance energy and the economy move
to sort of figure out where resources go
because we do have a lot of digital
tools at our disposal for more creative
structures for both governing where
resources go when it matters for a
community of people but also different
types of collective intelligence
mechanisms besides just markets and I
think as we do these thought experiments
it needs to not just be about goods and
services it needs to include these other
things so I would just like to talk a
little bit about each of these scarce
resources and why these should become a
bigger focus of economic restructuring
so why does attention need to be a key
scarce resource
and it has some interesting properties
like my guess is some of you paid for
this video with a little bit of your
attention on an advertisement so it's
already sort of entered into the economy
in a way that
um in a way that's pretty important and
is in some cases linked to money
attention is definitely scarce like you
definitely only have 24 hours a day
seven days a week and the quality of
your attention is not the same in all of
that time sometimes you're asleep
sometimes you're kind of zoned out and
don't have the energy to give like
quality thinking like quality problem
solving attention to something
so I think in some ways what the labor
economy
it buys your your highest quality
attention like those hours in the day
when you're focused on a problem and
thinking creatively about it thinking
carefully about it and sometimes I will
do these thought experiments where I
imagine a world vacuum and of course you
can use the world vacuum to be like okay
what if we vacuumed up half of the bee
population what would that do to society
and things but I also do thought
experiments where I say what if we
vacuumed up half of the attention in the
world like half of the quality attention
and sucked it into something like social
media so that there's less of that
scarce resource to go around and given
that I think quality attention is
essential for things like human
relationships and quality problem
solving if you vacuum up half the
attention half of that scarce resource
how does that affect society because
attention and quality attention is in
some ways the number one input into some
of the most important things that happen
in any economy but particularly in an
information economy and I do think we
live in an age where it is an
information economy where information
determines how how physical Goods move
where scarce resources get allocated and
so the kinds of things that require
attention as an input include governance
Community formation labor of any type
problem solving quality relationships
there's so many things where the main
input into that thing is quality
attention and this includes like quality
information like where does quality
information come from it comes from
somebody who's thought about something
and done a lot of research putting their
quality attention into figuring out
what's true or not true about something
or a community of people putting their
Collective attention into into coming up
with knowledge that they have decided is
valid and in the past I do think we've
thought of attention as a secondary
thing like first we focus on our job
first we go focus on how we're
allocating things through markets and
then our attention will just kind of
play out however it plays out and
economists like to think about
efficiency so we like to think about how
do you use resources efficiently and
when are we using resources really
inefficiently
and when I look at today's economy I
think we're using a lot of the attention
resources really really inefficiently
where you have a lot of attention
focused on things that are
um either not that important relative to
other things that need more attention or
else maybe they are important but
putting more and more attention in that
direction doesn't actually make progress
it just sort of uh feeds to a loggerhead
that is already stuck and so if we were
to stop and think okay how could we use
human attention in the most meaningful
important way to solve the economic and
governance problems of the world I just
think that's a problem that first and
foremost has to start with
how would we want to allocate scarce
attention now to be clear I don't think
dictating to people or forcing attention
is in at all the right way of doing this
but attention is related to attraction
you you do hire people to spend their
time and their attention solving certain
problems
so thinking about the allocation of that
resource without making it into a into a
coercive thing I think that's that's
important and some people will say that
attention is Holy like where you choose
to focus your thought energy where you
let your mind dwell that will shape your
values it will shape who you are and
collectively as a society where we put
our attention will determine the values
that we evolve into
and so the question is are we evolving
our attention in a direction that does
solve the problems we want to be solved
are we are we are we collectively
focusing our attention where it is most
holy now the second scarce resource that
I think we need to focus on as a scarce
resource is governance energy and this
is because governance energy is really
expensive like it does require attention
as a scarce input but it also requires
sort of a willingness to compromise that
takes a long time it requires a
willingness of populations and people to
enter into conflict over things to work
through that conflict to come up with
something and if you were to look at
every single decision someone made the
impacted a group of people bigger than
their own immediate family or whatever
that that list of decisions is so large
that the world does not have enough
governance energy to collectively make
all of those decisions and when I say
governance I'm not just talking about
the types of governance that happens in
Washington DC
I'm also talking about the types of
governance that happens inside
corporations because of course
corporations make decisions that deeply
impact society and there is a governance
structure within corporations that sort
of
um is headed by a board of directors
that's accountable to the shareholders
and whatnot and some of the decisions
that are made inside companies like
companies that involve artificial
intelligence for example some of those
will I think need a better governance
mechanism that's that includes a broader
range of people that's more democratic
so when I say governance I'm talking
about any decision that impacts a larger
Community other than the people making
the decision and what I'm saying here is
that list is so large that there is not
enough governance energy in the human
population to make every one of those
decisions collectively and yet I do
believe in the principle of democracy
that especially for the most important
of those decisions there does need to be
Democratic input and Democratic
processes that determine those things in
a way that is acceptable to to many
people
and and what I'm seeing right now is a
ton of governance energy going into
these bottleneck moments that happen
every four years where we vote in an
official way and the issues where public
attention and public discussion goes are
issues that are such at loggerheads that
there's not any progress
whereas I do think we could actually
find a bunch of things that the broad
part of the population widely agrees
upon and those things are not getting
any attention at all like those those
things sort of fall fall to the Wayside
of these um these loggerhead issues and
that tells me our governance energy as a
population is being wasted and is not
being used efficiently now that we have
some pretty powerful digital tools the
question is can we come up with other
mechanisms that will not waste this
precious governance energy and then my
next scarce resource is community
formation
because people cannot be in an infinite
number of communities they cannot know
an infinite number of people really well
and when I look at the current economy
one advantage I see that large
corporations have
is that oftentimes those are the only
places where people form real Community
bonds
where they've interacted with people
over a long enough period of time to
know everybody's quirks and to know how
to navigate conflict with different
people to know people's strengths and
weaknesses and it takes a long time for
a community to sort of come together and
know each other well enough to figure
out how to function well as a group like
to figure out when certain people should
step up because that's their strength
like some people are great in crises and
other people are are portable in crises
they they panic and become a burden and
I think communities can naturally sort
of deal with that well if they know each
other well
and what I see right now is these huge
mega organizations which is basically
corporations and bureaucracies of
various sorts those are where these
long-term relationships happen
and of course because every organization
every Community can depreciate like like
large communities can stop serving their
social purpose and instead turn their
own energy into the internal power
dynamics and internal struggles within
an organization that's no good but we
need communities to develop because of
the power of these communities and any
economic system that does not involve
communities forming communities
investing time and energy getting to
know one another I think it's leaving
too much good stuff too much meaningful
important stuff on the table
and that's one critique I have of a lot
of thinkers in the sort of space of
thinking about a future economy is that
it doesn't have places or mechanisms for
Community formation where that's a
scarce resource and it needs to be
cultivated and used carefully and then
my last scarce resource is what I'm
calling adversarial energy and here I'm
really thinking about things like
corporate law that that's sort of where
I started thinking about this issue but
it includes policing power and military
power and really the entire law not just
corporate law
but why I started thinking of this in
the context of corporate law is because
so many corporate lawyers I think by
their own admission believe that they're
sort of just contributing to rent
seeking they're just contributing to the
power battle between different corporate
entities
rather than actually adding real value
to the economy but the skill set of
corporate lawyers that is an incredible
skill set for sort of identifying where
there is corruption where there's a
problem in the system that is not
serving its pro-social role you need
some way of sort of going after those
problems in the system and corporate law
is actually set up well where it could
do that if that energy were focused
differently so all of the jokes about
lawyers causing problems and having a
bad role in the system I don't think the
solution is to get rid of lawyers where
lawyers are basically people who do a
lot of research and careful thought to
defend a certain position to perhaps go
after something that is that they are
claiming is not right and if the thing
they're going after is just sort of okay
somebody who's threatening the power of
a corporation that's no good
but if the thing they're going after is
actually wait a second we have something
really wrong with what's going on here
and that you need information to go
after that to sort of prove no this is
something we don't want that kind of
thing it could be so valuable in
essentially creating an immune system
for the economy and this is a white
rabbit video and the white rabbit is a
reference to Alice in Wonderland where
of course Alice in Wonderland You're
Going Underground down a rabbit hole
where everything's weird and distorted
and why I have this white rabbit on the
channel is that I think we need creative
economic thinking where everything's
different and weird if we want to get to
a better economic system so this video
is me sort of exploring how might we
re-jigger the way we think about
economics in general


## Keywords:
