---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9zBtn_NFcck
---

# Video
The Deficit Myth: MMT and How to Build a Better Economy w/ Stephanie Kelton - MR Live - 7/10/20
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9zBtn_NFcck)

## Transcript:

every day
that means Monday is casual Monday
Tuesday casual Tuesday Wednesday casual
hump day Thursday casual Thurs that's
what we call it and Friday casual
Shabbat majority report with sam Sita
it is Friday July 10th 2020 my name is
Sam cedar this is the five-time
award-winning majority report we are
broadcasting live to tape steps and
steps and steps from the industrially
ravaged Gowanus Canal in the heartland
of America downtown Brooklyn USA it is
the final day of our vacation shows and
we have arguably I don't know if I could
say this but I'm pretty excited every
time she's come on this program saved
the best for last
although I gotta say we've had some
great interviews this week if I do say
so myself
professor stephanie kelton will be here
she is the author of the best-selling
deficit myth modern monetary theory and
how to build a better economy stephanie
kelton has I think I mentioned in this
interview which way I pre recorded last
week it's been on this program three or
four times I think the first time was in
2012 she has been if that the premiere
and maybe the premier advocate for
modern monetary theory
one of the premier advocates for modern
monetary theory which is just a way a
response if you will to a belated one to
us getting off the gold standard and
understanding the nature of money the
flexibility we have as a body politic to
do things I mean ultimately you know a
budget is always a simply a choice it is
it is always in every society simply a
reflection upon what society feels is
most important and you know just even
during the course of this pandemic and
the subsequent and I believe ongoing and
I believe soon to get worse economic
recession slash depression potentially
we are simply making choices we do not
have to reopen to save the economy we
can pay people to stay at home we can
provide funding for areas that we want
to we can we the federal government can
can use its ability to create money to
give to states so that they're not
laying off teachers so that they're not
laying off sanitation workers so that
they're not laying off all sorts of
state workers we can the federal
government can make the decision to
create money essentially to make sure
that our immigration system is still
working to make
sure that our Postal Service keeps
working and the you know we are raised
with this this attitude that there is no
free lunch now it's not it's not free
money but and there is a mistaken idea
about money some instances it's just
because what we've been a cultured to
and in other instances it's because you
know being rich and having power is not
in a vacuum it is only in relationship
to other people's buying power and other
people's power political or otherwise
and so a lot of you know I think the
idea about being a multi billionaire
wouldn't be so satisfying for Jeff Bezos
let's say if everybody was even if he
had the same purchasing power if
everybody had the same purchasing power
I think it would still get under his
skin a little bit
I just thought be using his in an
example but the point is is that budgets
are always choices and in some instances
we don't have to make choices that
cancel each other out
you know when Bernie Sanders goes out
there and says we need to cut the
military budget to provide I can't
remember exactly what the proposal was
but something that's good for people in
many ways that's a false choice
according to stephanie kelton now I
happen to want to cut the military
budget period because I want us to be
less militaristic but we don't need to
do that to pay for other things the
concept of pay go in the United States
in terms of the federal government is
ridiculous and self-defeating Stephanie
Kelton will explain why that is the case
and I would urge you you can just search
majority report stephanie kelton go back
and listen to the other interviews
because it's also interesting to watch
her progression of ideas not dramatic in
terms of change but in terms of just
sort of also introducing this to the
country it's a really important
development I think and I think it's
going to have more relevance going
forward I mean knock on wood Donald
Trump won't be present forever
knock on wood hey this episode among
other things this episode is brought to
you by magic spoon as you know breakfast
cereal was one of the best parts of
being a kid I mean always consistent
always knew what you're getting loved it
every time and it's also actually one of
the best things about being an adult too
when you have kids you want cereal yes I
know what I gotta do I get the bowl I
get the milk I get the cereal but the
problem that I have had in the past is
like if the cereal is not horrible
in terms of health for my child then
he's not going to like it or she for
that matter but he in particular is the
issue right now because as an adult you
realize that all those cereals that you
loved they were full of sugar they were
full of junk
magic spoon is a new cereal company
that's discovered a way to recreate your
favorite childhood cereals with zero
sugar 12 grams of protein only three net
grams of carbs in each serving magic
spoon has four flavors they're based on
the all-time kids classics cocoa fruity
frosted and blueberry and they get a
variety pack that lets you get all four
if you want they've recreated the taste
and the texture of those classic sugary
cereals but it tastes so amazing you'd
never guess it was healthy it is keto
friendly it is gluten free it is grain
free it is soy free it is low-carb it is
GMO free I kidding you not my kids
love this I love it too I mean I'll have
one or two bowls a week they will have
five to seven bowls a week of this
cereal and they love it Saul actually
was even who is a little bit shy as you
know was actually going to do a
testimonial that's how much he loves it
Maya likes it too but Saul is hardcore
magic spoon advocate he and like his
father he must finish the box of fruity
before he moves on to the box of frosted
or the box of blueberry or the cocoa we
don't we don't mix stuff in my family
everybody's very ordered go to magic
spoon dot-com slash majority report to
grab a variety pack a try it today you
can you can have fruity one day and
cocoa the next day use promo code
majority report a checkout to get free
shipping but we in this house we go
through each box in sequence magic spoon
is so confident in their product it's
backed with a hundred percent happiness
guarantee so if you don't like it for
any reason they refund all your money
they don't ask any questions about it
it's just like here they don't even say
like what's wrong with you that cereal
is amazing the magic spoon com it's
magic spoon dot-com / majority port code
majority report for free shipping also
expressvpn protects your privacy and
your security online but you can also
use Express VPN to unlock movies and
shows that are only available in other
countries
everybody's at home everybody's gone
through their entire playlist they've
lost everything they've ever wanted to
watch again you've watched the soprano
six times Battlestar Galactica you can
only watch that three or four times each
all 70 episodes before you start getting
a little tired of it well you could use
Express VM to binge on shows like Doctor
Who on UK for Netflix you just fire up
the expressvpn app you change your
location to the UK you refresh Netflix
and that's it boom expressvpn hides your
P address and lets you control where you
want sites to think you're located you
can choose from almost a hundred
different countries so just think about
all the Netflix libraries you can go
through but it's not just Netflix
expressvpn works with any streaming
service expressvpn it's ridiculously
fast so you can stream in HD no problem
it's compatible with all your favorite
devices whatever you like your phone
your pad your computer I don't know
what's after that but if you visit
expressvpn dot-com slash majority you
get an extra three months of expressvpn
for free support the show watch what you
want protect yourself with expressvpn @
Express VPN dot-com / majority and
lastly this program has been sponsored
for weeks and weeks and continues to be
by Sunset Lake CBD I had tried CBD a
little bit I had tried like a tincture
it didn't really do anything for me and
so I never really thought about it that
these guys approached us because they're
watching they're you know they're fans
of the show and I'm like alright I'll
give it a try and the tincture has been
awesome for me in terms of sleeping the
salve has been awesome for me for
whatever reason either they don't even
talk about it that way but I put it on
me because I get what do you call it on
my hands eczema on my hands I've been
great for that the gummies are delicious
I pop a couple those when the kids who
drive me crazy and then they got all the
smokeable stuff that Matt who was a huge
CBD skeptic and he is a connoisseur of
smoking things he uses it in conjunction
with those other things that he smokes
and he says it's wonderful I mean
honestly he's super psyched about it
Jamie loves it Brendan it's they have
first of all a hundred percent pesticide
free hemp they only use organic
fertilizers they're a former dairy farm
that decided to branch out they used to
give milk where they I think they still
do for Ben and Jerry's ice cream they're
up
in Burlington just outside of it they
all their stuff is certified they have
regenitive agricultural practices that
they developed with the University of
Vermont their minimum wage is $15 an
hour the company is mostly employee
owned and they have gummies
they have topical solves they have CBD
coffee which is my which I'm imagining
all this week on vacation because I can
you got to check this out
like I say also fans of the show so
their coupon code left is best one word
left is best 20% off that sunset lake
CBD calm sunset lake CBD calm if you're
a CBD spec skeptic try this out I think
you will be surprised and if you're not
you're gonna be super psyched because
this they have everything you could
possibly want left is best 20% off
Sunset Lake CBD calm all right we're
gonna take a quick break and when we
come back we'll be talking to Stephanie
Kelton author of the best-selling the
deficit myth we are back Sam cedar on
the majority report on the phone it is a
pleasure to welcome back to the program
professor of economics and public policy
at Stony Brook University one of the
leading experts on modern monetary
theory former chief economist for the US
Senate Budget Committee and now a
best-selling author of the deficit myth
modern monetary theory and the birth of
the people's economy stephanie kelton
welcome back to the program thanks for
having me back Sam and congratulations
on all the success this is pretty
exciting it must feel I mean and and it
it must feel particularly gratifying
because I know you know we first I think
spoke on this program in 2012
I just went back and looked which is
sort of shocking to me I feel a little
bit old now but um
you know at that time it was on the sort
of front end of your project to
introduce people to this concept which
particularly you know around that time
was even you know was desperately needed
as the Obama administration had turned
to austerity in the wake of the
financial crisis and now your book is a
best-seller
that's quite a journey well it is and
you know it's weird in a lot of ways
your that the book is a best-seller at a
moment when again we're we're in the you
know period where the economy is in
recession where Congress has responded
with legislation like it did after the
financial crisis we had of course the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
and that was the you know supposedly
very big piece of legislation then you
know about 787 billion dollars and then
as you said you know very quickly
Congress got cold feet and there was
this pivot away from providing fiscal
support for the economy toward you know
the more austerity like attempts to
reduce the budget deficit and that sort
of thing and so here we are where this
time anyway Congress has had a little
more resolve with you know four pieces
of legislation the house has already
passed another three trillion but the
Senate is standing in the way and in
part giving as a reason for not wanting
to do more concerns about the deficit
and how much we've already added to the
debt so it feels very similar in a lot
of ways to where we were before but the
difference I guess is that you know the
book is out there and the conversation
does feel like it's changing to me I
have to say that and and I know he's
listening but I got a text from one of
my closest friends I don't know maybe it
was a week ago and he said this
stephanie kelton book is blowing my mind
and I was I texted back like like how so
then he started to explain to me the
theory and I'm like have you not
listened to my show like you we she's
been on before and it was how I found
out that he only recently you know that
he had been lying for many many years
about my show but it also like it is you
know it was a reminder to me that just
how how you know big of a project it is
to disseminate these ideas that are and
you know still are I think considered
heterodox in the in the economics world
as it were so let's let's start with
this let's start with the the deficit
myth like what what has been the the
myth or maybe maybe a series of myths
that we have been operating under
regarding our economy yeah so you know I
called the book the deficit myth which
is singular but you're exactly right
it's not it's not just one myth there's
that this web of
interrelatedness misunderstandings and
complete stories and so forth so I think
the big one is the one I start with in
the book which is the myths that the
federal government should operate its
budget the way that any household
operates this budget that it's
irresponsible to spend more than you
take in that borrowing taking on debt
set you up for problems down the road
that you can go broke you can you know
as Obama said in his first term you you
can run out of money and so I think
that's the most pernicious myth this
idea that the federal government has no
money of its own
that's what Margaret Thatcher told us in
the 1980s there is no public money she
said there is only taxpayer money and
once you get into that frame then of
course you know everything every
conversation we have about public policy
expanding building on existing programs
introducing new programs everybody
become solely focused on where is the
money going to
from how are we gonna pay for it
thinking that the government like any of
us like household has to go out and
collect up the dollars first either by
taxing the rest of us or by borrowing
from savers from the likes of China or
whomever then once they get the money in
hand then they're in a position to turn
around and spend and I hope that what
we're seeing now you know with the way
Congress has been responding to
coronavirus is that it's just pulled
back the curtain and made it absolutely
clear I think that that's not the way it
works that Congress can step forward
Congress has the power of the purse and
Congress can write a bill authorize the
spending and that's where the money
comes from they're spending money they
do not have and the money comes out of
the decision the commitment to spend it
that's where it's coming from and so
we've really got to reverse the thinking
and recognize that the government spends
first and that puts new dollars out into
the economy they are given you know it's
like the government is giving birth to
new money every time Congress passes one
of these bills and then those dollars
are out there and they can travel around
the economy and change hands and help
support jobs until the time comes where
the government removes them and that's
what happens when the rest of us pay
taxes to the government so and adds only
one one of the six myths that I deal
with in the book well I I want to get to
some some of some of the others as well
and I you know and I I sort of want to
put a pin in the sort of what we're
learning right now because it does feel
that if I put you in charge of of you
know of of history and you wanted to
sort of outline how much of a myth the
the the the the perspective on the
deficit has been the last three or four
years would be probably how you would
write that script let's have the party
that was so concerned about deficits and
debt blow open the the deficit and the
debt and then let's just cap it off with
our ability to sort of spend trillions
of dollars
and you know over the course of like
Amit and have that decision made over
the course of you know several weeks so
let's go I mean what are when we talk
about that myth that myth of the deficit
what what are the other what are the
other like sort of I guess the most
irrelevant myths that we've been
operating under that have per that have
really shrouded in many respects the
reality that we are our budget is really
just a a document that you call it a
moral document that is just an
expression of what we want to have
happen in society so yes Congress gets
to sit down and write a budget and put
resources into various places into
defense into infrastructure into
education into healthcare and all right
every line item there they can write
down any number that they like there is
no financial constraint when it comes to
the currency issuer which is the federal
government of the United States of
America they have the sole legal
authority to issue the US dollar to
issue our currency it can't come from
anywhere else
there is the Congress is not financially
constrained that is not to say that
there are no limits Congress could write
a budget that commits too much spending
and the punishment for doing that would
be inflation right you would drive up
prices and we would have an inflation
problem but that isn't how Congress has
behaved not in the recent past not
historically what they do is they
typically under spent which is to say
that they do not take full advantage of
the space that's available to them to
employ everybody who wants to work to
help produce the goods and services that
would materially increase well-being in
this country that we could do a lot more
that in fact we've been living far below
our means you always hear people say you
know a deficit is evidence that the
government is living beyond its needs
not at all not at all we have been
living well below our mid-tier
means for decades hey we have the people
we have the capital equipment we have
factories we have machines we have
workers we have all of these things in
abundance and many of them sit idle they
go under used or unused and so what I'm
saying is that that represents a huge
cost to all of us to the economy to our
society it's it's a forgone opportunity
whatever we could have done with those
things had we put them to work would
have had the potential to increase our
well-being but we didn't do it so it's
lost to us forever
so when Congress sits down to write a
budget I think they should do it in a
mission oriented way they should you
know not be thinking about matching up
how much comes in and how much goes out
where the focus is to strive to balance
the budget who cares about that
right I want a balanced economy I want
Congress sitting down and deliberating
saying look we got you know child
poverty rates that are an embarrassment
let's attack that problem let's drive
child poverty to zero over the course of
the next ten years or set a goal right
we've got infrastructure that's graded
at a B+ in the United States of America
let's raise that grade to a B+ or an A
over time let's make those investments
let's craft a budget that recognizes
that you know there are limits we can't
spend without limit
but once we recognize how much room the
economy has to safely absorb that new
spending that we're authorizing then
let's you know come up with a plan be
strategic make the investments in our
economy and and make it transparent to
the American people and set goals and
then hold yourself accountable okay so
so let's just start with one end of this
and when we talk about means the way
that people have perceived the concept
of means in the past is that we don't
have the taxation the the the taxation
engine as it were to support the
spending but in fact what means means in
this context is the ability to print
money I mean
that is the only limitation to our means
right and and that in terms of a the a
limit on what we can print it is not
again this engine that produces taxes
from folks in the private sector but it
is rather seeing the impact of this
money that the government is putting
into the economy and those I mean on
some level our language about these
things is completely restricts our
ability to conceptualize in many
respects what's going on absolutely I
think you know that's exactly right
words matter and the fact that we use
language like deficit and debt and
borrowing and burden of debt and all
this kind of stuff just creates
unnecessary anxiety and confusion every
time someone hears the word government
deficit they could replace it in their
mind with non government surplus with
our here's the words our surplus okay
when the government is engaged in
running a fiscal deficit we hear that we
think oh my god that's irresponsible
it's mismanaging its finances
something's gone wrong you know fix it
fix it but we shouldn't think of it that
way when you understand what's really
happening a government deficit simply
means that the government has spent more
dollars into the economy then it has
subtracted back out primarily through
taxation so if the government spends
let's say $100 into the economy and it
only subtracts $90 away by taxing those
dollars away from someone it has by
definition left someone with $10 you put
100 and you're subtract 90 away somebody
gets 10 so the government deficit is
always equal to a financial surplus that
is sitting in some other part of the
economy every deficit is good for
someone the question is you know for
whom and for what are we engaged in
deficit spending for the purpose of
provide
a huge windfall to the people who least
need the help in this economy in this
society or are we doing it for the
purpose of you know dealing with climate
and joblessness and poverty and you know
misery and communities and so forth I
mean it seems to me that really I mean
what we're saying when we say deficit is
really just a taxation deficit and that
it and that term should really be just
something that is used by a bureaucrat
to just come up with a statistic because
it is a subset of the way that
government spends and the way that
government operates in way that a
society operates in terms of its economy
particularly one and and and we'll get
into the sort of the somewhat uniqueness
of the United States versus other
countries particularly ones that don't
necessarily have control over their own
over their own currency but I think it's
like this concept which it took me a
long time and and in many conversations
with you to fully grasp and it in part
of it is just because as soon as we use
the word deficit we give it a
irrelevance in this conversation that is
greater than it is I mean it just simply
is a dynamic that is going on and it's
not it and and there's always like you
say there's always a deficit that's just
a dynamic and the question is within
which direction is that dynamic flowing
so what I just want to go back
historically a little bit was it simply
getting off the gold standard that
essentially changed this dynamic where
there was where the limitation was where
we had one less constraint and that
constraint just being is the economy
overheating but but it is when did we
get into this this I guess when did our
ability to spend and enter this stasis
status I guess well you always had the
ability to spend even under a gold
standard even
even then the punishment though would be
different because the risk was that you
would run out of your gold reserves so
President Nixon took the country off the
gold standard effectively in August of
1971 we had this monetary system that
was called the Bretton Woods system it
was put in place in 1944 after World War
two when countries came together and
they met in Bretton Woods New Hampshire
and they cobbled out a series of
agreements that created institutions
like the IMF and the World Bank and this
Bretton Woods monetary system and that
was a system of fixed exchange rates
where 44 countries agreed to fix the
value of their currencies visa vie one
another so the dollar had a fixed
exchange rate against the British Pound
and against the German mark and again
you know you get the picture and then
the US for its part agreed to convert
the US dollar into gold at a fixed price
internationally so you know you get the
picture somebody could trade their
British pound in at a fixed price
against the dollar get dollars and then
convert dollars into gold
the challenge is that your gold supplies
are limited so if you're running a gold
standard like system then you have to be
pretty careful about managing you know
how many dollars you put out there
because every one of those is
potentially convertible internationally
into gold so when we left that system in
1971 this goes to your question does
that change things does its free up you
know the ability of policymakers to do
things differently in the answers yes we
moved away from a fixed exchange rate
system to a system of floating
currencies so the dollar is no longer
tethered to gold or anything else it's
what we call a pure fiat currency and
that is liberating and that means that
when the government spends it no longer
has to worry about running out of gold
it does have to worry still about
inflation that that remains the relevant
risk but you don't have to worry about
protecting your gold reserves and that
that allows you to do
or under your monetary and I want to
move to inflation in a moment but the
was where we just hanging out was there
a well I mean what was the rationale of
fixing a currency to gold I mean I know
this is a you know this we're a little
bit a little bit outside of the sort of
the wheelhouse here but I'm just curious
because on some level it was just it was
it was it just essentially like a
superstition at that point where we just
sort of hanging on to a a relic of you
know just a superstition Wow what could
we have done that could we have done a
30 years earlier you know we always
suspended the gold standard whenever we
needed to spend big so we suspended the
gold standard to fight World War one
then during the interwar years the
period between World War one and World
War two the gold standard was
reimplemented and then to fight World
War two we go back off the gold standard
so very well there was this belief
though I mean you know Sam I think it's
like you say superstition and I think
that's part of it there is the belief
that somehow it makes a currency more
sound if it's attached to something
that's real that's perceived as real and
there was also an understanding that a
gold standard framework does in fact
constrain government's ability to do
things that it imposes constraints and
you know for for some people that's a
good thing it's like you know looking at
where the euro was introduced and
putting limits on government's say now
now we're going to make sure we
discipline these governments so they
don't try to do too much so in that
sense the gold standard is it
disciplining I was constrained well I
mean let's just want to also drop in
here that so we do have a fiat currency
and to say that we do have a fiat
currency you know there are there are
many people out there who still will say
you're talking about a totally fiat
currency that we make up money out of
thin air and in fact that is what we do
and
that's not a big deal right I mean I
mean I guess it has implications but
it's not that is not in and of itself
some type of like I don't know people
throw this around as if it's like some
type of nightmare scenario but in fact
that's what we we've always done I mean
you're just even even in the course when
we suspend the the gold standard is just
an example of yeah you can yeah I mean
thank God right thank God because if we
had tried to do World War two while
adhering to a gold standard we probably
would have lost and if we had either
constraints that a gold standard would
impose we wouldn't be responding the way
Congress has responded to the
coronavirus and the economic fallout so
the cares act think about the cares Act
that's the biggest one that has managed
to get through both the House and Senate
and and pass right and find by the
president that's 2.2 trillion dollars
that was Congress just going okay we got
to do something and it has to be pretty
big so let's write this thing and let's
get it quickly passed and that bill did
not include any so-called pay-fors there
was no tax increase associated with that
or anything Congress just said we don't
spend 2.2 trillion dollars let's go and
that legislation effectively ordered up
2.2 trillion dollars from the Federal
Reserve that's what that bill did it
said to the government's bank get ready
because we are about to spend 2.2
trillion and you're going to make those
payments on our behalf and so the Fed
fills that order on behalf of the US
Treasury the Federal Reserve's job is to
fill that order and they fill the order
by creating digital dollars you don't
physically print dollars so the
government can make its payments they
use the computer at the Fed and they
make the appropriate entries in people's
bank accounts as the government spends
and the numbers go up so where did the
money come from well it came from the
Fed typing the numbers in that's how the
payments are carried out in the modern
era under a fiat currency system where
the issuer of the currency in this case
the federal government has committed to
spending money it does not have how can
it do that
it's the issue of the currency and and a
sideline there's a lot of data that
suggests that the care acts at least
like the twelve hundred dollar payments
and and some of the bonus unemployment
insurance has I mean been incredibly
effective in reducing poverty in the
country just sort of a you know it turns
out oh good yeah no I just I'm sorry I
didn't mean to interrupt you it's it's
been a lifeline for millions of people
in this country absolutely um alright so
so we have this dynamic where we we can
spend and we keep mentioning that the
only constraint to this is the is the
appearance of inflation so talk about
the in in in and and the reason why we
can spend up until inflation is that
there is so-called slack in our economy
or within our society explain that
concept and then explain how we measure
it okay
well so first let's talk about the the
slack thing because economists usually
think about inflation in one of two ways
there's the kind of inflation that
arises because there's just too much
spending in the aggregate right total
spending in the economy is too high and
our economy can't keep up our businesses
can't keep up they can't produce enough
goods and services to meet that high
demand and that starts to put pressure
on prices so we have to what we call
demand pull inflation just too much
spending pressure and the inability of
the economy's productive capacity to
meet that demand so that's one type of
inflation the other type we call cost
push inflation and that can happen when
the prices of some important inputs are
rising so think about oil right we had
oil price shocks and that can fuel
inflation because
you know energy costs get passed through
in the form of higher transportation
costs and then the end consumer ends up
paying more higher healthcare premiums
and you know prescription drug prices
that feeds into how we measure inflation
we have different measures like the
Consumer Price Index and the PCE and PPI
we have all these different indices for
measuring prices so we try to say you
know we want to get a picture of what's
happening to prices in the whole US
economy how do we think about that
well we construct a price index let's
take the Consumer Price Index and we say
what what kinds of things does the
average consumer buy every month you
know you have housing you have
transportation costs you have energy you
have health care you have you know food
and clothing education that kind of
stuff and then we wait how important is
each of these things in the basket so if
health care housing energy are big
contributors to the consumer basket then
increases in the prices of housing or
health care can drive headline inflation
so you can imagine inflation arising for
lots of different reasons that have
nothing to do with an economy that's
running above its maximum speed limit so
inflation is complicated it's a complex
dynamic there's not a simple model that
you can write down that will help you
understand inflation like in all times
and places well I so I so love it so we
have two different types you a demand
pull in the cost push and the cost push
largely it seems to me is not really is
it's not a or one is fiscal I guess and
one is monetary in a way is that a fair
enough way to put it one is a function
of the cost of commodities at one point
which you know some are sensitive to how
much money is in the economy
and some are are just a function of like
oh we ran out of oil or there's you know
a ship you know crashed and so there's
less oil and the price of it goes up at
that point that's more of a cost push
inflation but theoretically like real
estate a housing that also that could be
a function of of how much money is in
the system correct like you know if if
if people have a lot of cash they're
gonna their be willing to pay more for
housing and then it gets more expensive
so where it could yeah you could have
that you could have you know rental
costs going through the roof and you
know maybe you have a wave of evictions
and private equity comes in and buys up
you know millions of properties and then
you know starts charging exorbitant
rents or something I mean yeah what's
one of those but which which one of
those two that you broke down for us
demand-pull and cost-push which one of
those two is most implicated by the idea
that the government can just is not
constrained in its spending by how much
money it has well the one that people
worry about is demand-pull that somehow
the government is going to be too
aggressive in terms of you know passing
spending bills and spend too much money
into the economy and remember I said
every time the government authorizes a
bill and new money is created those
dollars travel around the economy until
they're subtracted away so if the
government is you know engaged in
spending lots and lots of dollars into
the economy and there's this multiplier
effect and people turn around and start
spending and we run out of you know
there's not another seat in the movie
theater you can't get a table in a
restaurant you can't book a flight
because the whole thing is full why
don't you run out of your capacity then
price prices start to rise so that's the
one I think people seem to worry more
about right man pull the irony that
that's
least common form of inflation when we
have seen inflationary problems around
the world whether we're looking at
Zimbabwe or whether we harken back to
Bymark Germany or even the 1970s
it's the cost-push type of inflation
that has been problematic for most
countries most of the time and the
reason is that almost none of us run our
economies at full employment capacity we
just underperform so we don't get the
demand pull inflation problems when
we've had inflationary challenges
they've been related to issues on the
supply side on the cost-push type okay
and that's what I want and that's where
we you know you know during the 2008
when they started when the Fed started
give qe1 and qe2 the quantitative easing
which was essentially I mean I don't
know we don't really call it that
anymore but that's you know because that
well I guess we do I mean that is that
was a monetary policy as opposed to
Congress you know issuing the spending
or calling for the spending but the
argument was that all this money that
was flooding into the system was going
to was was going to create this demand
pull inflation and everyone from you
know Glenn Beck and I remember David
Stockman coming on MSNBC and saying that
we're just about to you know we're about
to turn into by mark Germany and in
Zimbabwe and and and then in and you
know the the the gold bugs were we're
saying buy gold because this is about to
go and and and nothing happened it
literally nothing happened all that we
did was not spend enough and and not
grow the economy so the cost push
inflation is one of those things that
that monetary policy or even fiscal
policy can't necessarily deal with right
unless it has the ability to I guess
create somehow reduce the cost of those
goods well I think we can deal with it I
mean you know look one of the reasons
that health care cost inflation has been
subdued for so many years was the ACA
the Affordable Care Act and so there are
things you can do legislatively through
regulation you know there are people who
argue that actually Paul Volcker who was
chairman of the Federal Reserve during
the period of very high inflation in the
US right your prior to Greenspan and
Volcker pushed interest rates extremely
high in an effort to break the back of
inflation 1970s and into the early 80s
well really 1970s and he is widely
credited with successfully breaking the
back of inflation through raising
interest rates very very high but there
are people who say that Volcker does not
deserve credit for finally taming
inflation that in fact it was Jimmy
Carter who we should be grateful to
because Carter deregulated the natural
gas industry would have broke the oil
cartels power to keep oil prices very
high by creating you know a competitor
to that to that energy market and so I
think there are lots of things we can do
to to deal with cost-push price you know
take away pricing power diminish pricing
power no patent monopolies if you were
talking to Dean Baker he'd probably say
right there all kinds of things yeah
right so so on the so on that I just
wanted to trying to just you know lay it
out clearly for folks where the
government could step in if we had a a
cost push situation which was like a
sort of a lack of supply they could come
in and do things to promote that supply
on the demand pull inflation side this
is this is the other problem that
there's too much cash out there and that
you know there's only in that that there
is no slack and for every new movie
theater that the government could could
could build if it if it need be there
would be so much cash out there that
they would just get filled up
immediately and and and that's what we'd
still have this sort of runaway
inflation so how how do you deal with
that demand pull inflation so let's
the government says okay we're gonna put
we're gonna we're gonna do
infrastructure and which means that
we're gonna spend a you know five let's
just pick a number five trillion dollars
and we're gonna hire contra and
everybody's gonna be flush with cash
because they're gonna be building
everybody's gonna be working we're gonna
get unemployment down to zero percent or
zero point you know and for a long time
in my life we were told that you cannot
get unemployment below four percent the
natural rate of unemployment is there
and then then we did it where how do you
measure that slack like how do how do we
know that there is slack in the economy
obviously it may be more obvious now but
I mean how do you measure it to know
that when you're getting to that that's
sort of like line where you're bumping
up and there's no slack yeah it's a
great question and so we've done this
you know we have we we used to be pretty
darn good at this in the 1940s and the
1950s we had something called the
natural resources planning board I mean
my goodness imagine the words you know
planning we actually thought about these
things and and it would there were very
groups that came together that included
you know people from the labor community
people from the business industry
economists and so forth and they came
together to try to answer questions
exactly like this if we were to spend
more heavily in this area you say
infrastructure do we have the capacity
how much can we safely do before we you
know run the risk of accelerating
inflation so they thought about these
things what we have today are
statistical measures we know what the
unemployment rate is we know what the
unemployment rate is by occupation so
you said if you want to do large-scale
infrastructure you've got to hire a lot
of contractors well we know what how
much slack I mean we have these
measurements right the Bureau of Labor
Statistics tells us what how many people
are unemployed in the construction
industry we need architects we need
engineers we need steel we need concrete
we need machines so you can find out
from industry and this is the kind of
thing they used to do you call up the
leaders you call up the heads of these
companies and you say if I were to place
a huge order right
25 billion dollars or whatever
caterpillar I need this much from you
you know these producers can you can you
hit that can you produce that for me you
know do you have the capacity and you
look at manufacturing capacity
utilization rates we have those
measurements we know how much slack
there is if businesses are operating
their factories at 65 75 percent of
capacity we know that there's 25 percent
Headroom there and so you have to you
know you have to study the industry and
you have to you know model do the macro
modeling and and you try to gather up
all the information and then you make a
decision you know is it safe to spend
five trillion over a ten year period
maybe you decide that you don't have the
capacity to do that so you have to scale
it back how would you measure that if
okay so you know I become president and
you know it's a long process I don't
want to go through the gory details but
I become president and also a head
prefect of the Congress and so I say
we're gonna do an infrastructure bill
and the the planning committee is gonna
go out and assess you know just how much
we can because I wanna I want to get to
like I don't want to leave anything on
the table
95 let's say 90% just to give us
ourselves a little bit of headroom
go out and find out what 90% of our
capacity remains and whatever that is if
it's three trillion dollars then we
issue three trillion dollars to to build
infrastructure and also I want to get
rid of poverty so I want to know how
many people are living in poverty it's X
number of people we're gonna give them
you know an extra I don't know $10,000
let's just call it $12,000 a year to get
them out of poverty how do I know that
doing that what what the implications of
that will because I don't know how those
people are gonna spend their money you
know what I'm gonna be a little bit more
let's just say a hundred thousand
dollars extra for all these people or
50,000 whatever it is I don't know how
they're gonna
and how do we measure in that instance
where the slack is well you we have
models so this is the best that we can
do this is what the Congressional Budget
Office attempts to do the Fed makes
macro models available there's something
called the fair model out there which
was built by an economist named Ray Fair
who's a professor at Yale University
there are models out there large-scale
macro models all of them are imperfect
okay
and that's the reality right so I like
this idea you're saying well build in a
little room for error so you've got you
know take me to ninety percent of what
we think is available so I have a little
bit of room in case you know things are
different from what the model suggests
but that's what we do Sam I mean you
know Congress gives the Congressional
Budget Office spending bills now and ask
them to evaluate those bills but what
they ask them to do is you know mainly
give us feedback and let us know does
this bill add to the deficit does it
increase the debt over time and that I
think is the least important question
that we could be asking of the CBO so
what I'm suggesting is that you know
let's help lawmakers get a handle on how
much space is available for them to
safely spend into the economy let's use
the models let's rely on more than one
agency let you know other third-party
independent agencies also evaluate and
give feedback and you know then allow
lawmakers to proceed with the best kind
of input that they have available and
decide you know how quickly can we fix
America's infrastructure problem like
okay so so under the the example I've
given where I'm in charge of everything
we've done this we've done you know I
got a 90 percent figure on
infrastructure we did it we pumped that
money out I got a nine you know a I got
an estimation on what it would take to
eradicate poverty and what the sort of
the the cap at you know what the I guess
the the consumer you know consumer goods
could sustain we
you know providing folks who are living
in poverty with money so they can go out
and they're buying a little more they're
going to a restaurant they're going to
see movies and this and that and there's
enough slack in it but and we've done
all this in all these different sectors
health care etc etc and I overshoot my
my models were off I gave myself a 10%
Headroom it turned out it was closer to
like I needed a 15% Headroom so when we
start to get this feedback in and start
to see that like oh wow there's not as
many contractors out there as we thought
or there's not as many you know back
hoes or whatever it is
and so what do we do at that point
living you know it you know assuming
that we're we've adopted this program
how does the government then respond
when it starts to get this feedback that
maybe there is some creeping inflation
that's coming well okay that's a good
question so let's first say that right
now in the economic environment we're in
with tens of millions of people
unemployed we're in a much safer place
in terms of being able to spend without
offsets yes without worrying about right
matching it up with a tax increase and
so forth but if we were to do what
you're saying and and we commit to five
trillion and infrastructure and we have
some basic income support and all that
sort of stuff
eventually you would expect the economy
the slack is going to diminish and the
economy is going to move closer to full
employment that's where you begin to see
these inflationary pressures so that's
when it becomes more and more critical
that you get that you evaluate the
spending carefully and that you get the
offsets right so if you get the offsets
wrong and you end up with some inflation
then what so here's an option as the
economy gets closer and closer to full
employment
you don't want Congress passing spending
bills without offsets you got to get you
got to be very careful what you could do
at that point is say I'm going to write
a bill I think I have enough capacity in
the economy that I can spend another you
know 200 billion on some project and I
don't
apt offset I'm not sure so I'm gonna put
a trigger in this legislation it's not
going to require an increase in taxes in
order to pass the bill but it will it
will say that in the event that
inflation you know accelerates to
whatever we write in the bill there will
be this adjustment in the marginal tax
rates of you know whatever or that we
will claw back some of the spending it's
an infrastructure bill it's five
trillion if we discover that we're going
too fast and that inflation is beginning
to accelerate then you simply claw back
some of the spending you say well we
can't spend that much next year we have
to scale it back we're going to turn a
five year plan into a ten year plan I
mean there are there are ways that you
can do this and there are other ways to
address inflationary pressures that
don't involve tax increases or
reductions in government spending so
what but my colleague Nathan tank is
called non fiscal offsets the things you
could do on the regulatory side for
example alright fair enough
and and I actually recently spoke to
tank ace I guess maybe I don't know what
recent means anymore at a time it sort
of collapsed for me but that's where I
was I was I was getting to we what we're
talking about is almost it's almost the
flipside of automatic stabilizers we you
know and this is something that people
called for in the the cares Act and they
wanted them in the heroes Act which was
just to remind people an automatic
stabilizer is if unemployment doesn't
drop below 8% by you know of December of
2020 then we automatically we don't have
to come back and engage in the political
process we automatically release X
amount of dollars into unemployment or
into this infrastructure and in this is
sort of like the the sort of the the
mirror image of that automatic
stabilizer what you're proposing is when
we but when we when we when we create
legislation to do something we also
create markers inflation markers or
capacity markers if you will that will
automatically slow it down once we cross
those threshold
and because and that to me is very
important because I think that has been
in the past a a criticism that from a
political standpoint this idea that the
government can be that sensitive you
know that again and this is based upon
you know everyone having this experience
of of a really a dysfunctional Congress
in many respects that the the that we
can't trust the government the the
Congress to lawmakers to be that nimble
but we can actually build it into the
initial legislation and don't have to
worry about the nimbleness of of
Congress we can just set certain
benchmarks where we pull back
yeah sure it would it would involve
changing the way we approach the federal
budgeting process but that's exactly
what I think we should be doing because
the way we approach the federal
budgeting process is completely broken
as I said we're asking the Congressional
Budget Office the scoring agency to
evaluate legislation based almost
exclusively on the budgetary impacts
rather than real impacts you know ask
them if this bill is designed to reduce
poverty then have them evaluate the
likelihood that you know how much is it
going to cut poverty you want to put
more money in this or you know
inequality we don't even ask what are
the implications for you know income and
wealth inequality of this particular
bill versus this bill you know how can
let's get some useful feedback to help
guide lawmakers and get away from this
you know
obsession we have with solely judging
the attractiveness of any new spending
bill based on you know whether we can
avoid adding to the deficit otherwise it
can't go to the floor it can't get a
vote you know if you if you could make a
reform that would help the you know
lawmakers because I know that it's not
just it's the this is not a question of
like lawmakers saying like well I've
studied monetary monitor monetary theory
and I just I don't buy it or this and
that they're just there's a lot of
ignorance right towards this like if if
and it's just I think hard for people to
sort of reassess what has been very
conventional wisdom you know like if you
had the ability to change the way that
we we structure things so that people
can understand the concept could would
you basically say like we're gonna spend
and we're not gonna issue Treasury bonds
which are basically you know which is
not gonna borrow the money we're just
gonna spend we're not even going to go
through the sort of semi kabuki of
issuing bonds here and we don't even
really need to you know if if somebody
in some bureaucracy wants to keep track
of the deficit of us spending to what we
tax fine but it's just not going to be a
number that we really need to talk about
I mean would that be what you would do
to sort of like help conceptually our
government to understand and free them
up psychologically to to do this
probably Sam is so funny because I used
to be more or less agnostic on this
question because I don't think that the
way we do things currently is inherently
problematic okay it's just that it's so
opaque and the discourse around what's
happening is you know the borrowing from
China bit and the idea that someday the
bond markets might wake up and decide no
more dollars for you Uncle Sam you know
that it confuses people and it creates
unnecessary anxiety with respect to our
national finances I mean you you know
you have the Secretary Clinton when she
was I think Secretary of State going out
and referring to the national debt as a
national security threat I mean that
that's scary for folks and so it isn't
the deficit piece that is the real
problem it's the fact that deficit
spending adds to something we call the
national debt and then we have all the
borrowing from China the national
security the burdening of the next
generation all that stuff that's wrapped
up in that so when you say would I just
get rid of that piece no more Treasuries
no more borrowing we'll just have
deficits without the debt piece I think
I'm there I think I'm there it would be
much more transparent than you know what
we do today it's hard for people to
understand they think that the
government has to borrow when it needs
when it spends more than it collects in
taxes doesn't have to borrow it chooses
to borrow and what's happening is that
go back to my earlier example if the
government spends $100 into the economy
and only subtracts 90 away by taxing its
left $10 sitting in the economy
somewhere when it borrows quote-unquote
what it does is it subtracts those $10
back out and replaces them with
government bonds US Treasuries which are
really nothing more than interest
bearing currency so you've taken dollars
out and replace them with dollars that
amplify themselves and that's very nice
if you happen to be the bond holder
because you have a
risk-free asset but you're getting
reward right the government is layering
on more dollars over time and and that
creates problems my time in the Senate
working as the chief economist for the
Democrats I can tell you both sides
Democrats and Republicans big obsession
with the line item in the budget called
interest interest expenditure interest
on the debt and they see that number I
think last year if I'm not mistaken it
was about 380 billion dollars in
interest payments okay that's just a
subsidy to bondholders that's what that
is but they see that line item in the
budget and they think it's eating up
money that could have been spent on
other things so Republicans say oh my
god look at the CBO projections we're
going to be spending more on interest
than we spend on defense right that's
how they see it Democrats think oh my
god this is money we could be spending
on education or health care well you
know I come along and my point is we can
always put more money in those line
items you want to spend more on defense
you guys do it all the time you know you
spend one Democrats could put more money
into programs that they like but what
public purpose is served by by providing
380 billion dollars of interest income
to bondholders annually you know what's
in their interest but it's not a very
good use of public money so for a lot of
reasons I think that you know it may be
time to just suspend the issuance of
Treasuries let people hold on to the
non-interest bearing dollars if the Fed
wants to pay interest on those dollars
as they sit in the banking system that's
up to them that's monetary policy but it
doesn't have to be a line item on the
federal government's budget the interest
expenditure would go away over time and
the national debt would disappear and
all the existing bonds eventually the
only thing I can imagine that it has
value because it is you know just as
inflationary as anything else except for
you don't get anything from it right
it's like you yeah it's it's it's
creating more it's putting more money
into the economy but you don't get
anything
from it it seems to me because you know
that that that those loans could be
instead you know sort of uh actually
used as things to build infrastructure
or whatever it is the only value I could
imagine that it there is some value and
I'm not even sure if this is the case
but it just you know occurs to me that
like having people invested in you know
financial products that are tied to the
fate of the United States is a healthy
thing for the United States I mean you
know when I was in show business I
thought like the way I perceived you
know hat giving 15 percent to my manager
and ten percent to my lawyer and ten
percent to my agent was just like it's
got to help me to have other people be
making money off of me in terms of my
ability to make money and and that's the
only that's the only thing I can imagine
that there's any value to the Treasury
bonds to the United States I'm not even
convinced that it but it's just sort of
that
that's what occurs to me I mean on some
of it we just don't need to have the
deficit as a as a computation so all
right let me ask you this so with that
said right if we got away with that
stuff then it would reorient it what
what's next for like you know and and
you know like I said we started this off
by saying I first interviewed in 2012
and your your project was to broaden the
understanding of this and to let more
people know about it and in many
respects with the trillions of dollars
that went into the economy without
anybody blinking an eye in in the wake
of this with the Republicans from a
political standpoint you know being able
to explode the deficit and you know
despite the fact that we've been told
for years that this is gonna be highly
problematic and that you know Paul Ryan
would be turning in his grave if he was
it passed away but he's alive and
apparently he's just doing fine what
what's the next stage what's the next
phase of this project for you I mean I
know you'll continue to to you know and
you get a best-selling book now
what is like how do you then take this
understanding and and and and give an
operating manual to actually have these
ideas get implemented within the context
of the government
well okay I'll tell you I'm not going to
name any names but I will tell you that
just before the economy sort of went
into lockdown I was on the hill and I
was invited to to meet and I had a very
long good two hour long I guess meeting
with House members and some members of
the Senate who are very interested in
finding a way out of this corner that
they've packed themselves into over time
and we didn't even talk about the
Clinton surpluses but I think they're
important and instructive because you
know the Democratic Party has for a very
long time you know basically use the
talking points that come from the
Peterson foundation and fix the debt and
they've reinforced this narrative this
idea that deficits are something that
they ought to try to avoid that the best
times we've had were probably during the
Clinton years when the budget was in
surplus that they are the true party of
fiscal responsibility the last parties
not just balance the budget but put it
in surplus and they now see I think that
they have been playing Charlie Brown to
Lucy in the football for a whole lot of
decades and they don't want to do it
anymore and yet they feel trapped by
some of their prior rhetoric and and
stances and positions they've taken with
Pago and that sort of thing so you know
it was very good for me to be in a
position to have these conversations try
to be helpful to them as they try to
extricate themselves because you know
they're looking at the possibility of
taking the White House in November maybe
picking up the Senate who knows but
they're going to inherit an economy that
is still in very bad shape they're gonna
inherit a debt that is large and growing
a deficit that is maybe three four
trillion and they don't want to try to
govern to spend four years fighting
against you know the deficits and the
debt they don't want to do that so you
know where do I go next I'm having I was
having those in-person conversations now
they take place
you know remotely but there are also a
lot of candidates who are running for
office and even some who've recently
been elected and I am working and have
worked and so have other mmt economists
with so many incredible candidates all
over this country and some of them are
going to get elected to Congress so you
know my hope is that over time we'll get
enough folks in there who will be in
positions and sitting on committees and
you know we talked about asking CBO to
approach the scoring process differently
well that will come from a congressional
directive right CBO works for the budget
committee so there are ways I think that
you know things that I can do in the
years ahead that can help to continue to
move the ball forward stephanie kelton
real pleasure the the book is the
deficit myth modern monetary theory in
the birth of the people's economy I
can't encourage people enough to read it
and then I would also say go back
November 20th 2012
you can go back May 22nd 2014 go back to
September 26 2017 listen to our other
interviews with Stephanie because we
covered slightly different stuff at that
time I just congratulations on the
success and thank you so much we will
put a link to your book at majority dot
F M and really I'm very happy for you
and for mana monetary theory and frankly
for all of us because I think in some
respects I think you your work and
others in modern monetary theory has you
know made it a little bit easier for
people to pull the trigger on some of
the you know what we saw in the cares
Act and hopefully there'll be another
round of of spending that will not be
inhibited in any way by this notion that
we somehow have to have a balanced
ledger like we would if we were just a
household so thank you so much Stephanie
thanks Sam I guess I'll see you again in
three years yeah we'll try to do it
sooner thanks so much Matt take us
Rebecca to get to where I want but I
know

I was late I just got

feel any better yeah no chicken

I could somewhere the choice is made so
the option will get paid

drive

takes




Wow




## Keywords:
