---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fNBNDZPfwYg
---

# Video
The Global Economy is Rigged - with Dean Baker
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fNBNDZPfwYg)

## Transcript:

okay hello everybody and uh welcome to
the unlearning economics stream I've got
with me today one of my favorite
economists uh Dean Baker so thank you so
much for coming on Dean well thanks a
lot for having me on so we're going to
talk about how the global economy is
rigged um which is something that I
think resonates with a lot of people but
I think the great thing about the book
you wrote uh is that it goes into
specifics and so the way you start is
really interesting because you talk
about
globalization and something that we've
all heard about globalization over the
past few decades is that you know it was
a kind of flawed but largely Progressive
process of rising tide lifts all boats
and yeah okay look people in former
manufacturing hubs like Detroit uh may
have lost out but ultimately the global
poor have been lifted out of absolute
poverty uh which is much more important
right so if you're raiding against the
effects of globalization on on the sort
of Rich World middle class which is
something that for instance Bernie
Sanders was doing around the time you
were writing the book uh then you're
just forgetting most of the globe now
you say that that narrative is wrong why
well it's wrong in a number of different
ways just at the most basic basic level
much of the lifting people out of
poverty was actually in China which I
mean is a great thing I mean as a
tremendous accomplishment of the Chinese
government Chinese system but it was not
you know globalization per se it was a
very effective policies in China
promoting growth also again you know the
promoters of that path of globalization
were saying that people in China or at
least implying people in China would not
have seen the gains they saw had it not
been for Global Iz ation the reality was
China actually had very rapid growth
before its major export boom so that's
really dated with its entry into the WTO
in 2000 in the year 2000 it had been
growing every bit as rapidly in fact
even a little bit more rapidly in the
80s and 90s so the idea that somehow
China would not have seen rapid growth
and we wouldn't have seen all these
people lifted out of poverty had it not
been for their huge export boom to the
US that's just simply not true so the
long and short of the story is it was
not the great Boom for people in the
developing world that it's often
portrayed there were huge benefits but
the idea that that was depend on
globalization that that's very very
misleading but the other point that I
think is at least as important is
globalization is not something that just
happened it's something that we did and
it could have been done different ways
and you know I'm us-centric I live in
the US and you know in the US nothing
else in the world exists um so but the
way we did this we we opened up certain
SE sectors particularly manufacturing to
free trade and that became kind of a
religion certainly in Washington you
know that oh you had to support free
trade you had to support free trade
we've protected a lot of other areas and
the ones I pick on I get a lot of people
angry me for this are doctors because
our doctors are paid way more than
doctors in Europe way more than doctors
anywhere in the world our doctors on
average get paid over 350,000 a year I
know in the UK you're down at the lower
end among uh rich countries but even if
you look at Germany Canada they're paid
less than half that so why is it our
doctors are paid so much more because
they're protected they're both protected
internally there's all sorts of things
that other medical professionals can and
do do that you could have Physicians
assistants nurse practitioners there's a
lot of things that they can do but
they're prevented from doing and they're
Pro protected internationally it's very
hard for even a very well-trained
experienced doctor from UK from Germany
from Canada to practice in the US and
that's by Design so we could have said
okay we're going to have globalization
let's open everything up let's have you
know Freer trade in Professional
Services again I'm picking on doctors
but you could tell the same story with
dentists lawyers other highly paid
professions we did not do that so it was
a very partial opening we basically
adopted a policy saying we're going to
globalize in a way that puts downward
pressure on the wages of our
manufacturing workers and that puts way
downward pressure on the wages of
workers without college degrees more
generally
because historically manufacturing has
been a source of high-paying jobs for
workers without college degrees that's
no longer True by the way the the the
manufacturing wage premium which we
could measure um has dwindled to pretty
much nothing I haven't we we haven't I
haven't done it others haven't done it
recently at least not that I know of but
we've we've seen a huge erosion in the
pay of manufacturing workers relative to
to other blue collar workers so that the
idea of manufacturing wage premiums
pretty much gone so that that's an
artifact of globalization I'm not going
to say that was necessarily a good thing
I understand those are mostly male jobs
you could have arguments about that but
that was just the reality that was a
source of high-paying jobs for workers
without college degrees that to a large
extent does not exist
anymore absolutely I mean I suppose the
the one of the arguments you might hear
for why manufacturing workers have been
affected differentially is that
manufacturing is inherently more prone
to globalization right more prone to
Outsourcing whereas something like a
doctor is not I mean what do you think
of that
argument well we have large numbers of
immigrants and so so and obviously
that's been a big issue here a big issue
in England elsewhere in the the other
rich countries um we could have more of
them be doctors and you know I've had
arguments with people go oh well it's
already immigration's a hunb issue we
can't have more immigrants and go fine
we'll bring in some doctors and placees
some of the Farm Workers the kitchen
workers you know don't have to have a
NBT increase I mean I wouldn't be
bothered by having a NBT increase in
Immigration but if that were the issue
fine you know we'll bring in 100,000
doctors a year in place of 100,000
people would otherwise be working
construction and kitchens and Farms you
know that that's fine if you want to
keep a keep a lid on that way um but we
didn't do that um and again you have
people I've had cab drivers who were
doctors you know they they were you know
generally in poorer countries I don't
think you'd have a cab driver from
German it was doctor in Germany but I've
had cab drivers or doctors in Ethiopia
India and it they're very real barriers
now just just to be clear I mean there's
differences in training so I probably
wouldn't want to see a doctor who had
qualified in Ethiopia practicing
medicine here without some additional
training or at least proving that they
they they were up to our standards but
we have barriers that go far beyond just
ensuring that our doctors are competent
they're they're clearly designed to keep
out
um foreign
doctors yeah I mean it's this specific
type of trade right which seems to I
suppose you could say it seems to favor
Capital more uh broadly right uh there's
there's kind of free movement of capital
there's free movement of goods uh but
there's not really free movement of like
people right and then there are a whole
web of laws which kind of seem to favor
even among workers the the the better
off like
doctors yeah exactly and you know it's
very clear in the case of capital two
points I'll make here one is that in a
lot of our trade agreements it's not the
WTO but a lot of our trade agreements
like NAFTA trade deals bilateral trade
deals we've had with a number of
different countries they have a isds
mechanism investor State dispute
settlement mechanism that basically
overrides the national laws and and
again I've getting arguments with people
because they want to pull semantics it
doesn't literally override the laws so
you have you know some environmental
regulation where you know it it's
preventing Exxon or someone from making
as much money as they think they should
you could still have the law you just
pay a penalty for it so you know so it
it creates this extrajudicial process
that is included in in probably most of
our trade agreements I haven't tried to
look to count them but certainly most of
the recent ones and that purely that's
purely to benefit investors it doesn't
it's it's called investor state so it's
not as though a union could go there and
take a case it's an investor state
dispute settlement mechanism and it it
does hugely favor uh the the investors
the other point that you know again in
terms of our our recent trade patterns
copyright and patent monopolies these
are front and center in every trade
agreement these are 180 degrees at odds
with free trade and it's just amazing to
me that this isn't more widely
recognized I don't mean by someone I
grab on the street but I mean among
policy people arguing about free trade
you go well you know these are
monopolies you know you you and they go
oh well we need them well they policies
to promote Innovation creative work and
we could have a good argument about
whether they're the best policies but
the fact that they're protectionists
that they're not free trade I mean that
should be obvious on the face of it you
know so I make a a drug that fiser has a
patent on it and I you know it's a safe
drug it's not that it's unsafe or
anything but fiser says you know you're
violating our patent well I'll get
arrested for that you know that that
that's not free trade you know and and
that's really front and center in all
our trade deals certainly in the WTO the
trips Accord and uh 1995 required
basically every member of the WTO to
adopt us style patent and copyright
rules and and it's a huge amount of
money at stake again it's striking to me
how little appreciation among economists
of how much money is at stake it's more
in the US than other countries because
we we basically allow I'm thinking of
the drug companies in particular we
allow them to run wild so we give a drug
company a patent and they could charge
whatever they feel like so here it is
you have a patent a monopoly on a drug
that people need for their health for
their life if there's any way they could
pay for it or get the insurer to pay for
it the government to pay for it they'll
do that so you have drugs that sell for
tens of thousands now sometimes hundreds
of thousands there was one I'm
forgetting what it was exactly but it's
over a million and it's not because
they're expensive to manufacture and
distribute it's very rare that you have
a drug that's actually expensive to
manufacture and distribute usually you
could have a Year's dosage for you know1
$200 $300 but they're selling them for
tens of thousands hundreds of thousands
because we gave them a patent Monopoly
and you know again the amount of money
at stake in the United States we're
going to spend over $600 billion dollar
this year on prescription drugs that's
uh about 2.2% of our GDP on drugs almost
certainly would cost us less than a 100
billion if we just snapped our fingers
and got rid of patents and related
protections and just a free market so
you know again this applies in many
other areas it's most to my view OB scen
in drugs because it's both a huge amount
of money but it's also people's life
People's Health um and we we somehow
accept that as free trade and it's just
it's absolutely mindboggling the invest
State dispute uh Mech mechanism is is
really astonishing I think when you
realize it's just companies being
allowed to sue countries for their for
damages to their bottom line right and
you can you can almost imagine in a
fairer world you might have like a
worker State disput mechanism right that
had protected those kind of uh workers
in Detroit and and across the world as
well in sou Paulo or whoever had been
affected by the
industrialization yeah you know and also
it's important to note it's not as
though they didn't already have
mechanisms so the US has generally not
been on the receiving end of this but
they occasionally have been they could
always Sue in US courts and you know
we've used this sometimes against Canada
you know which you know I mentioning
Canada because they're our neighbor we
think of them as having you know very
similar legal structures which they do
to the United States so it's not as
though you know if Exxon felt was being
badly treated by you know one of the
provinces in Canada they couldn't go
into Canadian courts and Sue so this is
just an extra you know bonus for them so
you know again no no compan can invest
in you know say it's a develop country
they're not sure of its legal system
they would never invest in them if they
didn't have some confidence you know
they understand the risk in other words
and you know that that's something that
would take into account so why do you
need this extra mechanism that again it
exists only for corporations only for
Capital not for anyone else one of the
things I like is that your book sort of
indirectly or maybe directly debunks the
the
common common IDE is about trade and
markets common theories of globalization
right uh because if you do an economics
degree then you'll have done the kind of
comparative advantage grid where you
know you're trading apples for bananas
or something and everything works out
optimally I mean what's your view of how
helpful or harmful th this this notion
of trade is and would you I mean for me
what I would prefer to do if I were
teaching students about trade and
globalization is open with literally
everything thing we've just spoken about
right the details of trade deals because
that seems to be the the thing that
matters the most not these abstract
ideas yeah absolutely I mean I think
people have to understand the world is
more complicated than just saying have
free trade and everyone will benefit
because you really have to Define what's
being traded how it's being traded and
you know again it's the idea that
there's anyone out there saying
literally free I mean that saying
literally free trade but that they
actually are promoting free trade that's
simply not true so I think it's really
important to make those points and of
course you know the track record of
Economic Development it's been very very
far you know if we look at the success
stories very far from free trade you
know success stories the United States
being an obvious case my friend hajun
Chang wrote has actually written several
books on this but anyhow he makes the
point that you know we had the highest
tariffs in the world if you go back to
the the turn of the last century we want
to protect our industry from the UK from
Germany and we did that we built up you
know major industries and you know cross
you know wide spectrum you know Auto
steel the whole range um so we did that
based on having tariffs and you look at
the other success stories Japan similar
story uh South Korea amazing success
story uh certainly not free trade so you
know to say countries could benefit by
from trade absolutely but it's not a
simple story of saying oh free trade
everyone benefits it's it's much more
complex story and that's just the
reality and you're being dishonest
misleading to people if you just tell
them free trade every you know
everyone's everyone everyone's boat
Rises but going back to the the
beginning right it's like China is one
of the main drivers of this reduction in
global poverty and it's just you know
it's it defies credulity to act like
that's a kind of free trade economy
they've got they've had a massively
devalued currency they've got Capital
controls they've got state-owned
Enterprises they I mean it's just is
it's completely State directed
capitalism and it's pragmatic at every
level and it has been you know since um
76 or or whenever yeah absolutely and
you know again I I admire that you know
PL things to criticize China about but I
you know I admire their success I mean
they did lift you know it had been a a
very poor country you go back to to to
the 70s it was on a par with substar
Africa in terms of its you know its
standard of living its per capita income
and today it's you know up there with
you know poor countries in in Europe you
know with say a Bulgaria or something I
don't know I haven't checked the numbers
lately if that's exactly right but it's
in the ballpark so it's made incredible
progress in in the last you know 40
years but it wasn't free trade and it's
just it's really just dishonest if you
look at China go see what free trade did
for them they didn't have free trade I
mean I know some people say oh they
would have done even better if they
didn't okay you know we we don't have
that counterfactual we have plenty of
countries that tried that route and they
don't seem to have succeeded much but
you know the fact was they they China
has succeeded and uh it it certainly was
not it was anything but free trade it's
it's pretty difficult to find an example
of a country industrializing that didn't
use some kind of protectionism some kind
of subsidies right I mean uh the
Netherlands Springs to mind but then
they were like the first so I think they
had a kind of Advantage I'm not sure it
may be like Hong Kong but that's the
city state I don't know yeah Hong Kong
um I've not looked at this recently they
still had a lot of subsidies of
different types and also obviously Hong
Kong benefit enormously is being kind of
this you know at least in original phase
of industrialization that it was this
Entre between you know the massive
Chinese economy which at that point was
largely closed off so here I'm thinking
of the 50s the 60s into the 70s and the
rest of the world so they benefit
enormously from being kind of this valve
that you know items could go out of
China and into China and they had to go
through Hong Kong so those are kind of
extraordinary circumstances that you
have you know a n a city state next to
this massive economy and that's the
valve through which things go in and out
I mean is it's interesting because what
you're saying is about kind of
industrial policy we've sort of come on
to that and I was going to ask you about
this because I think your book the book
rigged isn't really about industrial
policy per se it seems to be more
focused on inequality right and how the
rich are protected by existing global
trade um but I I was wondering you know
the book was uh released in 2016 it was
kind of at the height of the Trump and
breit uh wave which some people blamed
on on
de-industrialization um but since then
you know a lot A lot's happened
obviously and we've had a raft of new
but maybe related problems um I don't
know if you know who Barry C Lyn is
um the American Prospect but in 2007 he
was warning of the fragility of the
global trade system and then obviously
in the pandemic after the pandemic
especially we had the supply chain
crisis and this notion of you know a
very fragile trade system that's quite
easy to break emerged and now we've had
uh you bomic we've had the chips act we'
we've got similar initiatives in the EU
in India in China and Taiwan as well all
across the world really and these ideas
of like Nearshore ing onshoring friend
Shoring that are almost undoing the very
things that you identified in the book
but maybe in a in a in a slightly
different way to to to what you were
talking about right so my my question is
what do you think about these types of
policies these reindustrialization
policies do you think that they are one
way of addressing the problems you
identify um
yeah I I think it's a mixed Story I mean
I I think some of the talk of industrial
policy here it's almost treated as a
mantra like we called industrial policy
therefore it is so I mean one of the
points I would say I didn't emphasize in
my book but we give a lot of money the
prescription development of prescription
drugs I mean direct funding and then we
have very generous patent monopolies to
my view that's very much industrial
policy right and this this is a big part
of our economy as I said over 600
billion a year that will spend on
prescription drugs two more than 2% of
GDP um we were in other words we always
have a big government hand in the
economy so say oh why don't we have a
big hand in we we have been doing that
so it's not you know that we're going
off in a different direction we're doing
it in different areas so then you have
to ask okay do these areas make sense
and I think there's a mixed story here I
mean one of the points an obvious one
sort of you know we we have kind of
growing hostility with China which I
think is unfortunate I mean I think it'
be disaster for us for the world if we
actually had a sort of a full-scale cold
war like we did with the Soviet Union
with China and among other reasons
China's economies is larger than ours so
the idea we're going to spend them into
the ground that that doesn't make sense
um but in any case you know the idea
that okay we might have tensions with
China maybe we shouldn't be relyant on
semiconductors from Taiwan because those
could be cut off in the event you know
you know certainly in a fullscale war
but even in something short of that it
may that may be cut off off so that that
makes sense I think you know so I
wouldn't argue with that I think some of
the other stuff I think is kind of
gratuitous you know in the sense you
know the the Biden Administration
certainly hasn't gotten like the Trump
Administration we put National Defense
tariffs on Canada um you just go like
what what what's the story where we
can't get steel from Canada I mean it's
you know we must be doing something
really wrong in the world if Canada's
cut off our steel now no bun hasn't gone
that far but I think some of it does
does get exaggerated and the benefits of
producing in the US I think as I say can
be exaggerated in part because the
manufacturing wage premiums gone away so
you know the this wasn't this wasn't a
reversible story in other words so it
was really bad we lost over 2 million
manufacturing jobs from 2000 to 2007
before the Great Recession we lost even
more in the Great Recession we've not
gotten those back and as we lost those
jobs many of them were union jobs so it
used to be the case that manufacturing
was disproportionately unionized sector
that's not true anymore it's trivially
true I last I looked there was something
about 8 8% of manufacturing workers re
unionized vers a little over six for the
private sector as a whole so it's you
know a little bit more but trivially if
you go back to 1980 20% of manufacturing
workers are unionized so there was a big
gap between the rate of unionization and
Manufacturing and the rest of the
private sector but that's now largely
gone so again the bid Administration has
tried to promote unions and I give them
a lot of credit for that I mean I think
it's a great thing and you know with
some success that you know you had the
UAW got really our Auto Workers got a
very good contract um he's encouraged uh
the National Labor Relations Board has
tried to be more Union friendly than it
been in the past under both Republican
and Democratic administrations um so
those are great things but the idea that
we're going to bring back manufacturing
jobs and those will be good jobs some of
them will be but my guess is most of
them are not going to be again unless
they could be unionized but if we could
unionize Starbucks if we could unionize
you know Apple Stores you know those
would be good jobs too I mean I'm
getting the sense from you um I don't
want to make it sound glib but it's like
your the question of distribution is is
maybe somewhat separate from the
question of like investment and
industrialization right and it it not
enough just to bring back manufacturing
jobs even if that might have a
justification like what Barry C Linn
talks about you know in terms of
resilience and and potential war and
stuff but it's like no matter what you
do you need to ensure your institutions
are designed to protect the poor and the
middle class and because if they're not
then they're probably designed to funnel
money upwards to the rich and that can
occur under a wide range of different
sort of uh economic scenarios in a wide
range of different economies would you
say that's fair yeah no it's exactly
right so you know again manufacturing
job there's there's nothing inherent
about a manufacturing job that makes it
a good job we have institutional
structure in the past that made it
possible for workers to organize and
they got pay increases and that made
them good jobs but the fact that you're
working a factory as opposed to an
office that doesn't mean you have a good
job yeah absolutely I mean what's your
take on like kind of worker democracy
and uh sort of workers directly running
companies because I've looked into this
quite a bit and it it seems to me from
my reading of the evidence there's it's
quite difficult to find examples where
worker democracy didn't work uh in a lot
of cases it's at least as good on
various metrics survival investment um
staff retention as as capitalist firms
and it's it's also better on other
metrics especially ones uh that concern
the workers things like pay inequality
um so I mean do you are you kind of an
advocate of that do you see that as one
way of of solving this problem I I think
there are plenty of cases where it has
been successful and it's it's a good
thing I I just don't know if we could
ever make it a mass phenomenon so we
could obviously make our laws more
friendly to to worker owned Enterprises
and we certainly should try to do that
but I'm not sure if that's the biggest
obstacle I think uh you know maybe it's
a mindset that you have to convince more
workers you actually can run the place
and maybe you know it would be a
snowballing thing the one discouraging
thing I look at that way is if you look
at the The Basque region where we
probably had the most uh developed set
of worker cooperatives it actually and
I'm not up to date on that I haven't
looked at the latest data on it but it
did did seem to be dwindling rather than
growing and that that's a little
concerning and again I can't say I know
exactly why that is the case but it
seems that you know over the last I
don't know 10 15 20 years the share of
workers that are in the The Cooperative
sector there is has been
declining so I do you know what the
story I would like to be able to tell is
okay workers will see hey yeah we can
run the place look at that they're doing
it over there they're doing it over
there we want to do it here and you'd
see it spread and you know again it
looked like that was happening in The
Basque region if you go back to the 50s
and 60s when they when they were growing
but it seems to be going the other way
now and again I can't say I know the
reasons for that but I'll just say it's
it's it's a little
discouraging yeah I wonder what the
relationship of the particular type of
rigged globalization we have is to to
this type of thing because I feel like
as an advocate of worker democracy I I
kind of agree with you it's not it's
something that's going to be hard to
establish it doesn't necessarily emerge
organically and it might dwindle and I
just wonder if the you know that you
need the macro policies there uh to
allow workers the room to and and the
same applies to unions right which
you've talked about a lot right is like
unions can be undermined by this
particular type of
globalization um so I think you need you
need the sort of bottom up and top down
and I guess you're you're more focused
on the macro stuff right in rigged yeah
yeah no exactly and again I I don't mean
to I Want It All put down you know I
know plenty of people have been involved
very much in you know the worker
democracy movement I you know I love to
see it succeed more I just I I just say
the the skepticism it it because I'd
like to see like to be able to tell the
story you have success stories and
success Builds on success and it's
clearly more complicated than that yeah
absolutely um let so so you you've youve
talk a lot about intellectual property
and you've talked a lot about it already
I want to go into detail on it I mean we
I think uh me and my listeners will
generally be quite anti- intellectual
property as people who use the internet
a lot it it it strikes me that um it
just it just doesn't seem to work very
much I for for me
the internet is something which is
naturally quite communal um and actually
it's kind of more difficult to design a
website that charges people and where
you have protected rights I mean uh I'm
old enough to remember when the internet
was you know relatively new in the '90s
and in the u0s and it it really couldn't
be monetized that was actually a joke
about it right and we've just had
stronger stronger protections and I
think that a lot of websites have gotten
have gotten much worse right um so I
mean what why are our intellectual
property laws so
Dreadful well I think the it's an area
that it's very specialized at least when
it comes to actually the writing of the
laws and it just it's exactly sort of
thing that lends itself to Industry
capture so you know you have this in a
lot of areas but this is something
obviously affects directly affects you
know hundreds of millions of people
every day billions and the people
writing the laws you know they're it's a
small group and they're all on one side
I mean you don't have uh you know
advocates for open internet I mean you
do have advocates for open internet but
they don't have the Deep Pockets that
you know Microsoft and Google and apple
have so you know when it comes to
writing the laws it's Microsoft and
Google and apple it's not you know our
friends who might be saying hey we want
an open internet and it's literally like
not even discussed and again you know I
was saying this with prescription drugs
but you know just more generally these
are issues that you they're literally
not you know if you read through what
I'm saying not discussed I mean you and
I could have the discussion but you know
pick up the New York Times every day
pick up you know uh the Atlantic Monthly
which is you know our big magazine where
they write all these intellectual pieces
New York Review books once in a blue
moon you'll have anything on
intellectual property I remember I had
once written a piece for the Atlantic
and you know they they seem to like it a
lot and they say well if you want to
write anything else and I said yeah
actually I'd love to write something on
intellectual property and you know I
kind of outlined in you know a couple
paragraphs what I was thinking of and
they said we don't do opinion
pieces you know which I just I didn't
even know how to respond like um I
wasn't particularly talking about an
opinion piece you know and they do do
opinion pieces you know because I can
pick it up any day of the week and you
know here that sure looks like an
opinion piece but anyhow I mean that's
just spoke volumes and okay you don't
want to you don't want to talk about it
but yeah I think it is a case you know
again you have this you know this idea
of Industry capture which you know
occurs in all sorts of context so like
you know regulating the meat industry
well who's there the meat companies you
know so they're going to have
regulations that you know they're
business friendly you know and you know
people advocating that you know meat be
safe or whatever shouldn't have meat
whatever but you know but uh they're not
at the table and and you know certainly
when it comes to intellectual property
you know you get roles that that are
written to be you know friendly to the
industry groups and and and again they
don't even want disgusted because
because I I think you could you know
what I I always you know in the book and
elsewhere I always trying to think how
how do you you know get something on the
table get a wedge you know get something
through the door and they're determined
not to I mean I I'll give you an example
this is going back to drugs but um uh uh
uh drct Peter hotz was a well-known
doctor here at least he he he's at uh
University of Texas Medical School um
and uh what's it it doesn't matter what
the hospitals anyhow he has a vaccine
team and they they developed a effective
covid vaccine that's been widely
distributed in India and Indonesia over
100 million people have got it it might
be as many 200 million now so it's been
wiely
distributed we've been trying to make it
so it could be distributed in the US
it's open source so it's very cheap you
know so in India it sells for about $2 a
shot that's what they end up charging I
mean no one's making it well I don't
know someone might make a profit on it
he's not making a profit on it um so it
sells for $2 a shot you know I've been
speculating it' be about $5 a shot here
um our boosters from fiser or madna they
charge over $100 a shot so I've been
we've been working with some people at
the FDA saying you know can can it be
approved here and they've been throwing
up basically ridiculous
barriers um saying he would have to do a
full clinical trial which would be
hundreds of millions maybe billions of
dollars to to show its its safety and
Effectiveness now they have the data
from India and pakist India and
Indonesia probably some other countries
too over 100 million people obviously
it's safe obviously it's effective you
know they could produce data you know
they had clinical trials there too um
but they're blocking it from being you
know approving it here and you know I
think it's very clear on the one hand
you know those companies madna and fiser
have a direct interest in not having the
competition
but there's a more general interest in
not seeing we could actually produce and
distribute these things very cheaply and
they they simply don't want that to be
known so I think that's part of the
debate more generally that you know the
the interest groups the corporations
that are benefiting from the current
system they do not want anyone to get a
foot in the door so as much as I'm
trying to think ways how can we get a
foot in the door they're at the other
side saying we're going to make sure you
don't get a foot in the door have you
have you seen the uh the show
dopesick no okay it's about the opioid
crisis in the USA it's a really really
excellent show but it just it's funny
because you're talking about the FDA and
a lot of kind of free market
Libertarians complain about the FDA and
I'm I'm usually inclined to disagree
with most of what they say but I mean
you're you're painting a picture and in
dopesick you see it where in so far as
regulation is used it's against the
little guy right and in so in so far as
uh only big corporations are allowed to
skirt around regulations and ignore them
I mean would you say that's close to the
truth do you think the FDA needs to be
reformed or even
abolished well you know the the
Libertarians you know because I know
some of these people they say the FDA
the standard I think assume it's the
same in UK and most other countries
safety and Effectiveness and what the
the libertarian types I don't know all
of them but you know many of them will
say say well we're okay with safety but
why should they determine Effectiveness
that should be up to the individual and
my usual comeback with those people is
okay but why don't we take away the pat
monopolies because the pat monopolies
and the opioids are an obvious case they
give you an enormous incentive to lie so
you pay doctors and unfortunately
they're doctors who are prepared to be
bought they'll say yeah that's good this
is effective and you know me as a
patient or even as a doctor you know I
see oh this doctor said this is good
must be good you know so you know I if
you took away the incentive if you took
away the patent monopolies I would be
more sympathetic to the idea that okay
just rule on safety but yeah I mean I I
I wouldn't get rid of it because you
know you do need particularly in the
system where you have pet monopolies you
need an entity that's trying to be sort
of the traffic cop and you know they
don't do a great job because it is it is
corrupted and you know it's it's hard to
see you know again this just you know to
my mind it's kind of it's sort of
mindboggling that economists don't
aren't on this more so you know if I say
oh I want to have a 20% tariff they're
going well that's that's an open door
for corruption and they're right you
know gives incentive you know sure go
okay but we're going to have a pat
Monopoly and a drug that allows
companies to charge a 100 times more
than the free market price the 10,000%
tariff what does that do and they look
at me blank-faced you don't think that
gives an incentive for corruption you
know it's so I think you know again I
think we need the FDA certainly in the
current system um but trying to Poli it
you know to prevent corruption it's it's
it's very difficult when there's so much
money at stake yeah I mean it's
interesting what I thought of when I was
reading the book and when you talk about
Licensing Laws as well intellectual
property laws I I'm feeling like this
this idea of kind of
privatizing the gains right uh creating
almost a private property right where
the income accurs to an individual or to
a company uh for doing something that
that's kind of the source of these
problems right because that's where you
said you get the incentive to light
that's where you get the corruption
that's where you get the barriers to
entry for everybody else and I suppose
the question is what is the alternative
I mean are you a fan of almost burn it
all down in terms of intellectual
property in terms of Licensing and talk
think about maybe more Public Funding
for example and just free use of ideas
you know let ideas let patents be
free I certainly would like to move in
that direction so you know again how far
you go I think you have to you know sort
of push the envelope and you know we we
have a system that sort of works I mean
people will say oh we developed all
these great drugs and yeah I mean we've
had a lot of drugs that meant big
improvements in people's health
so I certainly wouldn't look to throw it
out tomorrow but you know the way I've
proposed doing things let's let's focus
on drugs because you know obviously that
is a big area that we have the
government our government US Government
already spends a ton of money we spend
close to 60 billion a year on Research
developing prescription drugs most of
it's more basic some of it they actually
carry it through but in any case you you
could double that triple that you know
and pick particular areas cancer
research heart disease whatever it might
be and you say okay we're going to
dedicate funding to these areas for you
know the next 10 15 years and I'm fine
with privatizing in the sense that you
can contract it out you know contract it
out to fizer if they want to put up a
bid for it or whoever condition of
getting the money though is everything's
open so you're now getting Public
Funding all your research findings
should go up on the web as quickly as
practical so you know the the Bermuda uh
project where they the the uh Human
Genome Project that the Bermuda uh
protocols that they put it up every
night I don't know if that would be
practical for everything but you know
but in any case you know to make all
your findings open as quickly as
practical and no patents so that
whenever you know you had something that
was in principle of patentable product
it's fully in the public domain so when
you actually carry it through the the
trials the clinical trials could be
approved by the FDA anyone who wanted to
could produce a drug is generic now if
you did that let's say in those areas
cancer heart disease those obviously big
areas then I'd say you know if if other
companies if MC wants to go ahead and
develop their own p uh uh cancer drug
they they could do it and they get a
patent on it the risk that they'll face
is that if they do develop a successful
drug and they point out they often don't
you know that's true but if they do
develop a successful drug they'll also
run the risk that they'll be competing
with a generic sell selling for less
than one % the price that every bit is
good or even better so that's the way I
would look to do it and you know the
same would apply in other areas again
drugs I think is the biggest clearest
story but try to look for ways where you
could you know move in incrementally and
basically you know kind of win out in a
market competition you're aren't going
to arrest people for going the other
route you're just going to say okay you
have to compete you know and see how you
do yeah it's the kind of public option
right it's just specifically in drugs
right you've got if you want to make
lows of money from private property
rights patents whatever um you have to
contend with the fact that there is an
available lowcost public competitors so
you have to be really good if you want
to attract people away from it yeah
exactly and my guess you know you know
assuming that you're serious you put
inadequate funding my guess is that in
most cases you know the private side
would dwindle away very quickly because
you know again they lie you know there
these studies they do saying it cost
them two billion three billion now I
don't know what the latest number would
be to develop a new drug they keep there
there's a guy at tus who keeps coming
out with a new study every five years
and it goes up by you know 500 million
or a billion whatever but in any case
they exaggerate enormously about how
much it costs them to develop a drug but
it does cost them a lot and you know to
for them to put in all this money and
then find out oh we're competing against
this generic that's every bit as good
you know they're not going to do it
they're not in business to lose money so
so I think fairly quickly they they
would you know they would give up in
that that that horse race I mean you've
said that um intellectual property laws
are costing uh the US economy or
possibly the globe one1 trillion dollars
right um and I think almost half of that
is the is through drug patents if I'm if
I'm remembering correctly so why do you
how do you arrive at those estimates I
mean and I wonder what do they miss CU
you talked about lives you know and
health before and I was thinking it
seems like the cost is almost
incalculable in in one way yeah well in
the case this was just for the us just
to be clear right but the case for
prescription drugs it's fairly
straightforward because we have a pretty
good idea of what drugs cost as generics
because some drugs are sold as generics
and almost invariably they are cheap and
you know so you could say okay here's
how many like you could literally
calculate how many prescriptions are
being sold you know so it doesn't matter
you know are you getting some cheap
generic are you getting you you know a
hugely expensive cancer drug we could we
have data on that we could say okay
here's what generics cost here's what
people are paying so the difference is
you know you know this figure I've been
throwing around 500 billion that'd be a
ballpark number for today when you get
to other areas it's a little harder
because it's not you don't have as
discreet a product you know so if you
look at Medical Equipment um you know it
sells in in many cases for ridiculous
prices you could look at say the older
versions that where the patents you know
and it's complicated cuz often times
they've overlapping you know there might
be 50 100 patents on a particular you
know medical device you know so so you
may still have some that apply but there
are huge differences between the newer
you know machines where almost
everything's going to be patented and
the older ones and it's not because
they're harder to manufacture it's
because you know they're getting their
patents um so you can get some ideas
there something like software you just
say how much do we spend on software
because it'd be free I mean if you know
in a world where there are no panch so
so those are very much ballpark numbers
but you know I so I won't go to the mat
saying oh it's a trillion dollars I'm
pretty sure it'd be well over a trillion
today because that was six years ago
seven years ago um but it would be an
enormous amount to then you make the
point about lives I mean this was driven
home in the pandemic yeah you know I was
writing things and I don't know if
anyone really cared but you know going
okay what would be the rational thing to
do this is back in 220 you know we
recognized this worldwide p pandemic and
people are talking about vaccines why
don't we just pull our knowledge why
don't we you know why don't we share it
all you know meaning worldwide you know
the US Europe China everyone and as soon
as you know we develop vaccines that are
effective they could be distributed
manufactured distributed throughout the
world anyone who could produce them you
know and ideally you'd even stockpile
them because the cost of you know
suppose you made a 100 million doses of
a particular vaccine turned out at the
end of the day it wasn't effective you
have to throw it out but what's the cost
that cost relative to the benefit of
having 100 million vaccines that you can
begin giving to people tomorrow um you
know we could have saved millions of
lives we probably would have prevented
we almost certainly would have prevented
the development of the Omicron strain
and quite possibly the Delta strain but
you know that that simply wasn't on the
agenda because you know you had the drug
companies that wanted to protect their
patent monopolies and there you know
there was remarkably little uh uh
collaboration and you know certainly not
again we're demonizing China they had
effective vaccines you know no one here
talk about that you go okay you don't
like China that's fine but they have
effective vaccines that could prevent
people from getting a deadly disease why
would we not want those to be used as
widely as
possible yeah
I it's you know it's kind of if you
don't laugh you'll cry right it just
kind of boggles the mind that generally
privatized knowledge is something that I
don't believe in cuz ideas aren't
inherently scarce but when you start to
talk about specifics like I mean Public
Health researchers were talking about
vaccine apartheid right and I'm pretty
sure that Bill Gates because one of the
first vaccines was actually developed at
Oxford University um I think the
pharmaceutical companies were involved
in in some respect you know they did
collaborate a bit but it was Bill Gates
who stepped in and said no this needs to
be protected by pton it needs it can't
be public which just it it just it just
done so much human as well as economic
Dage that I just I'm not sure how he
sleeps at
night it it's remarkable and again this
is something you know people in the
Public Health Community know about it
but you know to much of the world oh
he's this great humanitarian um he
played a horrible role there and going
further back you know with the AIDS
crisis back in the 90s you know they
were big obstacle to having widespread
distribution of AIDS drugs in subaran
Africa because he was insisting that
patent monopolies be be be respected so
this is now ancient history because I
was telling some people about the other
day and they're looking at me like what
are you talking about so if you go back
to the 90s you know when AIDS first
became well first of course became big
problem in the 80s but you know the
first AIDS drug was act which you know
slowed the spread you know protected
people for a period of time but
ultimately at least with the vast
majority of people it stopped working
and the disease progressed and you know
they got worse and usually died then you
developed the triple cocktails in the
early 90s and they were charging in the
United States 10 to 15,000 for a Year's
treatment and the drug companies were
insisting this is what it cost them to
to sell you know to manufacture you know
that they needed to you know charge
these prices and of course in the US
even the US was very expensive but you
know but you know we're a rich country
we could you know pay that you know one
way or another um but obviously in
subsaharan Africa where you had millions
of people were infected and you know per
capita income was you know at that time5
six 700 a year in many these countries
there's no way on Earth you could afford
anything like that so anyhow you know
people in the Public Health Community
were saying you know it doesn't cost you
know there there clearly was money spent
developing the drugs no one disputes
that but you already developed them it
doesn't cost 10,000 15,000 a year to
manufacture and distribute them and
Gates was saying no these patents have
to be honored well what happened was you
know you had a number of people in the
Public Health Community they partnered
with SIA it was I think the biggest
generic manufacturer in the world if not
the biggest certainly one of them in
and their head said I could produce
these and make money $200 to $300 a year
and he was prepared to do that and they
M they partnered with Doctors Without
Borders and they were bringing him into
Africa and you know Gates basically
threw in the towel and you know the drug
companies they they they began to sell
theirs at Big discounts but also you had
the Indian generics that you can get for
$2 or $300 and it totally undermined
what Gates is trying to do but it saved
millions of lives I me it's just you
know and anyhow I mean the idea anyone
would treat that guy as a hero was just
incredible I mean it's funny because we
were talking about the internet earlier
and of course it's it's funny how it all
comes back around right because Bill
Gates is famous for that open letter to
the open source Community I can't
remember the was it 76 or something but
back when there yeah back when the
internet was very much open source
collaborative communities all code was
available to share you could you know
there were no ad vers you could just
copy the code uh you know augment it
improve it whichever way you saw fit
Bill Gates was like the guy who just
really didn't like that wrote this
really testy letter to everyone
complaining that he wasn't getting as
much money as he should have um and you
know everyone should be paid including
Bill Gates but it was I think it was
like people pointed out in response that
he' he was using a government computer
for a start to do his coding and you
know it's just ridiculous but he's just
all always thought that he should be
able to profit from ideas and
unfortunately it seems he's got his way
in with the internet with health and you
know I'm sure with countless other
things as well yeah you know in fact I
remember this is some time ago but we we
were I can't remember the specific
project doesn't even matter but we were
we were talking to a program officer At
The Gates Foundation and we're looking
at something with patents you know
remember that part and you know so I was
talking to the this person one of their
program officers and I was saying
something something patents and she goes
oh we don't talk about patents
here and I said excuse me you know she
goes well you know because of the source
of wealth of our founder and and like
that was like a reasonable thing you
know you're you're in public health you
know you're um but you know you know
again I guess that was an open policy
she wasn't trying to hide it she said it
out right you know so that's incredible
yeah and and and he's he's shaped Global
health so much right you just wonder
there's the stuff that we can point to
the stuff that we can find the problems
like the vaccine with covid was quite
visible but how many projects haven't
been started you know how how many ideas
have been stifled uh how many people
have been shut out just because of of
that those walls right that he's created
yeah no it's uh you and it is kind of
remarkable this is all on under the you
know sensible the guise of
humanitarianism you know and here it is
they're basically doing the opposite
yeah I mean he's incidentally somebody
who's been very vocal about praising the
sort of reduction in global poverty that
we were talking about uh at the start
right even though it it what was
achieved probably goes against some of
his Central Central philosophies right
and um yeah I think uh things could have
been a lot better had he not
intervened yeah no I think that's a safe
bet yeah yeah um so I want to I want to
ask you about something else um which
which maybe is kind of conceptually
distinct which is about full employment
policy right because this is something
we've spoken a lot about protectionism
and uh various kinds and trade deals but
full employment policy is something that
you you argue essentially that the level
of employment is inherently uh a choice
of governments right it's not like
governments intervene and decide we want
full employment and that's like a new
policy they always determine the level
of employment I feel like this is is
quite a radical argument that that's
stuck stuck out uh for me in the book so
could you explain it to us Yeah so
basically through macroeconomic policy
through how much governments spend tax
and then also the monetary policy they
determine the level of economic output
and you know how many people are going
to be employed and you know we we've had
periods well every country but certainly
in the United States we have periods of
high unemployment um those can be
countered so if we go back following the
the crash of our housing bubble in 20072
2008 we had the financial crisis our
unemployment rate got up almost to 10%
um and it very gradually fell back down
to 5% and then eventually under 4% in
2019 just before the pandemic um but we
could have been at four under 4%
unemployment much more quickly if we
were prepared to spend more more money
you know because that really that's how
you you know boost the economy the
government could spend more money and we
did that basically following the
pandemic I'm very happy to say my my
co-author in one of the books I wrote
and this Jared Bernstein he's now the
head of uh President Biden's Council of
economic advisors and I'm sure he had a
big hand in this I mean not that he's
confided with me all the discussions but
I'm sure he had a big hand in it and
they pushed through a policy that they
spent a lot of money as soon as
President Biden got into office the
unemployment rate came down to under 4%
by the end of
2021 you know so so we didn't have this
long period of high unemployment like we
had back following the the Great
Recession 2008 2009 2010 and this makes
an enormous difference in people's lives
so it's not just that they have a job
which by itself is important but when
you have a low unemployment rate that
gives workers with less education it
gives them the bargaining power to get
higher wages and we've seen that so we
see people at the bottom end of the wage
ladder they've had very substantial real
wage gains in fact wages for for workers
in the bottom quintile the bottom 20% of
the wage distribution are 12% higher
today than they were before the pandemic
that's after adjusting for inflation so
we always hear about inflation in the
United States and obviously it's been a
problem but after you adjust for
inflation workers at the bottom end have
gotten strong wage gains very strong
wage gains I don't think we've ever seen
that much wage growth over that period
for for workers in the bottom Quintel
and I'd say a very large part of that
story is that we've had very low
unemployment so you know so this is a
policy choice and you know again it
makes a big difference which way you go
on it and you know having you know been
through you know I was in the policy
debates following the Great Recession
people were you know we had this high
unemployment rate and people were coming
up with literally wacky theories as to
why the unemployment rate was still so
high I'm deadly serious there was a a
scholar I'm forgetting where he was but
his you know his very well respected guy
who said it was it was video games Tyler
call I remember yeah well you're being
gracious by not saying his name sorry it
was Tyler call yeah you know and you're
like come on you like video games and
you know we we're laughing even at the
time because you know you didn't see the
same high unemployment this is young
young younger men 25 to 35 so you didn't
see the same thing in Europe at least
the same distinction between you know
young men and other groups so we go I
guess our video games aren't as good you
know and and then as the anoy start to
fall we go it's it's a shame to see the
deterioration of video game quality in
real time yeah yeah
exactly uh yeah I I mean it's amazing I
mean it really you know we laugh but it
does capture a t that tendency amongst
economists I think and a particular type
of economist um where you know whatever
happens in the economy is kind of
essentialized and you got oh well it's
just the result of these kind of
inexplicable changes and it's just a
reflection of preferences whether it's
video games and with globalization you
had that sort of skill biased
technological change type thing where
people with more education were
naturally seeing increases in their pay
and it's just this is exactly why I like
what you could call the institutionalist
approach I mean I don't know if you
identify as an institutionalist but it's
like no here here are the things that
are happening I mean it seems so
straightforward to me right it makes me
quite animated because I'm like well no
those are the laws in the economy those
are the policies that are directly
leading to these outcomes I don't want
some mystical explanation about skill
biased technological change I don't want
some nonsense explanation about video
games you know what I mean it's about
specifics what is happening in the
economy let's study and identify that
that's what economics should be for me
yeah well if you could make it these
abstract forces then you just go oh
there's nothing we could do about them
they're doing that you know you know
it's stupid you I'm going to get upset
at an abstract Force I mean it's might
be unfortunate but you know what what
are you g to do we go no we shaped
globalization it's not something that
happened it's something we did and you
know the whole issue skills by bias
technological change I you know I have
fun raising it the comments I go well
suppose we don't have patents and and
copyrights they go well then no one
innovate go okay but those are policies
right so yeah so so you can't you you
don't get to say both this is something
that just happened you know there was
skills bias techn and and then also we
need these policies we could argue about
the policies and that's fine maybe these
are the best policies but you can't tell
me that the policies were inevitable
they could have been otherwise yeah yeah
we patent biased technological change
might be a might be a better name for it
I think um I mean with full employment
right the same applies so you had you
had this joke about the great the great
vacation was it was it um real business
cycle theory was the Great Depression
was actually the great vacation because
workers suddenly decided that they had a
much greater preference for leisure and
and this was a theory that was taken
seriously and I just it just astonishes
me yeah you know I went to grad school
at the Heyday of you know that you know
uh rational expectations and real
business cycle theory in in the 80s and
you know my me and my fellow students I
don't think we're radically
indoctrinated because we're pretty much
all going are you kidding me you know we
had a Professor telling us this and you
know they they're telling us with a
straight face and you're saying everyone
just decided they didn't feel like
working you know I mean we were trying
to I mean you're trying to give them the
B of the doubt we're trying to
understand like what are you saying and
it just seemed on its face so utterly
absurd yeah absolutely um and it I mean
I mean I don't know how much real
business cycle Theory directly guided
policy but it's it's still kind of the
the core of a lot of macroeconomic
models and I think it makes itself felt
because you've got this idea of like the
nairu right you've got the non-
accelerating inflation rate of
unemployment where unemployment can't be
uh below a certain level otherwise you
get accelerating inflation um and that's
guided Central Bank policy and when when
we're too close to the nairu interest
rates go up to increase unemployment and
that's it sounds when you say out loud
it sounds just horrible and
conspiratorial but it's like no that's
that's Central Bank policy and it's
based on this kind of model right I mean
do you think that the nairu exists do
you think it's a kind of nonsense
concept I I think it's essentially a
nonsense concept and one of the things
that's been striking to me is like you
go how could you possibly disprove this
I mean I remember when I was in in
college I took some philosophy or
science course you go well you make your
theories and you test them and they
could be you go okay how could this be
disproved because we've again and again
and again gone below the unemployment
rates that were thought to be the nairu
and you know remember back in the 90s
you literally I I the experience you had
people laugh at you if you said that the
unemployment rate can get below 6% or
five and a half you know the range that
they had for the nairo I remember Paul
Krugman who I consider a friend is
generally an ally in these things he was
among those who was laughing back then
you know that uh you know and then the
unemployment rate we saw in in 2000 was
4% as a year- round average and there
was very little acceleration of
inflation so I mean what I would say
about this there's kind of a simple
proposition I would agree with that when
you get lower unemployment there's more
inflation pressure in the economy you
know so I'd agree with that is there
some fixed level of unemployment that
you can't get below without having
inflation go through the roof no I mean
you know at a point in time there might
be you know so if we said let's have 2%
unemployment we're just going to keep
spending money till we get well I grant
that probably be a problem but you know
that's going to move over time the the
circumstances will change there are
other policies you could use to try and
contain inflation so the idea that there
should be some fixed point that that you
can't get below I you know I think that
just makes literally no sense and I
think the evidence are you know totally
you know points in that direction um I
remember back in the 90s there was uh um
well he's still around Robert Gordon's
very prominent comments he's done a lot
of good things so I don't mean to knock
him particularly but he was he was
called dub the guru of nairu because he
was you know written I don't know if he
coined the phrase but he was certainly
one of the first people to be out there
pushing it and when the unemployment
rates start to get below his estimates
of nairu you know in the mid 90s and we
weren't seeing accelerating inflation
obviously was bothered by it so he came
up with what he called the time very
nairu and I remember I was at a
conference where he presented I was
sitting next to this guy Bob Eis great
Economist who he was actually taught the
same school at Northwestern they're
there for I don't know 20 30 years I
mean he's passed on now but in any case
he was literally making fun of him he's
going yeah he goes he had he had a
random term in there that determined how
much the nairu will move from one
quarter to the next so he said how do
you decide how big that random term is
he goes well if you don't make it big
enough it doesn't help your fit if you
make it too big then it jumps all over
the place that's a scientific
explanation so you know anyhow you know
I'm just going look if you could
disprove the theory we disproved it yeah
and but yet it didn't go away you know
and it's just like okay I I don't know
what to say it's totally UNIF ible right
and you get all these op heads like oh
the nairu has moved it's like no the
rate of employment has moved and then
you've made up a number that has also
because depends on the rate of
employment yeah it just it just makes no
sense as a basis for policy it's it's
just silly and and to reiterate you know
what you said about about bad policy
right is again these are very abstract
models you know you've got a uh a
diagram you've got the the sort of well
the long run aggregate supply curve is
kind of the simplified version of The
Nair might say right and it's like uh
it's just it's just a couple of lines it
doesn't tell you what type of spending
is taking place and I remember um you
know the Barbie movie um they they ran
out of pink paint um like as in in the
world they ran out of pink paint in the
world now that so if you just say yeah
we're going to buy all the pink paint
then yeah you're going to get inflation
in the pink paint sector and probably
related sectors right but that's that's
obviously a ridiculous policy um if you
invest in chips right in uh I don't know
uh uh environmental policies Renewables
and things like that then you you're
going to create capacity as well as
employment right and that's going to be
prog growth so it's just I mean it's all
about just well-designed policy it's
just way too
simplistic yeah and you know again we we
we seen again and again by pushing the
limits and that you know that's one of
the things I give the Biden
Administration just enormous credit for
that you know they had this very
ambitious you know recovery package that
pushed through the first month as
administ ation and it got us back to to
Full Employment very quickly and we'
benefited enormously from that in ways
that you know I just think it's
unfortunately people don't I I you know
I hate to be in the situation you don't
appreciate how good it is but you know
it could have been an awful lot worse
I'll just put it that way you know and
again not ancient history we just go
back a decade and look at the slow weak
recovery from the Great Recession we
didn't have that we have millions of
people out of work who didn't have to be
and they aren't out of work today
because we had very aggressive stimulus
policy yeah yeah absolutely I mean it it
it it's it's kind of amazing how quickly
the US recovered after the pandemic and
I think it was interesting with poverty
I mean this was a bit more shortlived
but you could almost say something
similar with poverty right because there
were these massive um Assistance
programs and there was um was it the
cares Act Right which was sort of for
child poverty and that unfortunately was
ended which you know is is a horrible uh
mistake in my opinion but poverty as
employment I would argue is is a policy
variable as well it's like if you put
the policy but poverty went down over
the pandemic in the USA because the
policies were in place right so we just
need to institutionalize those things
yeah and it's you know it was a tragedy
because you know the the the big factor
not the only Factor but probably the
biggest factor in reducing poverty here
with the child tax credit expanded child
tax credit I won't go through all our
Dynamics with the child tax credits it's
a complicated program but long and short
you had low income people that were
gaining the child tax credit who hadn't
been previously and it lifted them up
out of poverty it just made a huge
difference in their lives because what
that meant was that you know they didn't
have to worry about all the necessities
of life and also you know if you know
people sometimes have to change a job
not just that they want to they
literally have to because they can't get
to work you know their car broke down
there's all sorts of reasons sometimes
people have to go week two weeks three
weeks between jobs and if you're living
constantly at the edge that means you
don't have food for your kids and you
know this the the child tax credit again
which did not cost a lot of money that's
the other thing about it is really you
know nickels and dimes I'd have to check
was maybe 1% of the budget and probably
less you know and uh you know it ended
in 222 and you know poverty shot back up
child poverty shot back up yeah yeah
it's just it's just I mean it's it's
it's it's not just predictable it's like
obvious right it's total logical if you
don't have that as your policy aim then
it's going to it's going to be much more
of a problem
um I mean it yeah I I feel like with
with full employment It just strikes me
that it it does solve so many problems I
think by I mean it's been argued right I
think kan's actually argued in the
general theory he said that neoclassical
economics comes into its own if you um
have full employment right that's the
kind of the Assumption at the back of it
and while I maybe that's too strong a
statement I do feel like once you have
full employment once you have that
pressure you have the bargaining power
for workers um they can ask for a lot
more and you might see like increases in
unionization and stuff and like maybe
even increases in like worker
democracy yeah I mean it's it's a very
different world you know where we are
today in the US from say you know 10
years ago when you had the unemployment
rate around 6% because you know now
employers can't just say okay you don't
like it here across go wherever you want
go to hell you know they can't do that
so workers could you know they could
organize trying to get a union which is
happening more we'll see how much you
know that carries through I mean I'm
hopeful whether we see a big surge
imization remains to be seen but you
know you do have a lot more efforts
trying unionization and you know whether
you know worker democracy again this is
a sort of situation where you could
where workers could have that as an
option whereas they don't when the
unemployment rate's High so yeah so I
mean I I consider this really front and
center I mean there's a lot of you know
again I have plenty of arguments made
with former well they're still friends
but you know um political allies that
you know look I'm not going to try and
tell you everything's great but you know
we've had a lot of doors open for us
that we should appreciate and try and
build on of course but you know
recognize that this is this this has
created opportunities that weren't there
a decade
ago I I I even remember there were
stories of um
how it affects former convicts when you
have very high employment because people
companies start to hire former convicts
and then that's you know that's
obviously great in itself also
especially in America there's there's a
massive factor in racial inequality
right um so you just get you get all of
these all of these effects and I just
think if you pursued full employment as
a policy for decades Beyond just the
positive effects of that policy I think
you'd see a lot of other changes as well
it feels like that's a sort of
background condition for a much better
not just economy but like a better
better country a better world right
absolutely and you know we we've had
mass incarceration numbers have really
Fallen sharply by the way in terms of
numbers of people incarcerated even as
crimes gone down you so it's not just
that we have all these criminals I mean
if you hear the Trump people yeah
criminals are on the street that's not
true you know but incarceration rates
have fallen crime rates fallen and you
know you

you when you're in an environment where
you have higher unemployment and
employers have a choice to see someone
has been in prison they're not going to
hire them but they don't have that as an
option now I mean obviously they're not
going to hire someone they think's
dangerous but someone you know had some
petty crimes or whatever and you know
they come apply for your job you know
you're you're going to consider that
person and obviously once they get a
foot in the door you know if they're
trying to improve themselves they'll try
to develop more skills move up the
hierarchy you know maybe they're not
ever going to get rich or anything but
they might be able to have a decent
middle class standard of living and that
that's a huge difference obviously for
that person but they're kids the Next
Generation so you really create enormous
opportunities from basically a simple
policy I mean spend the money you know
that's kind of the story yeah absolutely
I mean would you say the books actually
well it's getting on for for a decade
old actually uh but would you say we've
spoken about industrial policy a bit
would you say there's anything that you
missed that maybe if you rewrote the
book you'd add like uh any laws that
protect the rich that you didn't really
speak
about well certainly one that I've
written some short pieces on that's come
to take on great importance uh section
230 of the communications decency act
this was passed in uh was it 98 I
believe 96
96 and it protects internet platforms
from being sued for defamation for
third-party content so if uh you know if
I were start to make up lies about
someone on your show you could be be
sued you know CU you're you know it's
your show but you know the platforms
that this got carried on couldn't be
sued and that's distinct from the laws
that apply to prin or broadcast so if uh
if you know it was carried on NBC you
know or or you know the New York Times
the they were going to do a segment you
know run this run theary content they
could be sued um but you know on uh
Facebook or on Twitter they don't carry
that liability and I think two things
there one is I think people who defame
people you know you should be able to
sue the carrier I mean that's the logic
and being able to sue the New York Times
or Sue CNN because they're basically
host sailing it they're profiting from
it they're whaling it if you know if
someone's on the street yelling so- and
so it's a murderer or rapist or whatever
okay um who who heard it whoever's on
the street heard it you know but but
when it's carried over and well millions
of people might hear it and it's carried
over Twitter might be tens of millions
so strikes me those people they should
be responsible they're they're
wholesaling it they're profiting from it
you know the other thing is that you've
given you know these platforms have
become enormously important and I think
part of the story is that they do have
this Advantage not so much that they're
defaming people that is an advantage
because sometimes that sells you know
more people are going to you know but
also they don't have to worry about it
so see CNN has to worry about it so
they're going to have someone come on
and they're going to start saying this
and that and that about so and so had
molesting kids they're G wait a second
we're GNA have to check that out you
know and then they might have to check
it out they might have to issue a
correction you know you know so so they
don't get sued Twitter doesn't have to
do that so Twitter can carry all this
stuff and not not have those concerns so
I would see section 230 as a big deal
that you know has promoted you know both
inequality and created this horrible
horrible story where you have people
like Mark Zuckerberg and Elon Musk
deciding what literally tens of millions
of people will be able to see hundreds
of millions and you know I think that's
a really big problem so you know again
is that the only problem with the
internet will that fix it I can't say
that but I think it's kind of an obvious
thing that can and should be done so I I
wish I had written on that it was I
think less important in 216s I'll say
that in my own defenses to why I didn't
uh didn't go into that Turf but you know
I think today that is a very important
issue that you know I certainly would
have spent more time on I mean it's a
similar it's a similar issue right is
the kind of the rights and the
protections and the ability to make
money without any sort of
responsibility um is similar to what you
have with like intellectual property
laws right yeah exactly and you know
again there there's just you know
particularly since we we we have this
policy with you know with broadcast with
print so why would you say you know
you're exempt if you if you're
transmitting it on the internet you're
exempt but if you do it over broadcast
while you you have this responsibility
it's this blind spot again isn't it it's
this like you are protected by the law
you're protected by the government
you're able to make money right and then
but then you think of maybe well
presumably people who disagreed with you
were probably say something about Free
Speech right but it's like no this this
this is a creation of the government
it's completely different it carries
different responsibilities with it yeah
and you know the issue about La you know
defamation I mean I do know some free
speech absolutist who will say no we
shouldn't have uh right defamation you
know n chsky is very prominent example
pres respect to norly but I'm you know
on this issue I disagree with them but
in any case it's in the law already so
we don't allow I can't go up go around
make a story and say oh this doctor
butchered my my kid and the doctor never
even saw your kid I I can't do that I
suit you know so you know so that's
that's not seriously in dispute we're
only disputing whether Elon Musk is
subject to it that's the only issue yeah
does this apply to um podcast platforms
like Spotify and stuff is it sort of um
one explanation for why for instance Joe
Rogan can sort of make a lot of stuff up
to to tens of millions of people and
then there aren't really very many
consequences except maybe a Wikipedia
article in the description of the the
podcast well well Rogan if I if Rogan
defames someone he can be sued he can
not if I can't be yeah yeah so he not
protected so so the Creator themselves
you know if if you go def Fame someone
on Twitter you could be sued the point
is Elon musy and you know one of the
points I've made when people are arguing
about this is you could even do it
anonymously I mean there there's a guy
who tweets on uh Twitter goes under the
name captured so so so I was arguing
with someone about this and he goes I go
I don't know who catcher is and he goes
oh well I know who he is go I don't care
if you know who catcher is the point is
anyone could get on these these
platforms be completely Anonymous and I
you know have to track them down you
know I mean yeah I should do that but I
shouldn't have to Elon Musk is making
money on cat turn's tweets
yeah yeah absolutely absolutely I mean
so what one of the things
that to me comes out of the book and
comes out of talking to you today is
you're talking about how capital and
maybe higher paid laborers and people in
the rich world as well generally they
tend to have more of a seat at the table
um so I think it's one thing we've
discuss some of the the polic specific
policies that we'd like to see that
would be more Progressive but I mean is
one answer to this just generally to
bring in a broader range of people to
have seats at the table you know should
consumers I mean Jack dorsy said
something like this I think should
consumers have a say on how Twitter is
run um workers should have not just a
say on how their companies around but a
German style kind of seat at the at the
um political table negotiating inflation
deals and and Countrywide or sector-wide
Bargains you know all of this poorer
countries should be more included at the
World Trade Organization the IMF and the
World Bank because they're basically
dominated by the Richer countries is it
kind of is that something I think that's
something we need to do right absolutely
but I think you know a a big part of
that we need more people at the table
but I think people have to first
understand what's being decided at the
table right so so so you know because
there's the ideology is so thick that
these things are just happening and you
know our elections I I don't know the
turnouts in UK but you know 50% maybe a
little more vote you know and that's
because they don't realize that it
actually does matter that you know
there's a you know there you know this
is their life it's not just you know a
show where Donald Trump's yelling and
you know Biden whatever you think of him
as doing this and that it's not just a
show these are things that are going to
affect your life and I think there's
really it's hugely underappreciated so I
think we need more seats at the table
but part of the story is people really
have to understand what's being done at
the table and I think all too often they
fa fail to recognize that so even even
greater transparency and understand
understanding of these kinds of policies
you think would just change the G I mean
if if everybody knew all we've said
about drug licenses right and uh and
vaccines right surely surely they would
just be
disgusted I think so I mean I I give
talks so you know often begin to talk on
you know patents I go drugs are cheap
and people look at me like are you a
 and I go yeah well they're cheap
to manufacture and distribute government
granted monopolies make them expensive
and if I can convince people that point
I've done an enormous thing but the
point is this is you're worried someone
in your family is sick and you have to
come up with thousands of dollars to pay
for the drug that's going to you know
improve their health save their life
that is a political decision you know so
so this is not just theater this is your
life you know so I I you know again so I
think people don't realize how deep the
role of policy is in determining their
lives it's not just things that happen
that we can't control it's was going to
use the weather but obviously year of
global warming that also is up for
control but yeah did I mean it's funny
it's quite a us thing as well the uh the
the pharmaceutical healthc care thing
I'm not saying it doesn't affect the
rest of the world but a lot of people in
my country and in in the rest of Europe
are kind of it's it's quite strange to
me uh to read about how drugs are priced
over there and and the problems you have
with these pharmaceutical companies it I
can't really get my head around it
because for all the problems that we
have over here and there are plenty uh
even with especially with the healthcare
service it's like I I do just go to the
doctor and then I get treated if I've
got a problem and that's pretty much it
like it it just I think uh nobody else
would accept this kind of system that's
in the US it's it's really crazy it it
is it is striking and my wife's Danish
and you know we would uh you know I met
her parents they're very nice they were
conservatives there you know
conservatives in Denmark political
spectrum and you know we tell them about
people not having Health Care insurance
not being able to afford they thought oh
my my crazy daughter and er radical
boyfriend or husband you know and then
they you know they had OCC come over
here and they realize no that really is
true you know they they they found it
hard to believe they just couldn't
believe you know they know we're a rich
country you know like you really have
people that can't get you know they need
a medical procedure they can't afford
their drugs and that they they really
just couldn't believe that Denmark
incidentally is a pretty good model for
for a lot of what we're talking about
I'd say they've got uh they take a fair
few of the boxes right yeah yeah no as I
say it's they were conservatives in
Denmark I mean they would have been you
know well to the left the Democrats here
you know yeah of course people should
have healthare you know that wouldn't be
a question um I want to ask you one
final question and I'm asking it because
I know my followers definitely want to
ask you it so I mean
you would you consider the problems
you're talking about would you consider
them just generalized problems with
capitalism um is capitalism something
that we have to move away from to enact
you let's call it Bon nomics right um
because you talk about like private
protections and I agree with everything
you say but I suppose in one sense
capitalism kind of is private protection
of of of property right it's private
private land um private ownership of of
capital the stock market right um in
Investments and uh the Returns on
investment shareholder capitalism I mean
I just wonder and and there's some
things which push against this in the
book to be clear um but if we
implemented your vision of the world are
we kind of moving towards towards
Socialism or would you still consider it
a very radical
capitalism I guess I consider a radical
capitalism I guess put this way I think
the Market's tremendously valuable so I
don't want to get rid of the market but
the point I've tried to make throughout
this book and really much of my writing
over the last couple decades is I think
it's infinitely malleable so to treat it
like oh the Market's just going to
create inequality well we could
structure the market so it creates
inequality but we could structure it
differently so that it doesn't create
large amounts of inequality so what my
my focus is like okay how can we
structure the market to you know produce
less inequality to meet our needs and
you know I guess I'd say I'm agnostic at
the end of the day where do you end up
because you know there's a great line in
marks which I'm mangling but something
like you know the world gives us
problems that we could manage or
something something to that effect I'm
totally mangling it's been a while since
I read my marks but you know but but the
point you know that I took him to be
saying is that it sort of sets a table
and we could figure out what to do with
what's on the table there are things
that aren't yet on the table and I'm not
going to talk you know I have nothing
contribute to that you know so so it's
say take what's on the table and try and
get it organized in a way that gives us
Better Lives yeah and you know where do
we end up after that well I don't know
you know let's do that and then we'll
figure out where where the next step is
yeah I I I I agree with that completely
it's great to have specific things to
point to and it's like we were saying
with full employment right you pursue
full employment for 30 years who knows
what happens to the ative shift of
political power in
society yeah yeah no and you know if if
we could do that I mean it'd be such a
such an amazing Story I mean if if you
know you know again I'm thinking
certainly in the US the racial dynamics
of you know the unemployment rate being
so much higher for blacks and you know
now the unemployment rate I should know
the latest number for blacks something
like 5% which is still much higher than
for whites but you know when we had a 6%
overall unemployment rate the
unemployment rate for blacks was around
11 12% you know so just a world of
difference you know and and you know if
you imagine maintaining that for decades
um you're talking about a very different
world yeah yeah absolutely um so that's
a really really good place to end on uh
but Dean Baker thank you so much for
speaking to me it's been really
interesting and I can't recommend uh
rigged enough to everybody listen it's
also free so people can just download it
yeah yeah it's also free it's just on
it's just on Dean's website like just go
and download the PDF the ebook right you
could you know you can get it in various
formats yeah so please yeah please go
and read
it well thanks lot for enjoy yeah thanks
a lot see you

later


## Keywords:
