---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H6HAWOBEHmM
---

# Video
The Revolutionary Legacy of Rosa Luxemburg
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H6HAWOBEHmM)

## Transcript:
we the generations of revolutionaries
today we stand on the shoulders of
giants and it's imperative for us that
we learn from their life and experience
and one of them is is Rosa Luxembourg
she's a figure that has been hijacked by
the soft leftist if you can if you can
call them that
people who try to to use her to justify
their their own left reformism and
putting it in a in a radical veneer and
I think it's time that we set the record
straight and that we the IMT reclaim
also Luxembourg as a revolutionary that
she was
yeah I will focus on on two myths that
that has been created around her
but but first a little bit of background
she was born in 1871 in the Russian
occupied Poland she was a pole not
allowed to speak her own language in
school
she wasn't you and she was a woman she
started fighting oppression in a very
young age
they're already in high school she
became politically and revolutionary
active and before she turned 20 she had
to flee the country and move to
Switzerland in 1898 she decided to move
to Berlin
and she decided to move there in order
to participate in what was probably the
strongest labor movement in the world
at that time the German Social
Democratic party the SPD
the leadership there they found her a
bit difficult to handle so they tried to
derail her into the woman's movement of
of the SPD okay but she wasn't a person
that was easily derailed and she threw
her self into the most important debates
of of the movement at that time
when she arrived in Berlin it was just
in time for the essential debate about
reform and and Revolution that that the
Edward banstein had raised inside the
SPD
manstan tried to introduce a revision of
Marxism and actually transforming uh the
the political foundation of the SPD from
Marxism into reformism
she she threw herself into this uh also
explaining it wasn't just a theoretical
question it was a question of the life
of death of of the SPD I think if you
read her text social reform and
Revolution today you will find it
striking that it is in many ways the
exact same arguments that you can hear
on the left wing today and you can take
quotes from from her and use directly
against a lot of these soft leftists in
the labor movement that that we meet
today all over the world I think
and throughout her life she played a key
role in fighting the opportunist
reformist degeneration that happened in
in the German social democracy and and
in the second International
a fight that ended up in her being the
key part of founding the German
Communist Party
and also a fight that ended in her being
killed for for fighting for what she
believed in
she has become somewhat of a left-wing
icon
but I would say that her Legacy have
been grossly distorted this concept of
so-called luxembourgism has been
invented
they present her as represent presenting
some kind of a special Trend within
Marxism as as her being both opposed to
the reformists but also the leninists
and the bolshevism
like some kind of Third Way a softer
revolutionary way
more democratic way in their View
in reality they try to use her to cover
up for their own left reformism in
radical clothing
they they try to portray her as some
champion of working class creativity and
spontaneity
and as being in opposition to some Ultra
centralist undemocratic linen who
supposedly made a coup in Russia to set
up a dictatorship under his own
leadership
this is false and I will try to explain
this but this luxembourgism so-called it
can seem attractive to to Young honest
revolutionaries
uh revolutionaries who seek an
alternative to what they have been told
is leninism but is it in actual fact
stalinism but this idea of of a special
looks and poorism as an independent
Trend in opposition to leninism and
bulgerism is false to the Core
it is based on myths that is created by
taking texts and quotes out of context
and also hiding the fact that Luxembourg
on several occasions changed her mind
when events convinced her that the that
her criticism of Lenin and the
Bolsheviks had had been wrong
if you make a serious study of the
writings and life of Rosa Luxembourg you
can reach no other conclusion that he
was a revolutionary a communist and on
the same side of the barricade as linen
and the Bolsheviks the same side of the
barricade that the IMT stands on that
there are many myths that has been
created I want to use my talk to to try
and combat the the two uh myths that I
think are most important uh the first
one is that she supposedly had this
special theory of spontaneity and was
against the building of a revolutionary
organization to lead the working class
and that he somehow predicted how the
Russian Revolution would end up and the
Practical conclusion being in a in a
dictatorship understand and and the
Practical conclusion of these
luxembourgist is sorry is from that but
therefore we shouldn't build a
revolutionary organization at all
and the second myth is that she
supposedly was an opponent of the
Russian Revolution and the Bolsheviks
but let's begin with the question of
organization and spontaneity we are told
that Luxembourg stood for the
spontaneity of the masses and their
creativity as against the leninist model
of a highly centralized monolithic
revolutionary party it is especially her
work the mass strike the political party
and the trade unions that is used to
create this myth but this this claim
that this text support this myth it both
misses the point on why she wrote the
pamphlet and against whom she was
polemicizing and furthermore and this is
general for for for all the claims about
what Luxembourg stood for you can only
create this myth if you grasply distort
the article
you cannot in honesty read this article
and from that claim the Luxembourg
dismisses the concept of revolutionary
leadership the article is analyzing the
first Russian Revolution in in 1905.
it's explaining in in great detail how
the Russian message Rose spontaneously
in math tracks and also how they set up
Soviets the Soviets is basically workers
councils the development of the strike
committee
it was something that the Russian masses
if found up as as Anita Rose it wasn't
something that has been had been
described by any Marxist theoretician
beforehand
and Luxembourg described this process
and it was these councils that in 1917
became the organs of workers power
and took power in Russia the article is
written for for a German audience it
wasn't written into a debate in the
Russian party
it was a contribution to a debate taking
place inside the SPD the German Social
Democratic Party
and it is basically a very harsh
criticism of the leadership of the SPD
and their behavior around the time of
the Russian of the 1905 Revolution in
Russia there was also a Strife way of
taking place in Germany
and the discussion was taking place
inside the SPD on the mass strike that
is but at least in Denmark we call the
general strike on how and when to use it
and with what the what method in
contrast to Russia in Germany there were
strong trade unions and a strong Social
Democratic party with with Mass Roots in
in Germany but the leaders of the German
Workers movement they treated the
strikes with contempt and also said that
they were immature and that they were
doomed to fail and in contrast it looks
also Luxembourg again the Revolutionary
wing of the SPD they welcomed the
strikes and argued for the need of the
party to intervene and to give the
strikes a political leadership and
Direction and and Luxembourg she in her
in her criticism of the leadership of
the of the SPD she she compared them
or she used an example saying that the
SPD leadership they treated the mass
movement as a pocket knife I.E as
something you can just open and close as
the party found convenient you call the
message to the street and you send them
home instead she said using the example
of Russia 1905 that the masses move
without permission from any party
they move when they move
the ante argued that when the masses
moved it was the role of the party to
give this movement Direction and
Leadership
and in these ideas she was in complete
agreement with Lenin so so this article
about the mass strike was written for
this debate
as a criticism of the leadership of the
German SPD for not understanding how the
masses move and not wanting to lead the
message when they moved it was an actual
fact the criticism of the reformist
actions of the leadership of the SPD
that in some ways anticipated the later
actions I would say at a time where it
wasn't so clear uh how how far the
reformism have had spread it in the top
layer of the SPD it wasn't a criticism
of the Bolsheviks with whom she was in
agreement with in regard to the 1905
Revolution
in December
1905 she had gone to Poland to
participate in the revolution
at that time with which wasn't obvious
at the time but at that time the
Revolution was already at an IP and she
got arrested in March 1906. a few months
later she she got released and went to
Finland in Finland many of the Pacific
leaders were were also present and he
had long discussions with the with many
of them including linen and it became
clear in these discussions that on the
fundamental questions they agreed she
participated in the Congress of the
Russian Social Democratic party in 1907
and this was a congress where uh you
could say all the Tendencies of the
Russian Social Democratic party
participated the Bolsheviks the
menteviks and also the Polish party
that that for historical reason had
hadn't been part of the Russian Social
Democratic party before
so you had people like Lennon Trotsky
Rosa Luxembourg click enough at
discussing the experience of the of the
first and failed Russian Revolution
what was the lessons to be drawn the
revolution had drawn the different
Trends close but now again the
differences began to came to the fore
the differences between the maintivex
and Bolsheviks and so on yeah and this
became clear in in the discussions
during the the Congress
uh also Luxembourg she held a long
speech on behalf of the Polish party and
the main part of the speech she used to
to heavily criticize the menchieviks and
their conduct and their and their line
during the revolution
she criticized them for giving up the
independent struggle of the working
class
and and criticized them for putting
their trust in the bourgeoisie and the
liberal parties and
um how can you say that and
subordinating the working class to to
the bourgeoisie basically
she was fully on the side of the Polish
and praised them for the independent
class policy and she agreed with them
that the next step it would have been
for the message to to to go forward in
the Russian Revolutions a Russian
Revolution of 1905 would have been a for
an armed uprising of the World Cup in
Russia so while she she criticized the
main Civic in their basic position you
could say
she had one concrete critical uh remark
about the Bolsheviks and that was that
she she thought they had put too much
emphasize on organizing the technical
side of the of the Armed uprising she
said that the masses themselves they
would take care of this question and and
solve it during the revolution
uh and I think this reveal uh also what
I believe is is a weak side
okay and something that runs through her
her entire life that her approach to
organization is a bit abstract she has
this idea that problems of organization
will be solved when they arise basically
which is a consequence of of her being
in the German SPD that was very
organized and where she could see the
bureaucracy system uh putting a break on
on on the movement of the masses and the
workers but I believe this this was a
mistake of his but but I think if if you
look at these debates and also if you
look at what she writes it's it's very
clear that that when she criticized the
Bolsheviks she didn't reject political
leadership
Justice Lenin didn't reject the
spontaneity of of mass struggle they
agree that the masses move when they
moved it's not by order of of any party
but when they move it is necessary that
there is a revolutionary leadership to
this movement the difference was on how
much emphasis revolutionaries should put
on the Practical side of organizing the
masses taking power
and you can see this with the Practical
consequences Lenin built the Bolsheviks
and Luxembourg didn't build a party in
time that that could lead nemesis
and I think history have shown a
Luxembourg to be wrong in
on this question connected to this
question of organization these so-called
luxembourgists they reject the building
of a revolutionary party at all in
continuation of them claiming that she
was against organization they presented
as her somehow anticipated
um the development of bureaucratic
dictatorship under Stalin
and also they claimed that the stalinist
dictatorship
that it was it followed naturally from
Lenin's ideas on organization
implying you shouldn't build a
revolutionary organization because it
will always end up in a stalinist
bureaucratic dictatorship
they present the myth that Luxembourg
was for some kind of genuine workers
democracy in opposition to the
dictatorial methods of leninism this
idea is wrong on many hit levels the
bureaucratic Stalin is the generation of
the Russian revolutions did not flow
from Lenin's view of organization from
the Bolsheviks the stalinist
degeneration was a consequence of the
objective conditions in Russia in 19017
and the years after it was the
consequence of the Revolution taking
place in a backward country and the fact
that the revolution remained isolated
none of the leaders of the Bolsheviks at
that time imagined that the Russian
Revolution could lead to to socialism in
in Russia alone
their idea was to hold on uh until the
workers of of the more developed
capitalist countries especially Germany
came to the help
if if you look at history and what
actually happened in Russia you can see
that the bureaucratic regime was not a
continuation of of the organizational
methods of the Bolsheviks or the Russian
Revolution
and it wasn't a consequence of the
Russian Revolution how it took place all
the workers States set up under the
leadership of Lenin and Trotsky and the
Bolsheviks the two receipts were
separated by a river of blood the
stalinist regime practically wiped up
out the the old Bolshevik party if you
take a I think many of you will have
seen these pictures of of all the
members of the Central Committee of the
Bolsheviks during the the revolution the
1917 Revolution and you look at what
happened to these people you will see
that most of them will have disappeared
or been killed when we came come to
1940. the Luxembourg is falsify what
linen and the Bolsheviks really stood
for in order to facilitate this myth
they portrayed the Bolshevik party as
some kind of monolith without any free
debate under a highly centralized regime
on the linen and his dictatorship but
the truth is that the Bolshevik party
had the fullest freedom of internal
debate
if you read about the congresses you can
see that different opinions was being
freely discussed and often in a very
tense atmosphere and no words means what
is it that these soft leftists these
Luxembourg is really have against the
Bolshevik party
it is that it wasn't a debating Club
it wasn't a place where ideas could
freely be discussed just just for the
sake of discussion
or for individual expression the
Bolshevik party was a fighting
revolutionary organization where debates
were taking in order to prepare the
workers of for taking power
it was a fighting organization
internally it was organized on the lines
of democratic centralism a full
Democratic debates
but once an internal debate had taken
place on a question a vote would be held
and the majority policy would become the
policy of the party and the party
members had to follow the line and carry
out the decisions
just like it takes place at a factory or
workplace when the workers discussed
whether to strike or not you have a
debate you take a vote and then you
decide whether everybody strikes or not
this luxembourgus in order to try and
pit the Luxembourg against Lenin and
claim that Luxembourg thought he was an
undemocratic and Ultra centralist they
use a special article it's an article
from 1904 called the organizational
questions of the Russian social
democracy
I think it has been renamed so I don't
remember the exact title but something
like Marxism versus leninism
okay by someone in probably in the 70s
which says everything because that is
not the original title that Luxembourg
gave that article but it shows how they
try to distort it here she denounced
Lenin and the Bolsheviks for the ultra
centralism
and he even
um accused him of of blankism
a blank is a mystery idea of organizing
a social Revolution by a small
conspirational a group of revolutionary
leaders basically a coup
how can you say that weekend words when
she meant something she said it very
harshly but also like learning she
wasn't afraid of of uh
admitting later if he had been wrong in
her harsh words in 1903 in the split
between the menchievix and the Bolshevik
she initially decided with the
menchievix but she knew a lot of the
menchievement leaders personally and
believed their side of the story of what
happened in in the 1903 Congress the
reality is that Luxembourg didn't
understand what linen was striving for
in in 1904 when when she wrote the
article I think the truth is that very
few if any really did at the time
but if you look at the article the
Luxembourg is they they they actually
take her argument and turn it on its
head in the article she doesn't say that
the kind of party that Lenin is building
will establish a bureaucratic
dictatorship After the Revolution it is
not as the Luxembourg is say a warning
against the stalinist degeneration
what she says is that the party that
Linden is striving to build is in danger
of heat generation before the Revolution
degenerating into a sect and therefore
risks not being capable of carrying out
a revolution
so she's not against a revolutionary
organization a revolutionary leadership
she's debating what kind is the best in
order to secure the victory of the
workers and furthermore she changed her
mind
and this is never mentioned by by the
looks in progress they just pick and
choose what they want to use from her In
Articles and at the Congress in 1907 of
the Russian party she said that
experience of 1905 had shown her to be
um wrong
she said that her warnings about
blankism being inherent in bolshevism in
1904 belonged to the distant past that
is a quote and from 1905 and after she
sided with the Bolsheviks on all
fundamental questions against dementia
Vics and later in 1918 together with
Carl leifact as he set out to form the
German Communist party as part of the
Communist International
are you building a revolutionary party
so to say that she is diametrically
opposed to Lenin on this question is
sheer dishonesty there is no fundamental
difference between Lenin and Luxembourg
in their understanding of the masses and
the need for organization they were just
in different roles and different
situations
the masses move when they are ready the
outbreak of struggles Mass strikes
revolutions
are mainly or in most most examples
spontaneous in nature but they also
agreed on the need for revolutionaries
to build a working-class party
and to politically intervene and lead
the masses
you could say the difference was that
Lenin understood and carried out the
need to build a revolutionary cater
organization I will I will get back to
that in the end but before I return to
that I will go into the second myth the
question of the Russian Revolution
the the main myth is that Russia
Luxembourg was opposed to bolshevism and
the Russian Revolution in 1905 and the
Bolsheviks how they acted during that
Revolution and after yeah and this is a
lie a pure lie the text that is used to
create this myth is the only longer text
she wrote about the subject they're
called the Russian Revolution written in
1918. and I think you have all seen
inspirational quotes in in nice graphic
floating around on Facebook uh trying to
portray
Luxembourg as this defender of democracy
against the the dictatorship of of
Russia and the Bolsheviks the Luxembourg
is they try to use the article to
portray Rosa Luxembourg as a defender of
Bourgeois parliamentarianism that's
difficult to say Parliament tourism as
opposed to Soviet power so sorry
basically saying as you can be a
revolutionary you can be a Marxist you
can follow Russia Luxembourg uh but
within this system within the capitalist
democratic system yet again this is
absolutely false this was not the ideas
of Rosa Luxembourg first of all some
facts regarding a win and under what
conditions the article was written facts
that the Luxembourg is completely ignore
when they use the article they never
mentioned these things okay when the
Russian Revolution broke out uh it was
during the first World War
and Rosa Luxembourg was in prison
she was put in in prison by the German
authorities for her own safety which
which meant she had no no sentence and
no right to to try to have that sentence
overturned and no time limit for when
she would get out and he was only freed
by the German Revolution I think it must
have been really really frustrating for
her her access to information was
extremely limited and also and I think
she knew this what information she was
Fed was being filtered through the the
the German authorities so so she wasn't
getting the the clear picture
so she wrote down her observations for
for her own clarification and she refers
to publish it because she knew full well
that it would be distorted by the
enemies of the Revolution a Clara setkin
who was a close friend of Luxembourg
stated that after Luxembourg was
released from prison in November 1918
she had said that her views had been
wrong and based on insufficient
information
the text was only published three years
after her death it was published in 1922
by Paul Levin without Luxembourg ever
giving allowing him to do it
well at the time she was dead so
obviously not but not not before then
either
at that time Paul Levy had just been
expelled from the German Communist party
and it was a way of
um
of getting back at the at the movement
so you should think that you should take
this text and use it with a bit of care
yeah but the Luxembourg is they they
don't do that
but all that being said
you cannot read the text and come to the
conclusion that Luxembourg was opposed
to the October Revolution or the
Bolsheviks it is only if you take quotes
completely out of context and completely
distort the entire article that you can
portray like this and I dare anyone who
thinks that to read the the article from
into beginning
the text both begins and ends with long
Praises of the Revolution the Bolsheviks
and Lenin and Trotsky I have taken one
quote but there are many many like this
throughout the article in the beginning
as of the article as far as I remember
Luxembourg wrote The Following whatever
a party could offer of Courage
revolutionary farsighted knit
farsightedness and consistency in an
historic hour Lenin Trotsky and all the
other comrades have given in good
measure all the Revolutionary honor and
capacity which Western social democracy
lacked was represented by the Bolsheviks
their October Uprising was not only the
actual salvation of the Russian
Revolution
it was also the salvation of the honor
of international socialism I think from
this quote alone it should be quite
clear
and as I said there are several quotes
like this these are not the ones that
are that are put on on the inspirational
graphic on on Facebook what is taken
from the article is that she raised some
concrete points of criticism against the
Bolsheviks but her criticism is a
comrade critique of specific steps taken
by the Bolsheviks not a denunciation of
the October Revolution and mainly it was
written as a warning against thinking
you could take the experience from from
the Russian Revolution and mechanically
transfer that onto for example Germany
and he explained that the problems uh
facing the Russian Revolution and the
Bolsheviks was a direct consequence of
the isolation of the revolution in in
the backward backward conditions of of
the country
and she laid the responsibility for this
on the shoulders of the German working
class and not least the leadership of
the German working class
and she explained that this the solution
to the problems faced by the Revolution
and and the Bolsheviks was to break the
isolation of the country by carrying out
the German Revolution and the purpose of
the of the article and and the task of
the German revolutionaries was to learn
from the Russian experience in order to
prepare for the German Revolution so if
we read the article in its entirety
instead of picking out and and choosing
quotes out of context in order to
misrepresent her views it's impossible
to interpret Rosa Luxembourg as being
against Lenin and Trotsky and the
Bolsheviks he agreed the with the way
the October Revolution was carried out
he agreed with what linen and Trotsky
had to do to defend the young Soviet
Republic and as a genuine
internationalist she understood that the
German Revolution had to succeed in
order to save the Russian Revolution and
and come to the aid and when she faced
the problems of the Revolution
she ended up with the same conclusions
and as the Bolsheviks because a few
months after she had written this
article that the German Revolution did
break out
it released Rosa from from prison and
from then on she threw all she had into
securing the victory of of the German
Revolution and here the problems of
Revolution became concrete one of the
things that she had criticized about
your weeks for was the disbanding of the
constituent assembly it's a criticism
that is eagerly seized upon by those
their reformers who tried to portray
Lenin and Trotsky as
undemocratic or anti-democratic or other
authoritarian as against luxembourg's
Democratic socialism
but what was the facts
the Polish effects throughout the
history have supported the call for a
constituent assembly seeing this as a
step forward from Osiris the despotism
but when they um at the time of its
dissolution in January 1918
the constituent assembly it no longer
represented the Russian masses
the Russian methods they were organizing
their power in a higher form of
government the Soviets who were based on
the power of the working class
Parliament is capable of expressing the
rapidly changing views of the mass of
working people in the course of a
revolutionary upheaval quite the
opposite it becomes the force of
derailing the actions of the masses into
a careerist debating Club
to take the power out of the the
movement of the masses and the
constituent assembly in Russia was
lacking behind revolutionary events it
had became become a focal point of
counter-revolutionary forces they work
to defend the essence of the reactionary
Osiris regime the constituent assembly
had come into being when it's exists
existence had been overtaken by the real
revolutionary events and this Justified
its dissolution by the Bolshevik
government
by shutting down the constituent
assembly the the Bolsheviks were not
disbanding democracy as it is claimed
rather they were defending genuine
workers democracy as represented by the
Soviets but from her prison cell Rosa
Luxembourg couldn't see this
yeah and in in her article she she asked
which is basically a question for
herself because it was a question of
self-clarification she asked why can't
the constituent assembly of the Soviet
why can't they exist side by side
but he answered that question herself uh
when it when she faced the same
situation in Germany just a few months
later
in November 1918
in the German Revolution workers Council
sprung up throughout Germany and the
leadership of the SPD who at this time
had become thoroughly reformist and and
pillars of support for for for
capitalism in the revolution they pushed
for a calling of a National Assembly
which is basically the same as a
constituent constituent assembly
and it became clear for Rosa Luxembourg
that this this was a way for the
leadership of the SPD to try to derail
the revolution away from workers
councils into possible Democratic
channels it was part of their attempt to
try and prevent the Socialist Revolution
taking place in Germany
and now Rosa Luxembourg could see this
clearly that the two the National
Assembly of the constituent assembly on
one side and the workers councils the
Soviets they were mutually exclusive and
he called the National Assembly and I
quote an outmoded Legacy of Bourgeois
revolutions and empty shield and she
said to resort to the National Assembly
today is consciously or unconsciously to
turn the revolution back to the
historical stage of busra revolutions
anyone advocating it is a secret agent
of the bourgeoisie or an unconscious
spokesman of pedi Bourgeois ideology
I think that says very clearly what she
would have thought of all these people
who try to use it to to defend both
white democracy against the the workers
taking power but these words afroza are
totally ignored by our luxembourges of
today
and and the reason is is quite clear
she's clearly calling for the abolition
of Bourgeois Democratic National
Assembly
does this mean that Rosa Luxembourg was
out to destroy democracy
it quite the contrary it looks and work
in exactly the same manner as Lenin and
Trotsky was defending the real
institutions of focus democracy the
workers councils the Soviets and she and
she was fighting the distraction and
confusion that the National Assembly
would have created for the Revolution
and basically exposing it for being a
tool of counter Revolution so to
conclude or to
so how can you say to Trend and some of
it sum up everything if you look at the
life of Russia Luxembourg she didn't get
to fight this fight to the end her life
was cut short and I have sometimes been
asked why I think it is that these left
reformers can use Rosa luxembourth and I
think this is why she didn't lead a
Victorious Revolution
she was killed
and she didn't live long enough to
comment on the development taking place
in Russia and neither in the Years After
the Revolution or during the stalinist
degeneration
and therefore her ideas stayed a bit
abstract like her ideas on an
organization
and you don't have her
writing anything actually for
publication on the Russian Revolution
for example and I am sure that if he had
lived longer he would have been
Implement implantically on the side of
the revolution
I'm sure she would have been a staunch
enemy of the stalinistic generation and
I think he would have been just as hated
as Lenin by both the bourgeoisie and the
reformists after all it was the
reformists that had her killed in
January 1919 her life was cut short by
the reactionary freikop soldiers
they were spurred on by the Social
Democrat uh
who who who led a campaign a murderous
campaign against uh also Luxembourg and
the other outstanding leader of the
German Communist party
and and the rest of the leadership of
the newly formed German Communist Party
it happened at a time when the when the
Communist party was only two weeks old
it had just been formed on the New
Year's Eve of of 1918 1919. the newly
formed Communist party was left without
its hit and the German Revolution was
defeated As We Know
it was a catastrophe for for the workers
worldwide
it left the Russian Revolution isolated
and it paved the way for for fascism in
Germany and I think as revolutionaries
today we and Marxist today we have to
ask ourselves could it have been
otherwise but what can we learn from
from this and we have to look at the
difference between Germany and Russia
why did the Russian Revolution succeed
and why was the German Revolution
defeated
and of course there are many different
aspects but I think the main and the
decisive question was the existence of
the Bolshevik party in Russia and the
lack of an equivalent in Germany the
balcony party was a cater organization
built over years it was based on on a
solid foundation of Marxist theory and
had worked had had roots in the working
class this was what linen had strived
for and worked for since 1903. when we
look at the German Revolution when that
broke out no such cater organization
existed the revolutionaries was in in a
loose network of a few thousands and
only had 50 in Berlin the Communist
party was only formed during the
revolution two months into the
revolution
yeah at this time it it becomes clear in
retrospective that it was only Lenin who
understood the need to build a
revolutionary caterer organization
for many years Luxembourg thought that
the SPD would be the become the
Revolutionary party or be the
Revolutionary party and that the the
masses of the workers would would force
it to be the Revolutionary party
uh but Lenin also for many years hold
hold out the SPD as a model and in
hindsight I think it's it's clear to see
that what also Luxembourg should have
done was to build a a revolutionary
tendency long before inside the SPD and
that would have made the split between
the reformist and the revolutionaries
much clearer when it happened but it is
much easier to see in hindsight
we know what happened in the German and
the Russian Revolution
so I think Luxembourg might might be
excused but but the point is her
followers are not excused us who live
today are not excused if we don't learn
from the experience
we have on the basis of the experience
of the Russian and German Revolution we
can see that Lenin was correct in in
realizing the need to build a caterer
organization
and towards the end of her life
Luxembourg through the same conclusion
and set out to phone the German
Communist party so I think now it's time
for us to reclaim the Revolutionary
Legacy of of Rosa Luxembourg and to
learn from from her life and her
experience and it is up to us to fulfill
the tasks set by Rosa Luxembourg linen
and all the other revolutionaries that
came before us
to struggle with all that we have in
order to secure the victory of the
Socialist World Revolution thank you
great thank you so much Maggie for this
introduction
and I really hope it makes people who
have listened want to buy the book
written by Marie and delve into this
topic now we're going to move straight
into the discussion period
the first speaker will be Ben glenetsky
from the British section of the IMT
thank you chair
and uh thank you to Marie for a really
great introduction so Commerce Lennon
explained
that in every Revolution
the most basic question is the question
of state power
the Bourgeois state must be smashed by
the Revolution and and replaced with a
worker state and attempts to reform the
Bourgeois state or transform it into a
tool of the workers
are doomed to fail
and it's this that distinguishes
reformists from revolutionaries and and
this question formed a very important
part
of Rosa luxembourg's battle against
reformism against revisionism
in her text reformal Revolution
She Wrote
the theory of the gradual introduction
of socialism
proposes Progressive reform
of capitalist property and the
capitalist state in the direction of
socialism
Bernstein the theoretician of
revisionism of reformism
Bernstein proposes to change the Sea of
capitalist bitterness
into a sea of socialist sweetness
by pouring into it bottles of social
reformist lemonade
and she's and Rosa Luxembourg says this
is a ridiculous idea
because she goes on to say
the production relations of capitalist
Society
approach more and more towards the
production relations of socialist
society and that is to say that as
capitalism expands
it socializes production
from Individual Craftsmen to production
lines that span the globe involving
thousands of workers but on the other
hand she she continues in its political
and juridical relations that is to save
the state they establish between
capitalist and socialist society as
steadily Rising wall
so even as capitalism socializes
production on the question of the state
the that it establishes a war between
between private and or between
capitalism and socialist society and she
says this wall is not overthrown
but on the contrary is actually
strengthened
by the development of social reforms and
the course of democracy only the hammer
blower Revolution
which is the conquest of political power
by the proletariat can break that wall
down
now this is a really crucial theoretical
Point Luxembourg is saying
that social reforms willingly granted by
Bourgeois Democratic regime can actually
strengthen the capitalist State as a
weapon of class rule because the
illusion is created that the state acts
in the interests of all classes of
course we are in favor of reforms but
how you win the reforms is the crucial
question
we want class struggle
to force the ruling class to Grant those
reforms
because that strengthens the working
class it strengthens the confidence of
the workers in their own institutions
and their own abilities
which prepares the working class for the
Revolutionary overthrow of capitalism
and the capitalist State what we do not
want is to debate convince trade favors
with the Bourgeois state with with
diplomacy or parliamentary Maneuvers and
so on this is not our method for winning
reforms because it demobilizes the
working class
and it builds Illusions in the
capitalist state
and it throws back the struggle for
revolution
now Luxembourg took this up
theoretically against Bernstein but also
concretely
against milorand and some of the French
social Democrats Miller and was a
socialist politician
who joined a Bourgeois government in
France
he aimed to secure gains for the working
class yes but not through class struggle
but through deals and diplomacy and
parliamentary cretinism
now the result of that
was that instead of milorand reforming
the Bourgeois government
and and making the Bourgeois government
a bit more socialist the French
bourgeoisie
used milorand
as a as a left cover for their
reactionary policies they made him a bit
more capitalist now Luxembourg fought
very hard against milorandism she wrote
The Following
the entry of a socialist into a
Bourgeois government
is not a partial conquest of the
Bourgeois state by socialists but a
partial conquest of the Socialist Party
by the Bourgeois State Marie explained
how the question of state power was
posed very sharply by the Russian
Revolution and Marie explained how
Luxembourg was initially inconsistent in
applying her own ideas to this concrete
situation
she recognized the Supreme importance of
the Soviets as the basis for a new
worker state but at the same time
she argued that a constituent assembly a
Bourgeois Parliament should also be
convened because she said it could be
pushed to the left by the masses and
this is a this is a vacillating this is
a middle position
which tries to combine
the Smashing of the Bourgeois State
machine
with reforming it with pushing it to the
left but this as Maria explained this
was corrected by Luxembourg during a
revolution in Germany
the same question of the state was posed
Point Blank should there be a state
based on the workers councils or should
it be based on a Bourgeois Democratic
National Assembly and luxembourg's
position could not have been clearer
she wrote no evasions
no ambiguities the die must be cast
yesterday
parliamentary cretinism was a weakness
today it is an ambiguity
tomorrow it will be a betrayal of
socialism
in other words
any Illusions in Bourgeois democracy
were condemned by Luxembourg as a
betrayal of socialism these were the
revolutionary ideas of Rosa Luxembourg
on the state if we can steal ourselves
in these ideas
then the workers state that we will
build in the future will be her Legacy
thanks Commerce thank you very much ben
that was an excellent contribution
so it's been pointed out in Mary's
introduction and one of the main lessons
of the life of Rosa Luxembourg is the
need to build a strong revolutionary
party in advance of revolutions
and this is what the IMT is trying to do
incorporating these lessons into our
work today
but to build such an organization
we we have the ideas
but we need the money also to put these
ideas to the workers and Youth
so if you're enthused by what you've
heard so far
I would strongly urge you to make a
donation to The IMT every penny goes a
long way into helping us helping us
building the Revolutionary party all
across the world
so you can go to
donate.marxis.com next up we'll have
schematics from the Greek section of the
IMT
s
listen to her important General
contribution to Market Theory
was particularly distinguished
in the important theoretical and
political cause
of Marxism for learning against
Revolution and it will not be an
exaggeration
to say that Rosa and the founder of the
Russian boxes Georgie plechanov produced
the most systematic and complete
responses to Reformation most prominent
fairies Edward Bernstein Bernstein from
1896 to 1898
in his articles in the German Social
Democratic Journal not yet and in his
book the conditions of socialism had put
forward the idea
that socialists should emancipate
themselves
to outdated phraseology
meaning the revolutionary ideas
and become the party of reforms
berenstein's revisionist Theory
raised the question of the true
relationship
between reform and Revolution according
to bergerstein and his followers in the
German social democracy the constant
pursuit of legitimate reforms can lead
gradually and without the need for
revolution socially Rosa's response came
with a series of Articles and documents
in
1898 and 1899
that make up her work reform for
revolution
and this was the beginning of Rosa's
five-year theoretical struggle
against Bernstein's conceptions
with various documents there was an
important to the general question system
of the relationship between reform and
Revolution while defending as a Orthodox
Marxist the Revolutionary Road to
socialism does not renounce as the free
evolutionarians might consider the
reforms in general
she explained that Revolution and reform
are not two different methods of
historical progress
that someone can choose from the buffet
of history but they are different
moments in the evolution of class
Society
in history she explained
Progressive reforms are as a rule the
product of Revolution she pointed out
that whoever in the name of struggle for
democracy chooses reform as a substitute
an opposite element to Revolution does
not choose a peaceful path for the same
purpose
but in fact chooses another purpose
instead of worker power and socialism he
or she chooses capitalism and one of the
political forms of bourgeoisie's rule
Bourgeois democracy so Rosa was not at
all against before
the struggle for reforms she saw the
means of preparing
organizing and educating the working
class for the season
of particular value in her world
reformer or revolution
is the Marxist critique of Bernstein
ideas from the questions of the
capitalist economy and the character and
the role of labor unions because
according to Bernstein who arbitrarily
generalized a phase where capitalism was
developing and according Western Europe
make concessions of a few crams in the
working class of course from the table
of robbery of the colonies according to
berestein capitalism is capable of
adaptation
and it's a and its economic crisis are
now light and momentary fluctuation
he argued that the contradictions of
capitalism are no longer acute and this
makes socialism no longer objectively
necessary and so socialism cannot be
founded scientifically
but only morally
and it returns to the state it was
before March and
according to Bernstein the means to
overcome this consultation is on
Hardware the development of credit and
on the other hand the development of
trusts and cartel in relation to credit
Rosa replied that it does not prevent
the crisis from occurring but it still
makes it more acute very
in periods of capitalist Prosperity
credit increases the possibilities of
expansion of production but it does not
deal with the basic contradiction that
produce the crisis and that is the
contradiction
of production
means of production because as soon as
the first symptoms of recession appear
credits fall and stops expanding just
when the system needs in this way it
worsened the crisis
and in relation to cartels and trusts
but also explained that it may appear
that at the National Market level this
monopolies eliminated competition but
because the global market is imposed on
all states cartels and trusts in
international level make the competition
so do not soften but sharpen the good
tradition of the system
finally reflecting the Illusions created
at this period by the increasing power
of the trade unions in Germany Bernstein
wrote in his book that the struggle of
the trade Unions would gradually reduce
profits so much that Surplus value would
eventually disappear
and exploitation itself will be
abolished but according to Rosa unions
by demanding higher wages for better
purchasing power
of course they do not abolish Surplus
value and exploitation and she explained
that trade Union struggle is like the
work of CC
who was condemned by Zeus to carry on
his back a large role up a mountain
it was falling from the mountain and the
process of Transportation started again
and that's why the bureaucrats of the
German unions declare Rosa as enemy of
the Trade union they are good that
unions will gradually gain power in big
Enterprises firstly together with the
employers and then without them but for
Rosa the core management of trade unions
and bosses in big business
with joint price fixing would constitute
an employer labor cartel
at the expense of the entire working
class
but also a blow against the militancy of
the labor movement thank you very much
tomatoes for this excellent contribution
so before we move on to the next
contribution
I want to strongly encourage everyone
listening to check our theoretical
magazine or theoretical magazine in
defense of Marxism comes out every three
months
contains exclusive articles on various
aspects of Marx's Theory and history
the issue of this summer contains an
article on the American Civil War
which is a fascinating topic that all
marxists should learn about
and at a time where inflation is
ravaging the savings of Working Class
People
we also have a theoretical article on
Marxism money and inflation so I
strongly recommend you go to our website
and take a subscription to in defense of
Marxism the magazine is also available
in German in Russian and in Swedish
as well as a Spanish version called
America socialista to get your
subscription today
now the next speaker will be comrade
Oscar
from the Swedish section of the IMT okay
thank you very much hello comrades I
would just like to give one example of
how the legacy of Rosa Luxembourg is
being distorted I think in general the
enemies of Marxism have uh two main ways
of discouraging uh radical people from
revolutionary politics
the first way is what was done with the
Lenin and the Bolsheviks for example
is to attack the image of the leaders of
Marxism ruthlessly
they make learning out to be a
bloodthirsty dictator responsible for
the death of Millions
and they equate bolshevism with
stalinism of course none of this is true
we know that but it serves the purpose
of alienating people from genuine
Marxism the second way is what is to
transform the person in question into a
harmless symbol
a person who doesn't stand for anything
that can really harm the capitalist
system
and I think this second example is what
was done with Rosa Luxembourg the
reformist the feminists the anarchists
they have time and time again distorted
her views through quoting out of context
and misunderstanding what she actually
wrote consciously or not they have often
ended up portraying her views as being
the opposite of what they actually were
I actually rent recently read an article
which was published in the American
left-wing magazine Jacobin where this is
the case
it was published last year and I think
it's a good example of how this
Distortion is usually done the article
was actually called the Revolutionary
Legacy of Rosa Luxembourg so sounds good
but ironically the whole point of the
article seems to be to argue that she
tried to combine reformism and
revolutionary politics you see what they
did first is that it distorts the
question of the fight for actual reforms
in general and the ideology of reformism
and they make it out to seem as if as
revolutionaries are against the reforms
themselves and not the ideology of
reformism and then they say and I'm
gonna quote from the article now when
Luxembourg criticized Bernstein the main
point of dissatisfaction
was that Burstein was committed to
dismantling the very ideal of socialism
as access to political power
it's not a question of saying that
Luxembourg is a revolutionary and not a
reformist it's rather a question of
seeing what purpose reform should serve
that's the end of the quote so in other
words they are saying that we shouldn't
bother with this question of reformers
or revolution
and that they can actually be combined
they literally say that reform and
Revolution
weren't different ways of doing things
and obviously this is a great argument
if you want to keep the question of how
the workers can actually take power away
from the discussion but for Marxist the
question of reformism or revolution is
not something that can just be brushed
away so easily
it's a crucial question
we will obviously always fight for
reforms but you can't reform capitalism
into socialism that's what we believe
and the Rosa luxembly she fought against
reformism her whole life as the comrades
have explained and she gave her life in
the struggle for a socialist Revolution
which is what makes it especially
scandalous that reformists and
opportunists of all kind try to use
these quotes out of context
to make a seam as if she stood for
something that is the opposite of what
she actually fought for and this article
it also claims that she was against the
organizing of a party along the lines of
the Bolsheviks and even though the
author uh admits that she defended the
Russian Revolution of 1917 they used the
debates she had with Lenin about the
party and the role of the masses
to present it as if bolshevism
automatically led to stalinism
and in the end of the article they they
do their best but they struggle to
present these new luxembourgism so to
speak which is supposed to be a
continuation or a development of Marxism
but whose most prominent feature is to
combine reformism and revolution
so in the end we are left with Rosa
Luxembourg as a harmless thinker who
developed her own Marxism and with the
help of half-truth distortions and lies
and this is presented in contradiction
to the so-called dictatorship of Lenin
and the aim of all of this is to stop
all of those people who come into
contact with things such as revolutions
Marxism Luxembourg and Lenin is to stop
them from drawing the conclusions that
should flow from reading about the life
and the work of Lenin and Luxembourg so
I think it's a time that we drag the
legacy of Rosa Luxembourg out of the
dirt so that we can truly learn from her
life and struggle and prepare a victory
for our class in the future thank you
comrades thank you very much Oscar so
the last speaker today will be Fred
Weston from the international
Secretariat of the IMT and then we'll
have Marie give our concluding remarks
to the discussion okay it's been a very
good discussion an excellent lead-off
point Marie and it uh it was long
overdue I think a book by ourselves
on Rosa Luxembourg for decades now I've
had Rose Luxembourg in the background
as this person that you had to explain a
lot about uh because she would always
come up in the movement as a figure as
comers have explained an alternative to
millennialism in 1970s in Italy I
remember she was very fashionable
whenever anybody used Rosa Luxembourg it
was never to bring out the Revolutionary
side of her it was always about
everything else but her revolutionary
ideas and it was I remember she was
quite popular in the in the left wing of
the Italian Socialist Party in the 1970s
because you had you had a phenomenon
then which you could you could describe
it as a as a kind of centrism that
emerged I you know this this
sudden Lurch to the left in words in
moments of class struggle I like in the
1970s it was centrism is a phenomenon
that appears in moments of acute class
struggle and these socialist leaders
trying to give themselves a left image
as they move to the left under the
pressure
found in Rosen Luxembourg a useful tool
but I was I was looking through some of
her letters
and it's clear that Rose Luxembourg
realized long before Lenin how far the
leaders of the SPD had degenerated she
was very close to the kanskis
his wife but you know in in Easter 1908
she went on a trip with Kowski to Lake
Geneva and it was in this trip she
started to lose the illusions that she
had had she could see the personality of
this friend that she had she she
realized for the first time that she
found him
boring
monotonous with no imagination
and heavy going and it was Heavy to
listen to and she realized then that her
long-held friendship was now in Decline
it was from then that she she expressed
in her letters that she found the Sunday
dinners at the kowskis
she found them boring then she said soon
this is in one of her letters 27th of
June 1908.
soon I will not be able to read one line
of kowsky it's like a disgusting mass of
webs
from which you can Free Yourself only by
a mental bath of marks so she had begun
to see the limitations
and in fact she expressed the positions
you found herself in in a letter to
Clara zetsk in 1907. this is what she
wrote
I feel quite isolated August she's
referring here to Babel August Babel and
the others
have gone over completely to
parliamentarism
so
she explains that the left used her the
the the official left that is the August
Babel in reality he was the center of
the party
he used
um Rose luxberg against Bernstein then
this is what she says in her letter
when it comes to launching an offensive
against opportunism
the older leaders
always side
with Eddie Eddie is
um Bernstein actually valmar and David
basically she's saying when it comes
down to the real battle they're always
on the other side and this is the
Dilemma she found herself in for years
actually inside the party now she
finally came to the correct conclusions
before dying she understood the need to
build the Communist party they the myth
they present of her as being
anti-leninist doesn't stand up to the
test because
she was building a party which was a
section of the Communist International
led by Lenin what um what the so-called
Luxembourg is really Express when they
use Luxembourg is that they reject the
discipline of a revolutionary party they
reject its sensualism
to the to its revolutionary essence
now Marie explained she compared you
know Lenin's 20-year battle for the
Bolshevik party and eventually of course
the party emerged after years
of being a faction with together with
the Matrix into an independent Force
but it took years to achieve that now
sometimes I find it a stupid polemic on
the left about what should Rosa have
done she should have split a long time
before
that's not the point point is she should
have organized a faction like the
Bolshevik party that's what she should
have done inside the party and prepare
the ground for what Lenin eventually
achieved
something else that Rosa did realize
that it's not highlighted she realized
the difficulties that the Bolsheviks
faced once they came to power and she
did not criticize them for taking power
that's the false picture that they
present she understood the problems
faced by the revolution in isolation and
she says this very very clearly she also
puts the blame for this isolation on the
leaders of the SPD in Germany because by
not carrying out the revolution in
Germany they contributed directly to the
isolation of the Russian Revolution
see how important this was for Lenin in
March 1918 in a speech Lenin said this
it is the absolute truth that without a
German Revolution
we are doomed
this was the clarity of playing on the
on the need for the German Revolution
now we're discussing history here it's
easy to see the mistakes after a hundred
years
but imagine if the German Revolution had
succeeded imagine the effect that would
have had across the whole of Europe the
the Russian Revolution was not an
isolated revolution in the sense it
wasn't just one revolution uh there was
a revolution in many countries
that was the German Revolution 1918.
Hungary 1919
Italy 1920 a few years later you had
China in 1926 and the the big general
strike in Britain in the same year 1926.
and then of course the Revolutionary
events in Spain and France in the 1930s
and then of course even when the
Communist party was created in Germany
it was infantile
inexperienced and suffered also from
Ultra leftism
and and this affected many of the
Communist parties in Europe
so a discussion on Rose Luxembourg is
about what we take the best of Rosa we
underline this she was a revolutionary
but we also don't look with um we look
at it with open eyes we also see the
mistakes
but they were genuine mistakes of a
genuine revolutionary she was also
capable of learning from her mistakes
which she did many times but as Marie
said she was weak on particularly the
question of organizations
so what what monument can we build to
Roger Luxembourg well first of all build
a genuine Bolshevik organization in
Germany uh which we are doing we are
beginning to do and also do it on a
global scale
and remember we have to be
prepared long before the events
that's the difference between the
experience of bolshevism in Russia and
Rose Luxembourg in Germany when the
revolution broke out the Germans were
not ready
they were not readily both theoretically
and organizationally this school is
about educating our comrades in theory
to avoid repeating those mistakes and
then build an organization to take those
ideas into the movement
thank you very much for that friend
and thank you to everyone who
contributed to the discussion that was
excellent
so now I will turn it back to marief for
the conclusion
thank you turian and thank you to to all
who contributed in the discussion I
think it has been marvelous some really
good contributions
first of all I want to say that this
this discussion has been um and and my
lead-off was very limited in scope there
are many many questions that I didn't
touch upon
this talk focused on these two main
myths that that has been created by by
all those like the jacobit magazine and
people like that who tries to to take
Luxembourg and use it for their own
purpose
but there are many other questions of
course she lived a long well not long
life but until she was 47 there was many
questions she talked about upon and
things where I think she was correct and
things were I think she was wrong
but I think it's essential to to take
the essence of of of her life and her
Legacy and I think mistakes she made and
and all she did she did from the
perspective of fighting for revolution
and and because she had an un
unwavering faith in the in the working
class and their ability to take power
in opposition to most of those who who
try to use her who who has no faith in
in the working class but calls
themselves Marxist anyway
I think Luxembourg was a Marxist in the
true Marxist sense if you can say that
there are many Max so-called marxists
today academic marxists who who's who
used the the method and Analysis of of
Marx and find them interesting to look
at different aspects of of society today
but Mark said it very clearly himself
I don't have the code here so it's it's
from memory
but he said something like it was not up
to me to to to to invent the notion of
class struggle and if you look at
society today there are many who accept
the notion of class struggle also in the
bourgeoisie that doesn't make you a
Marxist to talk about cholesterol and
the existence of classes now Mark said
his contribution and his an English
contribution was the realization that
the workers could not take as Ben
pointed out could not take the Bourgeois
State and use it for its own purposes
that the workers had to smash the bus by
state and and create a new state a work
mistake and this is what the Rosa luxem
book fought for and I think it's worth
uh quoting a linen when it comes to
Luxembourg
he wrote an article in
I don't remember when
1919 maybe where he lists some some
points where he thought Rosa Luxembourg
was wrong like the national question a
question that they never agreed on
but first of all he says he wrote in
left-wing communism
he says what applies to individuals also
applies with necessary modifications to
politics and parties it is not he who
makes no mistakes that is intelligent
there are no such men nor can there be
it is he whose errors are not very grave
and who is able to rectify them easily
and quickly that is intelligent
this is he said in you know it was not
related to Luxembourg but in relation to
Luxembourg he he used a Russian proverb
to describe to describe her after her
death
and he said egos May at times fly lower
than hints but hens can never rise to
the height of an eagle
in spite of her mistakes she was and
remained for us an eagle
this is Lenin's appraisal of resolution
book so when we say we want to reclaim
the legacy of Luxembourg it is not down
to every sudden Karma she ever wrote
she is being used to try and derail
young people who are getting radicalized
away from revolutionary ideas and these
people belong to revolutionary Marxism
and not to some left reformism
the young people who are looking for
revolutionary ideas they belong in the
IMT and that is why we're trying to save
the legacy of Rosa Luxembourg yeah and
and I wanted to to give another quote I
apologize to the translators
because I think also what Fred pointed
out what is the purpose of of this this
uh this school we are having now and
what was the purpose of of Rosa
Luxembourg in her life and what is
always forgotten by these lift reformers
are not forgotten but hidden they
ridicule the fact that we are Orthodox
marxists that we focus on Theory and
this is what Rosa Luxembourg had to to
say about Theory and the need for Theory
yes he says what appears to characterize
the practice that is reformism above all
a certain hostility to Theory
this is quite natural for our theory
that is the Principles of Scientific
Socialism impose clearly marked
limitations to practical activity
insofar as it concerns the aims of this
activity
the means used in attaining these aims
and the method employed in this activity
it is quite natural for people
for people who run after immedical
practical results
to want to free themselves from such
limitations
and to render that practice independent
of our Theory
I think this is quite an excellent reply
to all those reformers that you can meet
in overflow today also but try to
dismiss Theory as something
unnecessary but also to the other side
of the coin those who are Marxist in in
the academic Scholastic way where you
just sit and discuss and you take no
practical consequences and organize for
Luxembourg and for us theory is a guide
to action
that is why we study and that is why we
have discussions like these and and what
she did and I think Fred explained this
very well in in this debate in in the
German SPD and I think this is one of
her strongest points the debate against
Benson and revisionism
she took the discussion head-on where
the lead the then the the leaders of the
SPD they try to avoid this is a question
of nuance this is this is not the
important for the Practical questions
right now and so on
and one of the one of the leaders
actually said to to Bernstein uh dear
friend we don't usually go around saying
these things we just do them
I we we don't throw ourselves into
theoretical debates about Revolution
which we just continue with our
reformist practice
and I think that is the situation and
most working class organizations today
and as has been explained very well by
several um contributions the question of
Reform and revolution
it's not a question of us or Luxembourg
being against reforms it is against the
idea that capitalism can be reformed to
a capitalism with with a human face
and I think this is also why this is not
a historical question uh the legacy of
Rosa Luxembourg
these questions that he touched upon are
the burning questions of today is he is
famous for saying Socialism or barbarism
I think that was actually a quoting
angles but but she has become famous for
for this that that the the fate of which
humanity is facing is is socialism or
barbarism and I think that it's very
clear today
when it comes to to Wars to climate
change to hunger
to to the economy
and I think this is the the main
question for us why are we
revolutionaries if we look at history
since since the beginning of of the
workers movement since it's since the
time of Russell Luxembourg it is very
clear that all attempts to create this
capitalism with with a human face
that the basic idea of reformism of the
revision of Marxism that Bernstein put
forward
is that we slowly reform by reform can
can create a better capitalism
and that maybe sometime uh that will
automatically turn into socialism
but that that is not the important
question
and I would say if I if that was true
that we bit by bit could could make
lives better for the great majority of
humanity I might be a reformist but the
problem is that it's not how reality is
life is not getting better for the big
majority bit by bit it was a historic
except historical exception the time of
the post-war Boom the a period where
semi-civilized conditions could be
created for some part of the working
class in some part of the world
this is not how it is today
capitalism finds itself in a blind alley
and it cannot create a better life for
the great majority of the population
and it cannot solve the burning
questions that is in front of humanity
so the fact now is that we're not bit by
bit uh going towards a better better
future quite the opposite all that was
won in the past is now being taken back
so this discussion that was I don't know
if it was started but but between
Bernstein and Luxembourg and other
revolutionaries the question of of
reformer Revolution is just as valid
today as as it was back then
and you see the exact same arguments
being being put forward today
as I remember the the Finance Minister
of the Greek Services government
at the time of of the referendum and the
fight against the the European Central
Bank imposing a cuts and austerity to
towards the Greek workers he said
something like now is not the time to
talk about socialism first we have to
create a better capitalism and then we
can talk about socialism and there are
arguments like this all over the the
left wing but the point is we cannot
create a better capitalism
and therefore the only way forward
is to fight for socialist overthrow of
this system and and to take this from
Rosa Luxembourg her faith in the working
class to move
and also their ability to change society
but also to learn from her
in the negative sense you could say the
need to beforehand before the Revolution
to build a strong revolutionary cater
organization capable of of
um of securing the victory of the
working class and I think that task is
is up to us


## Keywords:
