---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZOFFNkQvaWg
---

# Video
They Say They Will
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZOFFNkQvaWg)

## Transcript:

some people like say that uh you know
keep down your chakras revolution stuff
now you might be like keel and
what-have-you like this is Reagan's here
cowboy
you know atmosphere you know all this
Rambo stuff is going on you got to talk
about revolution and talk about up
working for the defeat of the United
States and all this kind of like stuff
here you know and I basically you know I
would say that uh people like that I
mean like me - where I think my spirits
like to profess with a lot is selected
over an hour shot by a by the police I
should have been like they told me I
should have been like they'll accept by
the polling even for I would heard a
revolution it was kind of like shooting
me right down streams no more than being
like a young black out here in the
streets and what-have-you and being kind
of you know insolent and defiant about
you know being you know not being out
here being insolent and being like
disrespectful towards like now shot it
but even actually before I really heard
about revolution know anything about
like revolution so you know now you want
to shoot me because I'm out here talking
about like revolution and I you know
under someone's conscious over slavery
country would have to be done about the
end slavery you know that makes me I
feel good that they want to do that
country what they want to do with me I
want to do a thousand times water it in


at least that everything from a 20-day
suspect and now the bridging alright my
fellow Americans I'm pleased to tell you
today to that time legislation that will
outlaw Russia forever we begin bombing
in five minutes
forever any last minute we wanna make
last minute minute

we're going to passing out body bag it's
a race it would help everyone out if you
would just climb into your own body bag
teachers that are saying that you
shouldn't come down because it's also
important it's not important efforts all
supported by climbing communist
revolutionary communist yet our high
school and we shouldn't come down and
support this because communist because
the Communists you down here Jenna too
but I know with things being like so
heavy like now we would you know it's
being like you know faced with all this
nuclear war what-have-you like this here
that uh and I mean to not you know like
to go all out to not go all out
revolution they're trying to like bring
these chumps down before they like push
the button that's you know if people
want to say that's what's unrealistic
that's being like detached from reality
we need to think that you know they
won't do it and we can like some kind of
way shorter revolution prevent them from
doing it that's the
that's crazy a lot of use really I mean
you know have nightmares about this
like you know of the actual dropping of
the hitting of a bomb and having the
real you know like walking through like
death you know just like construction
bodies all over the places outlines
people you know melted eyeball seeing
all kinds of you know just like
really vivid it's so incredible and
almost unbelievable that they actually
destroy the entire world all the little
emblems and symbols on this map are
nuclear installations in your ICBM
installations underground storage
facilities for nuclear weapons
intermediate range missiles atomic
munitions for cannons howitzers and so
forth like that the Armed Forces of both
blocks are so nuked up that they
actually don't have any other way of
fighting today
you know the type of war that we're
facing I think is not one of a
protracted nature that we think about
world war one world war two and people
fighting in the trenches for years we're
dealing now with the possibility of a
nuclear holocaust occurring in 30 to 45
minutes the fact that the war will be
fought with the weapons that are on hand
when the war begins means that the
weapons production that's going on today
is the war production of World War 3 the
mobile of political mobilization of
support for the war it is going on today
is the political mobilization of support
for world war 3 and also actions that
would be taken to prevent World War 3
would have to be the actions that are
taken today
they're always out here taking public
opinion polls like the Gallup poll just
pull that pole and it's usually you know
nine times out of ten is to reinforce a
really reactionary that they just
did or about to do right like the
bombing of Libya or the invasion of
Grenada and you know to say people
support it you know and they power
certain section of the public and live
gases
at probably a lot of times they pull the
members of the Kiwanis Club you know so
our party United with some people like
students to go out to Richmond
California where a lot of poet Aryans
live to take a public opinion poll of
our kind of public we asked the question
of about 3,000 people out of the 80,000
residents of Richmond that if you move
that the nuclear powers was about to
push the button and start a nuclear war
would you be willing you know and that
you knew they were going to do this in
like a few weeks would you be willing to
take up arms against the system
including against the government to stop
it so 62 percent of the people we polled
said yes and the majority of those also
felt that world war could break out at
any time and I think that those are the
people that we speak to and we speak for
and we plan to mobilize in making
revolution in this country that this
party represents will get the new moose
kill there are no chances con la
revolucion por que nós temos is muy
peligroso pero tenemos que hacer la
porque no tiempo tenemos que salvar el
espacio de mundo ANCA algunos marat Mo's
de alva vamos tiene que que dar la ja he
says Casey un esfuerzo a lo menos Eno
ovo Adara no clear Isis algunos mueren
otros no pero esta la historia says no
Marie de



I'm just kind of looking back on it it's
kind of interesting because back when I
was only involved in the revolutionary
movement we didn't really have a view
that this is where things were
necessarily going to end up in fact some
of us thought that maybe we could just
take care of it in the nineteen sixties
early seventies and finish it right
there and I guess I was somebody who
thought a little bit of that you know
what uh didn't work out that way it
ended up not being possible but what it
has come down to is that through the
work of the Revolutionary Union with the
Revolutionary Communist Party it's
actually been a thing that we were
getting ready for this exact point you
know not always clear on the exact
dimensions of how it was going to go in
exactly how it's going to shape up but
okay here we are
my hero whenever a fearless potestas yo
sabe lo que está pidiendo ser lo lo que
se material is mo lo que está siendo con
la gente que una persona sola nope no
pueden hacer absolutamente nada por ESO
teenisha
t-bird una de el tres personas que el
apoyo porque si la Miran
no I swear sir Jimmy caso del grupo es
una organización que esta temporada we
don't have any guarantee that we're
going to be able to carry it off and do
what's necessary but I'll tell you this
I think we do have the line organization
and you know the strategy for carrying
that out and you know we're going to be
maximizing our efforts to try to win
position so that we do get a chance to
do it you know right here in the belly
of the beast you know you used to refer
to it in the 60s you know what we're
going to try to be ready to take that
shot
our cptn fkn a Mucha experiencia de los
Sesenta sutorius ear la revolución de
los que los senta's yo creo que a try
Mucha gente pop or a service own para la
realidad a nuestro spices like Centro
America voy a hablar por que es lo que
donde yo vengo a special mentor Salvador
cuando cuando ella era de bien a Mottola
rebellion este watts aqui en los angeles
for emplo la rebellion n Negri's kanga v
doki de estudiante hey no Sesenta sotto
no Sally amo nada de ESO por que él
natural que los Estados Unidos no Eva a
de haar que su que su otro país de que
él tenía bajo su depression okay tiene
Vasu repression y su control se dieron
cuenta de que dentro de su Fronteras su
minima gente no esta confirm a
conceivably era mucho menos Evo mo estar
confirm a nosotros estamos en dos meses
pasados
this is a decisive time in Vietnam the
eyes of the nation and the eyes of the
entire world the eyes of all of history
itself are on that brutal brave band of
defenders we do not doubt the outcome


honorably discharged for the United
States Air Force on the 23rd day is made
December 66 now at the bottom of this is
an important record safeguarded I pray
the time will forgive me and my brothers
what we did and only just lumping pigs
behind those closed doors not to suffer
and not the junk is me unborn kid we
don't fight anymore but we have to fight
again it'll be to take these steps so
why did you decide to at home identity





like you have time to go that they're
all of you right no you wouldn't know no
wonder we daily oh I don't want to read
I don't want to read I'm an educated
Americans I know what it's about I don't
know I gotta find hours about I wasn't
well more to follow
and I say to you is I know what it's
about across the land that night grew
longer another midsummer manias went
from city to city no sooner was the
setting of fire the looting and the
sniping subside in one community and
they would be fanned into eruption in
another town in another part of the
country we will not tolerate rollin we
will not endure violence
each campus administrator must act
before the trouble starts by making it
clear that participants in destructive
demonstrations faculty or students face
instant suspension

our party was forged out of those two
motifs and firings and the city you were
like out demonstrating all day and
debating strategy and tactics all night
and looking for program addressing the
question of how are you going to bring
us imperialism down well my life was you
know typical typical with life it's like
we know for your press for black people
under this system and stuff and it was
you know early that's what my life was
about earlier was you know that it was
could be characterized by eluding and
combating the police and seeing like
others you know doing like the same
thing or even like being like killed by
more what happens a lot of like you know
just you know Karen brutality when the
pastor's hit the scene it was something
like they were speaking to my every
feeling young girls versus young guys
used to come there with pamphlets young
girl 15 16 years old you know you know
some young guys those tones little older
than that they used to come by my house
with a pamphlet papers and that's what
they were you know they would tell me
they say you know you Drakon into
the Black Panther Party you didn't get
no more safe Salinas obviously like
heavily like Studies classes and groups
and we were reading the red book and we
had to you know discuss it and break it
down and explain and trying to really
like understand some of the stuff that
Mao Zedong was talking about one of
those kind of meetings I found that
really and being able to be part of that
process something that's really what's
really exciting
and we should be like out on the streets
at night sometime you know like this
stalking me you know I guess well we
caught the stock on the stalkers and
stuff and you know the police and these
up you know the enforces of this way of
life the Rules Committee of the State
Assembly met today to review security
provisions in the State Capitol in the
wake of Tuesday's black panther
demonstration Assembly members are
worried because the Panthers brought
rifles pistols and sawed-off shotguns
into the chamber with variable
difficulty early guns and the way to
solve a problem that should be salad but
we people of goodwill and anyone who
would approve of this kind of
demonstration must be out of their mind
about the vacant one of first white
revolutionaries to come out in support
of the passage and you see a matter
they had like rallies at at the Oakland
auditorium where I played over the 67
and 68 rep Brown speaking Saint James
Forman and Stokely Carmichael and Bobby
Seale and Bob Avakian the only white
revolutionary brother be on the stage
speaking with these black militants I
held is clear I guess had offered him
secret membership into the Black Panther
Party let me say one thing to the white
people in the audience are you know
Bobby has been saying for a long time we
will not fight racism with racism we
refuse to stoop to the level of a racist
to hate somebody because the club is
kids well that's fine but I see a lot of
white people walking around they all
good now the Black Panther Party don't
hate me I can go on about my business
that's a cop-out and if you act like dr.
Black Panther Party will hate you not
because you're white but because you
hate taking care of business
organize the other people get them the
need to support the black liberation
movement left by the Black Panther Party
as a strong fearless voice against
American imperialism and to link up of
all people in Vietnam and China and
Angola in Latin America everywhere else
was standing Jordan Shores pride this
vicious beast out of it away and out of
the page of the history
a lot of people at their time because
would like anything like the Templars
like would say people would say always
cool oh it's revolution even what the
pencil was saying they were putting out
something that wasn't like revolutionary
and if they start talking more
about like the real we got democratic
rights we gotta start fighting for our
democratic right and our constitutional
right and all this other old
like that you know people still say that
was revolutionary cuz the Panthers are
saying how can you see for Ronald Reagan
he wasn't you know he wasn't never were
slavery's I remember like coming out
these meetings and it so there's a in
the hallway this Bible baking it was our
vacant this in this Panther they argue
they arguing like a they
are great they did a shouting at each
other and a brother bacon is shouting
that you know mouths a tongue is the
greatest revolutionary of our time and
it's Panthers shouting mile you
know from Milan into it and they
going back and forth like this and so as
the Panthers was like putting him down
Bob was even more into popularizing
Milan popularizing like that kind of
revolution and he had even like went
even further it went further and more
like Philly often there wasn't another
politics at La Salette Tom was about so
juniors there who's a you know pensive
leader and he's dead he's telling me
that I know you see what he's doing
point not pointing to Baba they can see
what he's doing you know really let him
get away with that you know beat his ass
you know so but you know I wouldn't like
do that I'm glad I didn't do that reason
I wouldn't you know know what I was
thinking about that time was because
what Baba victim was saying you know I
was you know I had some green or what he
was saying especially around like Mao
Zedong and especially like around like
Revolution I had more agreement with he
was saying what I had just heard him
that when that beaten fire first went to
jail I had some real conflicting
thoughts about revolution I really had
some real like doubt we can never like
make a revolution here in this country
or we can add the kind of like
organization can be like you know
brought about that wouldn't sell people
out
that kind of like we could never develop
the kind of leadership that they had in
China with mom in the past where we
talked about a lot about like my land
revolution taking up the gun and this
kind of like stuff here but in terms of
like the Cultural Revolution which was
something those was you know
unprecedented yeah that's stuff that
really didn't begin like to understand
really get a hold of until I got the
first great proletarian Cultural
Revolution or the culture evolutionism
people usually refer to it was something
it for me personally I think a lot of
other people who were involved and what
he came involved in that period of time
something was really tremendously
significant I mean here you had a
situation a Revolutionary Party that had
already seized power you know in the
leadership of that party calling on
millions of people throughout Chinese
society workers peasants you know
students you know to get involved in the
struggle to redirect and keep China on
the correct Revolutionary Road and
including within that to direct struggle
against leading members of the Communist
Party who are going down what they call
the capitalist Road dragging Chinese
society back towards the earth kind a
ways of life as opposed to trying to
help push it forward and for the
revolutionize event what it really did
for me and I think for a lot other
people cause it kind of raised my sights
and understanding of what this thing
revolution was all about it wasn't even
a question of just getting some new and
different and better people in power and
letting them want to fight sort of the
question of actually completely remaking
society

we had a mind-blowing effect as a god
people just like us ordinary people on
the bottom of society and we should get
elected to run society there was
eliminating all the bank that people I
think it's permanent we're going to lay
with class revisit your business based
upon like old question between like
those who are what they hear those who
once was they back are the social
inequalities between like men and women
different nationality it was uprooting
and doing away with all that I mean that
represented you know leg represented us
but when that kind of society was
overthrown after the death of my with
the arrest of the revolutionaries would
work most closely within his widow Chung
Chien Cheng Cheng Chao and several
others it was a very big loss I me
because that had been the beacon forward
into the future
people always oh you know associated
with politically was all like you know
checking out everything at China because
we have to switch into the PKM review so
was following you know the tensions
sharp struggle a lot of pieces just
asked us you know about it is but they
know we're going to Peking reviews and
she because it was all on the prison
radio and stuff like this no we had to
lyrics explain it to a tunnel like what
happened the last one the clue like half
an hour you know that was something that
really uh you know if that was it that
was a real like heavy bro I know for
that for us and uh I mean myself well I
couldn't know you know we couldn't like
understand like what happened first if I
meant Ella there's a hi Pooja
why never tandem the shovel we knew that
Calvin Creason mother don't which is a
tool away even you who do
we went over night show we love time
team you know we really couldn't like
figure out I would have went on we had
to we had the subscription to the peak
and review and a print the Mane's of
these different organizations from this
country as well as others welcoming
world world form well you know and
welcoming like the cool and stuff now we
asked one thing that structure we saw
these people sending that big welcoming
letters and it is kind of peaking review
but we didn't see them from the RCPD
and so that made us like thank there had
to be something more going on here than
what meets died Pineville okay youngji
Suki come behind side
it wasn't obvious at all what was going
on in China and a lot of people were
like very you know on edge and it was
Bob Avakian who led this party and to
rally the revolutionaries to uphold mal
and the achievements of the Cultural
Revolution and that was very you know
decisive and important at that time of
upholding the red flag and not letting
it drop you know wasn't what happened
when Khrushchev restored capitalism in
the Soviet Union in 1956 when there
wasn't such a Vanguard party in this
country and wasn't such a force that you
know decisively analyzed and defended
the revolution you know and distinguish
the revolution from counter-revolution
and communism and goulash communism
ideology delando's periodico deep iced
tea now official mentes en la revolution
cultural que esto puede a caso mucho
impacto pero yo no ideology dosa sobre
el pensamiento mm en toda socialism Oh
era no era locusts actual mint que el
socialism Oh es la collector yasiel
Cooney's y que realmente no social in
mythology exist a lucha a classic para
Mesa ante real mentor and conceal lucha
de clases dentro del socialism or VAR AC
algo en el dijo y que todavía z areas
peligro de una buh-booge Asya Secada
dentro del partido mismo pudiera toes
Turia desk are real are una revolución
dragwon
vulva ray Tatom una cosa è la chica
in Edisto por eso dijo que cuando
Judaica e conocía Altieri
see document a revolutionary Oh FERPA
Nami una gran gran Majesco entonces
e-media so completamente diferentes a la
idea de socialism okay tele Imperial
meant a a quaint aquí que era una
pergola some people say yeah well okay
but how do we know that you won't be
like others before you how do we know
you and your party won't be like the
other groups that have come along in
this country those how do we know that
you won't sell out revolution won't be
betrayed either before it even happens
or after it when you just try to turn in
the ohms and for your own benefit but
I'll say this first of all I myself
speaking for myself personally been
fighting the system politically for 15
years I'm going to revolutionary 4:12
and unconscious communists for 10 or
more and I got no intention of being or
doing anything else as long as I'm alive
and for as long as I can contribute to
struggle and they're gonna have to kill
me to stop me from doing that we go to
fight to see that that doesn't happen
even it's not just a question that we
have revolutionary determination we've
got to get to the point where we are to
develop the revolutionary line that we
have now the graph and application of
the revolutionary theory that we have
and there's going to be many sharp
struggles to safeguard to protect defend
that and to apply and enrich and deepen
in the process of leading not just
thousands and ultimately millions of
people and finally I'm going to put it
back to you
and answering this question if you want
this party to remain on the
revolutionary road if you want this
party to continue to be a sharp weapon
of the working-class and oppressed
people for revolution and not turn into
another dagger in the people's back if
you want that to happen then you've got
a role to play in that because if you
want to be emancipated you're going to
have to emancipate yourself ain't no
saviors coming from heaven ain't no
Pope's gonna do it for you
god damn secretary browning Kennedy
ain't gonna do it easy we're going to
have to emancipate ourselves if we want
to be emancipated and that's the only
way it can be done anyway
he's been in exile political exile the
last four years in Paris and uh you know
I mean before that it was like it was
all these death threats on his life he
was under constant surveillance it was
kind of like setting us on a setup setup
where he was living at making blueprints
of his living situation in the house
where he was living at and everything
and with a desperate by like the Secret
Service and by the clansmen and all
these kind of like people here so I'm
glad that he had got one up on him and
uh they would like to get up from out
you know get out the country his
leadership is much too valuable in terms
of our chances to be able to make
revolution



I'm a former Marine I think it's a
please attach marine or just give us 50
technically future cowboys we're going
that situation look around you this big
one is why I better go further back we
needed somebody here to show them
brighter places really proud to be
Americans you don't want to be anything
else
hey we got to do what we got to do if we
have to bomb will be off the map we
should have done it the other day
that's how serious we are the people
that I understand ready to actually mean
a lot of people see it but you got to
understand what it actually means going
to continue with that a you request that
is preparing for the greatest crime in
history you know it's prepared for no
earthly complete with you know the nukes
and all that and you're preparing for
something that we actually that horrible
you know then why not expect them to
mobilize around an all-around
reactionary program they took the
question then getting their forces
together friend of mine once said said
to me here recently Joe man you said man
you know just don't be doing this stuff
here and they said it seemed like what
it was when we stability poise that you
know they got a Reagan up then I got all
actually read next time stuff like this
you often if you're going to be killed
man don't be out here someone who
doesn't happen to do that
so I'd especially like told him that the
other side that's out here to those who
find that very revolting and disgusting
who've always experienced American night
man who can't wait to you know plus the
whole damn thing down the toilet and
came with get their hands around the
necks of one of these good old Cowboys
or Klansmen or something the
anti-abortion is lethal is Berkeley High
yeah
where the point where a group of young
women was going wages you know they're
nuns are like preaching to him about
don't have something I know birth
control and it they always immoral we're
discussing and you're going to hell
sinning is many years older better have
that is better quoting from the Bible on
I thing that you're sinning because
you're having premarital sex you're
using birth control and you're getting
abortions and that make you thinner
well they're the group of young women
start taking the listen yes sure we'll
take a look and there was so croissants
a cetera and burn the shitty
story standpoint or ever here are these
people telling them they layer plus that
they training on tainted cribs changes I
think you know and that yeah the bad
husbands angle many people say that they
don't believe revolution is possible in
this country I'll tell you something for
people who run this country do the state
police helicopter the passed overhead
made a low pass over the move
headquarters and something was dropped
on top of the compound we intend to
evict from the house we intend to
evacuate from the house we intend to
seize control of the house we will we
will do it by any means necessary
the explosive device was made of dupont
tovex be that you know bombs being
dropped in Philadelphia and a group of
black radicals clearly to make the point
about this is what you get you know if
you engage in deviant behavior by which
they mainly if you oppose us in any kind
of way on any kind of fronted when icing
it down literally hundreds of people
when they heard that there was a siege
of the move house that the police had
evacuated the neighborhood and they were
you know shooting another house and all
that literally hundreds of people
gathered at the barricades many of them
tried to get past the barricades to get
up to the house to kind of interfere and
what the police were doing and you know
a lot of them were chanting murder as
literal as murderers when this thing
went down and the bomb was dropped
you know the house burning and the
people were incinerated or probably
someone shot the crowd out here is now
getting to be a massive crowd
I'm looking at people here very I did
not very part of the cat and that young
idol right but this line cat they're
getting that you know we've done a lot
of work in the Philadelphia area we've
talked to a lot of people and a thing
that comes out from literally having
talked to dozens of those hundreds of
people is that they went there not just
to see what was happening to check it
out but a lot of them said hey I was
hoping something would happen down there
I was ready if somebody was going to
step up and read it I was going to go
down with it they were hoping that there
have been just some kind of upheaval
right there on the spot and hopefully
powerful enough to stop what the police
had planted see that's important to see
that kind of sentiment among people and
also to grasp that it's out there but it
requires leadership la revolucion que
sigue en estados unidos tiene que se
bastante frente que no spices Latinos
como Salvador Nicaragua Peru porque la
revolucion ellos se pueden Eskander MS
Montana's


Cardon Aeroflot ariados vamos mijos los
negro immigrant a Blanca Flores para
Mucha gente en si ellos on in Silver
Arrows more deeper especilly para ellos
Imani Harpo la calle in el este de los
angeles or you know gets of a destroyed
Chicago Houston amir al maraa esto es
una razón mas o menos que Mucha gente no
entiendo cuando DT Mos Espa Cindy Arun
ejército dilemma scenario Ramirez rel
Anala porque estamos hablando de unit
excellent a gente que para Mucha gente
no el día con content Prado
todos Posse u da de la combination de
por ejemplo de los Merlot still a
combination con con los immigrant a con
otras acciones
dalliances no solamente la gente de aqui
pero también la gente con experiencia
robinson area en sus propias pices a son
es una combination explosive ax Imperial
is mo h o que que salga Mo's de nuestra
tierra y donde Cacioppo retro co yasya
poor passione economic o porque lo que
ellos para decir por que muchas de aqui
na stanton dosti low-poly politico's que
por que dicen que la siente que c'est
bien a question economica y como noche
mana Denise focus t own economica SI
ellos han bravados drove a nuestra
materia prima indus vast and los pueblos
to air sensual economy Nia




Mucha gente hasta ben de su casitas
polkas cosas que tiene mi país para
venir aquí y su freedos tanto para
llegar a key Venga a sufrir mas Alvar
que en realidad su sueños no puede
llegar a ser realidad por que no se le
de en la oportunidad en realidad puede
la oportunidad para una una de meses
Lebar toilet yandar haciendo de ya
Natori y la miseria que ghana uno aqui
es e mo s taka MST pan dónde estás Bella
Rondo los creaminess a.m. esto cuando la
Plata seond a macho Pueblo el Robo de
nuestro pueblo y tenemos la opción de
luchar y con una posibilidad rein in de
de ganar Yona ya know tan solo ser mi
pueblo por que nuestro Pueblo existing
como tell when our Emerson's you know
where international and we don't
recognize that you know our struggle we
don't recognize see you know limitations
in borders that they set and Chara
you know say that some kind of American
affair or American event you know
revolution
country that's not how we look at it
belongs to the International proletariat
our revolution what we're doing is all
part of that
we do know at the time is not far off on
tremendous storms and upheavals will be
developing we do know but not thousands
but in the period millions of people
will be brought into the swirl of tumult
and uprising
and let's look at it this way the chance
to actually rise up and overthrow this
blood-sucking system the chance to
actually get a jugular vein and cut it
the chance to actually bring down this
monster not only preying on us but
squeezing the life out of people all
over the world the chance to do that
the time when its weak enough fighting
amidst itself exposed enough force to
drive the people to the wall enough
where they fight back and spring back
with the determined resolution to rise
up and overthrow the chance and the
opportunity when that comes along does
not happen all the time does not happen
every year does not happen but once
there only a few times in a lifetime and
we cannot afford to miss it they are
forcing people they are forcing people
mascara season you can stare at the fact
that they're going to use them just one
to die for this country
for the glory of your country poor girl
you go to a soccer game know about this
time what woman - I thought we was worn
by her nunca VI yo-yo aminotransferase
estoy yo creo que estas protesta is mas
importante en la Poste Italiane muchas
comme le yo le dicen files for ejemplos
como en los say centum Nadia parks ah be
a hippie senecio tiempo para el Yost
immunde demostrar on Loki a pasar en via
Nam Mucha gente no creo no Cree latest
errand loco si que no mas se ponen tan
endeavour dia sin sin causa pero ellos
anunciar lo que yo oppas are Mia nada
por eso protests are oh and what about I
mean in two weeks on the mount we could
spend that we do spend on nuclear
weapons in two weeks we could feed
clothes and medical care for everyone in
the whole world yet we get everywhere
except for just a few countries like
Brazil of Central America South America
Africa they're all starving to death
will we live in comfort right now the
movements not amongst the lower classes
but when they move things move and when
they speak you know everybody else
quakes
people are going to be looking for a way
out you know out of the madness out of
what they see and you know not a lot I
think a good section people are not
going to go along with it you know and
the question is where is it going to go
is it just going to be lashing out is it
going to be and then at the end going
along with the program no matter how to
space borders or people may be fighting
very hard and losing no es suficiente
nada mas Mirada what
seokjin area tenemos que preparado poor
case in preparation no still a ganar y
que ramos ganar y el punto de partido el
partido community o scenario exactamente
para que para a las más por el tiempo
cuando esto SI de Becque o'hare las
armas yo ant are gonna insurrection
armada pero si es tiempo s critic o s
critic o en la preparación poetic

appended ro go to our DJ low in sodium
Agassi
now being in the middle of life
hiroshima nagasaki day and you know
preparing for that like all throughout
the summer one part in our principle
community says turning every I don't
remember exact you a today something
about yeah turning every out out all
right approaches approach to it yeah in
before school the war and I think
basically what we were concentrating
learning how to do that here is training
does any different controls normal
public schools we get taught what to
learn you know and not power house it's
a science to be applied you know so it's
not going to be this this is one thing I
really like about it are going to expect
and given set of rules that you follow
in your day to day activity this is a
large organ is what you will follow you
know yeah it's not dogmatic it's
continuous I mean it progresses along
with the situation in the world you know
Iran with everything happens according
to in us each like for example like the
way that the sciences is applied to the
u.s. is not the way we apply to Turkey
for example you know wave pledge of
England is not the way it fights group
because early I think art is only one
ism announcing for five reflect that
because a lot of what they've written it
applies to their time yeah what's going
on in the world at their time and you
think well let's go follow me now
you know that doesn't make sense but it
does make sense because it is a science
and it can be applied now
I used to think of science as being you
know like laboratory huge business
microscopes and this kind of thing you
know I never thought that changing the
world we require as science people I
have thinking that you know that's not
they around right cuz they talk like it
shouldn't like do this so they think
this well gifted people and just for
like for geniuses and not for like let's
call the Terrans could be able to take
on like these questions or figure this
stuff out and just aside until we have
to you know fight against that to fight
against that you know agreeing with our
oppressor about our you know our sales

dear al mundo for employ a swastika las
Filipino I see parent a mentor de la
nada es posible para las Motta's estar
la calle Mucha India la gente esta bien
de mas o menos normalmente a pero con un
equipo con una una creases la gente
Thomas Caius en algunas de Fuca mama
a lot of the people that are like
involved in these struggles and other
points of the world seem a direct enemy
of us and kills the people who is
running the show here and one of the
main things they got to be doing is like
getting in position to nuke it out and
disc it out with the very zealous rival
until the in tonight and this exists you
know they're kind of like trying to keep
the empire together and here you know
people are rising up from South Africa
then we mix there you know literally
next day they gotta bring their six
weeks from the Persian Gulf people in
order to the Philippines and you know
creating tremendous buzz and course of
grain and pollen for our party is a
participant in the Revolutionary Service
along with 18 other parties and
organizations from around the world
including the Communist Party of Peru
right now leading people to war armed
struggle in Cyprus so definitely like
those things we have going for you know
in terms of the sources on a world
player when your system of Doha is in
place what's going to happen I'm going
to have a room for dissent and all that
stuff and people can say their mind and
you know a lot of people people have
been miss educated by what we're talking
about we're calling the radio shows on -
I mean say listen when you're in power I
won't even be able to criticize you
which is the farthest thing from the
truth in fact what we have to say them
is listen the biggest problem with
people like you is getting you to
criticize as once we're in power because
if you'll put up with what's going on to
this system now you're put up with
anything but I'm not going to dodge a
question here far as the Capitals have
been overthrown and new Kappas want to
rise in the party like push up or dunk
shouting and those people in China now
we're running in society and subjecting
the masses to oppression while they're
letting the privileged sector is running
wild those kind of people will not be
allowed to organize and try to put the
masses back in the hell as they've done
there will be freedom for the masses and
majority it will not be seating for
explorers because if exploiters of food
to exploit and the majority people are
not free to be free of that exploitation
so that if under your system I'm doing
the show there's a guy who wants to come
out and say
about you guys well we're going to write
in the television our party gonna leave
the Matthew question about that
I mean you're going to run the hair not
our party's gonna leave the people
invited we're not going to leave the
people like revolution and disappear and
abdicate leadership the people they know
what and the man the people that lead
this revolution take responsibility for
leading them to reshape the society
we're not going to go so long we let you
now you're on your own you know we could
probably write right now you know you
know take over a city very University a
police station or whatever take over the
city and a lot of people are digging
they probably come and join up when we
hold out for a couple of days or
what-have-you like this here but then
after that and you know things to be
back to like what they are and you
know so the only reason we are not doing
something like Ramona like way more like
you know bring these suckers all the way
down and you know create a whole new
revolutionary society and stuff and and
people got to you know become like part
of the process to help like bring that
about help I bring about the situation
so then when we do lots with the guns
and the arms and our hundreds of
thousands and millions electives here
and we have at least a decent chance as
we










## Keywords:
