---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H6_ND2X4-M4
---

# Video
TIM HEIDECKER on cancel culture, Dave Chappelle, Elon Musk, writing music, Neil Young and more!
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H6_ND2X4-M4)

## Transcript:

I wanna know what I Wanna Know
what I wanna do

nothing thanks so much for taking this
time it's a real pleasure
um I wanted to start hopefully somewhere
that I might be able to endear myself to
you and show you that I that I took this
interview very seriously I heard an
interview you did where you were talking
about Sirens have Titan and your
reference of Peter Arnett who is this
great award-winning journalist that you
grew up watching

and you said in the thing you were
curious if you had heard the song
I am yeah I have an update on that for
you okay yeah so yesterday I tried to
get and put on my investigative hat and
I emailed his son Andrew and he wrote me
back this beautiful email and he
basically said the song was brought to
Peter's attention last summer Peter
loved it and sent the link to many of
his friends oh we got a big kick out of
it the video is very well done as well
excellent work Tim is a fine comedian
slash musician and you can tell Tim we
are big fans of his and we congratulate
him on his Sirens of Titan hit that's
amazing that's so nice thank you for
doing that so I I wanted to start on the
comedy side of things because
I'm a recent fan of your work and I
can't believe I've been missing the uvra
for so long but a good friend of mine
this guy Mike Galley he sent me your
stand-up special about I guess about two
years ago and he was just like dude
you're gonna love this and from there
I've just gone down the rabbit hole so
shout out to Mike for for you basically
allowing this to happen today
um that character that you play that
you're about to go on tour
you're not you don't have some funny
name for the it's Tim hijacker right so
who is that version of Tim Heidecker how
would you describe man how does this guy
see the world
well I guess simply he's like the ID my
ID
um
I I he you know he's kind of developed
and evolved or devolved over the years I
it started by kind of being in LA and
going to friends comedy shows and seeing
a lot of people that weren't funny that
were you know kind of flailing up there
and I I grew up kind of a huge Andy
Kaufman fan and Albert Brooks and and
guys that kind of uh took a meta
approach to stand up or comedy where you
Steve Martin is another one where you
kind of the audience has to be kind of
you know aware of
sort of the tropes and traditions of
Comedy to kind of get it and so I
started by just kind of going up and
basically you know in the crudest way
kind of making fun of of failing
comedians so the girls here are sort of
like oh he's married

I tell you usually I'm wearing this here
when I'm on the road this comes off
oh yeah and it kind of worked it slowly
kind of just developed and I kept doing
it and and you know when Trump came
around and sort of the the his kind of
attitude is braggadoshi's kind of uh
Swagger or whatever the sort of this
sort of
um you know
like
it's just willfully ignorant and uh
proud of his of the ignorance uh that
started sort of seeping into the into
the into the character and
um yeah I think it works best I mean I
used to do it as kind of a stunt and you
know I'd say most of the audience
weren't in on the joke and now that I've
been doing it enough in my audience
gets it and and kind of you know
becomes a character the audience becomes
a character uh in that they pretend that
this guy is great you know so
um yeah it's it's very physical it's
very you know uh slap sticky in a lot of
ways with the microphone drops and and
then there's a lot of anger but it you
know essentially he's kind of this
traditional white male feeling kind of
left behind by the world a lot of you
know ancient uh misguided ideas of women
and other cultures and stuff and
a little bit like um you know there's a
little Allen partridge in there if I
were to show that to someone who is not
familiar with sort of the lineage of
comedians you're talking about I would I
find myself saying things like so just
just remember he's trying not to be
funny that's right and but is by me just
saying that by trying to explain it
before does that is that a red flag for
you is that annoying is that not what
comedy is about I hear you I think I get
a little uh frustrated because the truth
is I am trying to be funny you know I'm
trying to be funny in a different way
and I'm trying to make it like there's
no there's a term anti-comedy that gets
used a lot with our work and I
understand it's like a words are just
words and you know we all have to use
them to Define certain things but
um
in the in my work with Eric or on with
Greg with on Cinema or the stand up no
we're never like trying to not make you
laugh we're always trying to make you
laugh and
um and so I think it is funny and
uh but you have to come with sort of an
awareness of certain you know a certain
context to the material or you know to
the kind of Comedy I'm satirizing I
guess
so yes uh in a vacuum you could say this
character isn't funny but the the sum
total of it isn't it is my attempt to
make the an audience laugh but I can't
really worry about where they're coming
from I just have to kind of do my thing
when you came when you started when you
come out and you're having the problem
with the mic I was sitting with one of
my friends and I just showed it to him
and he was he was so confused like what
was happening what's going on but
immediately like when my friend sent
that to me he there was no primer of
like this is a character I was just I
get it that it was so over the top that
it went on so long and you had to sit in
that moment and just you could you could
is this real were you at you know but I
knew of course that it was a bit an
analogous kind of thing that's like very
simple and basic but like you know the
Three Stooges are not good plumbers you
know like they're so and you see a scene
of them uh you know failing at being
plumbers uh we understand that that's
where the humor is because uh we are
watching them fail you know and so
uh you know there's a there's a there's
kind of I've noticed kind of recently a
sort of a wave of uh literalism not
liberalism but literalism in in people
people are just kind of getting like
people expect what they're seeing should
be at face value and it's you know you
you kind of see this more
in comments on YouTube and on social
media and stuff but people are very
quick to react their reaction is
generally kind of
um
taking whatever they're being shown at
face value and and that creates I think
a perception that people don't get it
but you know
uh it's also it's also not for everybody
you know I I totally accept that and I
would say that there's a lot of Comedy
that that you would just classify as
comedy that does not make me smile and I
don't you know care for so right yeah
it's sort of like all right well what's
the difference between those two things
yeah and I think in one way you might be
a little bit referring to the whole the
Opera part of that that was taken out I
think you were saying that it kind of
went viral where you're making fun of
going to the Opera and telling them to
shut up yeah people were like who the
hell this guy think he is like what yeah
what a tasteless dude and obviously
that's a joke yeah yeah I mean that was
incredible and interesting but also
frustrating from a sort of a bigger
macro perspective because it shows that
the people saying that like why didn't
he just uh he leave or his wife should
leave him or you know like commenting on
the character as a real person it
wouldn't take them very long on Google
to get a better context of who I am you
know this show starts Opera starts you
know and I'm looking around this guy's
up on stage some jerks up there going la
la la la la la la la la this in that
looking around an hour goes by
I couldn't take it I stood up I go shut
the
oh
uh yeah it just it points more to sort
of the reactionary literal
um I need to get my take in front of the
public as soon as possible before I
understand what I'm looking at yeah uh
Trend that's that I see happening I'm
prone to just fact checking everything
I'm sure you see it being on social like
how many times did someone walks up to a
homeless guy to offer him money and
there's the hidden camera and you can
tell it's an actor I mean yeah I doubt
everything I see and you know I'm glad
you're sure it's legit so it must be it
must be interesting when you get caught
up in those kind of things
um on on the character just the
catharsis maybe of being able to go on
stage and be rude to someone in the
front audience when maybe there are
times where if you weren't in that
character you could be very annoyed but
you have to stay sort of professional is
there something kind of fun that if you
were to tell someone to just F off in
the front row that they would love that
and it actually feels good doing it yeah
I I generally you know I'm a pretty uh I
try to be a respectful kind uh
individual in society but there is a
there's certainly a fun uh playful
element to just tell you know I I would
do a bit sometimes where I break someone
up on stage and and they'd give them the
microphone to say their name and I'd
take the microphone back and I say you
should brush your teeth and I would
never say that in public you know in my
private life I would never say that
despite how bad their breath is you know
not in a million years would I comment
on someone's breath to them but yes the
character gives me this uh this you know
Shield to be able to get away with that
and in again you know if I did that if I
walked into a random Club nobody knew
who I was and did that I might get my
you know my head knocked off but my
audience generally is expecting me to
behave poorly uh to people so they're
they're up for it
you kind of just alluded to this a
little bit when you said it can kind of
be frustrating when people misunderstand
you but is it do you like the fact that
you have this very dedicated fan base
people who have supported your work
you've been able to maintain that
creative Integrity but like for example
my mom and dad will never understand you
they'll never get it they'll never think
it's funny but people like me are like
this is the the most inspiring coolest
I've ever seen do you do you like
that or is that just something you've
resigned your fact the comedy that I've
chosen that I'm in love with just will
never be that mainstream kind of thing
yeah I mean I always hold hope out for
it to reach as many people as possible I
think the the more that it does the
easier it becomes to do things I mean
purely from like a financial business
side it's like you know if something is
hitting it with with a big you know the
more people you have the sort of easier
as long as you're able to hold on to you
know your creative Integrity I say like
more the merrier I don't I'm not trying
to explain anybody but of course I'm a
realist and understand that uh you know
it's not going to be for everybody but
there's plenty of examples and I you
know again Steve Martin is a good
example of somebody who when he started
and he blew up uh he was just doing what
exactly what he wanted to do and there
was an Integrity to it and for whatever
reason it clicked with the Zeitgeist you
know so you know that happened to to
some extent with with my work with Eric
with Tim and Eric it's like there's a
that has that's kind of like almost
seeped into the mainstream as far as
like you know not to great success of
the original material but that its
influence is felt all over the place and
um and people are quick to remind me of
that when they see something but
um yeah I don't have again these are
just kind of things I don't have control
over so I just do what I do and and see
what sticks yeah it's interesting about
coming out at a certain time in history
when something might be hitting the
mainstream I kind of feel that way like
a lot of rock musicians right now and
sort of the age of hip-hop and rap it's
not really you know rock isn't really
King anymore right um but but curious
too for example like Radiohead for
example if they wanted to do okay
computer again and again and again they
could always write that Perfect pop
album but yet they kept trying to push
themselves and be more creative do you
think if you wanted to try to be
Seinfeld asking like observational humor
that you're like this is a tight joke
written in package do you think you
could do it but you just don't care to
or it's not really in your wheelhouse
I don't know I think yeah it's a very
specific kind of sensibility that I kind
of do a little I mean I think I do a
little bit on office hours which is the
podcast uh morning uh live stream show
that I do with my friends Doug and Vic
and I am a little more I am myself and I
make an attempt to be funny in a more
traditional whatever conventional way
because I'm talking about my own life
and it's not kind of steeped in a meta
character
um so but you know I kind of just yeah I
I I don't I don't have any desire to
sort of pursue that therefore I don't
kind of work on it and uh aim to do that
you're aware of this but people are kind
of talking about this character and sort
of being sort of pressy into the age
we've sort of come into right now in the
age of cancel culture the age of Comedy
is dying if we can't just come up with
ideas and freestyle and talk about
whatever's in the culture right now what
do you think about this whole
conversation about wokism and the idea
that comedy is being suffocated right
now
uh yeah I don't see any real evidence
for it I mean there's all these people
that are complaining or making the case
for it seem to be doing quite well you
know I think
uh Dave Chappelle is probably the
biggest example of it but you know Ricky
Gervais and uh they're all just you know
out of they're all extremely successful
and popular and clearly capable or or
clearly have the the space out there to
say really whatever they want so I it's
it seems like just another
fake controversy
um you know I think it's just also like
as a career as a writer as a creative
person like
Bo you know having the ability to be
open to the world changing around you
and uh and having a sensitivity to that
is just important as a person
so there are Eric and I talk about this
all the time or Greg or whatever
about just like yeah there's just
totally things we did be in our past
that we probably wouldn't do now if and
part of that is because of people out
there who have you know I have been have
been you know activists or uh voices for
um their their causes or their issues
that have you know culture changes
people's perceptions change uh and I'm
totally fine with that I don't think
it's a problem uh I get to have a little
fun because I can play with satire and
do things that are
you know that can be considered
offensive or across the line and I'm
kind of protected or at least I think I
am by the idea that I am commenting on
that issue from the other side uh and
can kind of because that's just how I
feel you know and and I'm ref that's how
I express that a lot of the time so
um yeah it's just it's not a thing it's
fun to write about it's fun to argue
about on Twitter but
um and you know but on the other side of
that
uh there there are things that that
there should be accountability and
responsibility for anything you do and
say so if you are going to take a
position that is controversial or
offensive to a lot of people then there
will be consequences you know so uh if
you if it's if it matters that much to
you and you feel so strongly about it
that understand that that people are
going to be upset by it and that that's
been around forever
and you mentioned Chapel you mentioned
your vase I have questions about each of
them separately and you you set me up
for that nicely because the issue around
this and we'll get get into this issue
of transgenderism because that right now
is the hot button issue around comedy
and in American politics where you are
right now you feel really strongly about
this issue you've been very vocal and
when you are vocal you get a lot of
traction it's on Twitter you Tweeting
about it this week and a lot of you know
attention on that you you posted a clip
of Michael Knowles who's a right-wing uh
daily wire guy and you may basically
called it straight Nazi talk so why do
you feel so strongly about the
transgender issue and can you expand a
little bit on why you felt compelled to
call it straight Nazi talk short answer
I have transgender friends I have close
friends who have transitioned you know
and I I have been able to experience
what they go through through that
process and or I've been able to you
know witness or or sort of an
appreciation for that process I've read
about it I've talked to people
uh you know who have gone through it and
uh and I also just don't care you know
what people want to do
uh it's so and and what I I see it as a
a man you know well I got a little
pushback from this because I kind of
look at it as like a wedge issue from
the right that's where they're like kind
of desperately trying to uh create you
know the fear machine to
uh to to kind of do what they always do
and and the left can do this too but is
to uh make people scared and and and and
and you know keep them on their side of
the aisle
um and it's they're running out of these
wedge issues because they've they've won
the abortion issue in a lot of ways and
gay uh you know gay marriage and and gay
issues have kind of become so normalized
that they sound ridiculous uh with that
issue
um and so they have this they have this
this this transgender stuff that's very
and and the pushback I got was sort of
like because because I said you know
almost speaking to my audience who are
on the fence or have kind of been
listening to this uh rhetoric and
getting ginned up by it's like just it
would be a you know just from my
perspective as a 47 year old man has
been around a while watching this kind
of stuff it feels like a it's just a
it's a cold political tactic to you know
where it's it's a non-issue and and some
people on the on the in the trans world
were like it's not just that people are
actually being hurt by this and people
are you know their laws coming that are
gonna or their laws now that are uh
going to have real consequences so yes
of course it's not something to ignore
but I just wanted to express to my or to
anyone listening listening that you know
you might be uh getting played here a
little bit for political gain by getting
upset about this stuff because again
it's it's it's a it's a very small
percentage of the population that have
any inclination uh to to you know to go
through a transition
so dramatic or so you know kind of
life-changing
um and it's not something that you're
probably going to have an issue in your
own life with you know and if you do
then most likely you're going to find
that the that as if it comes into your
life let's say it's a cousin or a friend
at work or something you're gonna you're
gonna have the experience I have which
is
uh you know getting to know what that
personal experience is and then having
empathy for it if you're a rational kind
of person and realize that okay this is
just this person that that once that has
a different way of thinking and who
cares I I think the word normal gets
thrown in a lot and it's sort of like
why do we care what why are we hung up
on normal and and all these uh
conventions that that as a kind of kid
growing up interested in alternative
music and alternative comedy and art the
last thing I want to care about is what
what's normal you know what I mean and
what you think is normal and uh and a
lot of it just comes down to semantics
and
um of course there's like there there's
an understandable
uh you know window of confusion or uh
the feeling of I don't get this or I
don't understand you know that's natural
um but it doesn't take long to get past
that you know and as long as you're open
to that then there should be no issues
at all
yeah and I think the key word you said
there was empathy and I'm totally on
board with you just knowing people
listening to people and just having an
open heart basically and that's
radically changed a lot of My Views over
my life so I think that was that was
very well said you know a guy like
Chappelle right he's sort of the main
the biggest comedian that goes on stage
that talks about this thing you know is
there a way to make jokes about
transgenderism on stage at this stage
that you think could be done cleverly or
is is it kind of what you're saying the
atmosphere is too toxic that it all just
really feels like punching down
um yeah I I think anything's open to
joke about you know if it's if the
intention is
uh to make you laugh
um and it's so I mean I did this dumb
joke that I'd kind of stopped doing but
it was it was just because it wasn't
that funny I mean it wasn't even for my
character wasn't that funny but it was
like these bathrooms now they're all
gender bathrooms right you got these all
gender bathrooms well it's better than
uh restrooms what am I going to do in
there take a nap you know so that's just
like a stupid right play on words or
whatever but
um it and it has nothing to it's it's
really not commenting at all about it's
but it's coming from a place of somebody
angry about the all gender bathrooms
well who cares you know about all gender
bathrooms it's like if that helps the
line go down as you're waiting to go to
the bathroom maybe that's a good a good
thing but
um yeah I mean I let George Carlin have
this great routine about everything is
funny in the right context you know and
like you talked about rape and like he's
like just all you have to do is think
about Elmer Fudd uh raping and it's
funny you know and it's sort of like I
agree with that I get that some I mean I
agree that that's funny uh that image
um but
so I do agree yeah I mean I I'm on that
side of it I'm a little older and maybe
I'm just like
uh but you know it comes down to what do
you really want to do and what do you
really want to get across and is it
worth it is it funny enough
that it's going to offend people you
know but right um and then you just kind
of don't worry about it and use and
trust your instincts and trust your
friends certainly there's lots of things
we're like you know what that's that's
too much but what
what I kind of uh
realized is a lot of my work does
kind of delve into dark territory
there's a lot of death and there's a lot
of you know pain and and disappointment
lots of these these sort of colors of of
uncomfortability and weird father-son
relationships and you know just like
lots of Darkness that that's in the
comedy and what I kind of the way I
think about that is these are kind of
natural uh sort of fundamental tools
that we use to play with ideas that are
that are scary to us you know and we
play in in waters that are that are
scary or dangerous
to help us process our true real
feelings about things like death and
alienation and uh and you know all kinds
of the dark stuff in our brains so you
know I I'd swim in those Waters often
and find that it it can be healthy for
me and it can be healthy for the
audience who might be like oh I've been
like so strong you know like really
struggling with my you know anxiety or
my fear of my mortality or whatever and
you guys we watch you guys and you joke
around about it and you don't take it
too seriously and so yeah I find that to
be ultimately healthy but understand
that we're in an age where people can be
offended and people have a very big
voice right now to express their offense
so
you know take that as you will yeah and
I think I think your point is is well
taken to the idea of when you do it
you're parroting people to laugh and see
the insanity of those who are speaking
out against transgender people you're
not putting a seed in people's heads oh
these people are mentally ill or these
people are a menace to society and needy
and and you know just creating Havoc so
I I can definitely see that and when
it's like you said people are dying
every day for being good they're being
murdered all around the world so it's
like I just can see like I would why
would I take the risk on that when
there's a billion other topics to
discuss about I mean yeah the other
thing is that like I'm just not a fan of
what I'm calling like didactic uh
truth-telling comedy with quotes around
telling which is a lot of which is a
very popular form of Comedy right now uh
with Chappelle and like Chris Rock's new
special you know like there's this
there's this form of Comedy that doesn't
make me laugh it doesn't make me smile
it is a man on stage
you know stomping back and forth
yelling at the audience about what he
believes is true and there's there's no
possible way that that that person can
truly get down to what is true about any
issue especially when they're also
trying to entertain and make those
people laugh I mean and and I don't want
to pick on Chris Rock because I think
he's generally very funny but I watched
this special and there's a moment where
he does a joke that's like you know
anybody that says words don't hurt has
never been punched in the face and the
crowd laughs and it's a hacky joke in my
opinion and it's not true so what the
you know what I mean what's the point of
of going up there and acting like you're
you know you're almost like a prophet or
something where you're telling you're
getting to the root of something and it
gets distilled and it gets kind of you
know Twisted for the sake of a joke that
he thinks is going to work in that room
and and it becomes kind of turned into
the way people think well I guess that's
true you know I guess that is true that
that words don't hurt you know and
you're like come on man that's that's
cheap you know so
yeah I mean I just I come from it like
already not liking that kind of Comedy
because I think there's just way funnier
things out there to me
and and so when they start kind of
prancing around treating it like they're
giving a sermon about any particular
issue uh I get turned off by that I just
find it not a good use of my very short
period you know a short amount of uh
entertainment time I give myself no and
I think I love it because I'm thinking
you said the word profit and that's your
Prophet Tim hi Decker on Twitter and I
love this idea of parroting people who
think they have a prophetic voice to the
age in time and I believe there are
people that have prophetic voices but I
think the people that say they're that
voice are oh yeah or kind of deluded
biggest red flag there is oh totally but
on Chappelle just just quickly on
Chappelle outside of sort of this recent
turn and the controversy on that issue
do you rate him as sort of one of the
greatest comedians of all time or do you
play some high up on your list I never
and I just total honesty here total
honesty you could think people can think
what they want about me but
I never thought he was that funny I just
didn't you know I don't know what to I
don't know why I never liked the I never
watched all right what I did watch of
the Chappelle show I thought okay yeah I
get it it's like you know well crafted
but it's just not my kind of humor you
know I just there's nothing I could do
about that
um but but then you know as years went
by and it became more just very uh you
know uh
I I disguise again prancing around stage
smoking the cigarette having these you
know I just want jokes you know I like
once I want Steven Wright or emo
Phillips or Steve Martin or you know
um people that that just are delivering
ideas and jokes and character and
um I don't really care I don't want to
be enlightened by your perspective on
the world I don't care you know right I
mean George Carlin maybe is a good
example of someone who did it really
well but he did he had jokes and he had
a voice and and a per you know and sort
of a Persona that that I liked growing
up but yeah the whole style of I mean
I'd rather watch The Three Stooges you
know I'd rather watch uh an Albert
Brooks movie and so it's it's just
personal preference really when it comes
down to that
um on the Ricky Gervais front I know
you've kind of tweeted some some
hilarious attacks at him over the years
and I don't think you're a fan either
and you don't need to get into why you
don't like it if you don't want but I'm
actually really curious if you liked the
office oh God yes I mean because that's
like that was one of that's like my
favorite show of all time and just just
quickly just I think that sort of primed
me to get you later on sure so I mean I
was just curious what you thought of the
show oh yeah I mean I can recall seeing
it in 2002 or one or whenever it kind of
came over here and uh seeing it on BBC
America
quite late at night and and not getting
it not and I was a fan of the
Christopher Guest movies uh so I should
have got it but I didn't know really
anything about it I just knew that it
was supposed to be funny or something
and I didn't pick up on the rhythms of
it right away but then I did and and
just was obsessed with it and was like
God this is exactly what kind this is
this is for me you know this is my style
of humor and
um yeah I mean for me it's sort of like
uh the the office was a tan you know and
Extras is like a nine
and then whatever comes in you know then
you get then you get this like drop off
and drop off and drop off and you're
like wait was that guy was that guy
really just David Brent you know like
you were like how much of that guy was
just a kid not a character and that's
really more closer to who he is but I
don't know I mean he's not like the he's
just a annoying and obnoxious to me and
has sort of come you know sided with the
dark side a little bit on certain issues
I guess transgender stuff and it's very
uh yeah it's disappointing because I
think there was uh yeah I'm not gonna
say I'm not gonna not watch the office
if I because of who he has become you
know but
um maybe Steven Merchant is the real uh
genius there in that yeah good point
good evidence for that I tend to agree
with you on the downside and I was
disappointed like he was the guy for me
that show changed everything for me
comedically
um quickly moving on did the Rogan sort
of thing you did that went viral and you
know Everyone likes to ask you about
this but Joe Rogan is one of the most
influential he's one of the biggest
comedians he sells out stadiums in his
podcast I think he's still like the
number one show like in the world
basically right in terms of viewership
You parody did that and you had this
12-hour conversation that was on Loop in
their sleep we found that they were
having
um essentially dreams wow
um and now what is dreaming
right to find
um
you know I think it's a uh imaginative
uh
um Journey that your sleeping mind goes
on which filters and processes Human
Experience and I know you're really
proud of that thing and we're really
happy that it got the traction that it
got but I'm curious too because
I'm assuming because you know on office
hours you and your buddies are sitting
around shooting the and that's one
of the greatest joys of life so yeah
your problem with Rogan potentially or
Joe Rogan Experience and podcasts like
this is it less about just shooting the
with nonsense or when you take that
into opinion on scientific facts uh yeah
cultural political things is that where
the real beef is at I guess so I mean
the my the The Germ of it is is for me
like trying to have an open mind about
that show and occasionally I will
stumble upon some interview that he does
it's kind of interesting but my first uh
my reaction has was always sort of just
like it's just so boring like this I
can't believe people are listening to
this it's so boring they're not getting
anywhere they don't really come to any
kind of you know conclusion on anything
I don't know I've never listened to the
I've never gotten to the end of one of
these you know I don't know where you
know I just kind of drop off and like
fall asleep or something so I kind of
wanted to get into sort of like how I
think that Joe Rogan show a lot of the
time is kind of almost becomes music or
you know background music for people
because there's no way all these people
are just are sitting there listening to
every word if so it becomes this double
talk you know I I fell asleep to it for
years yeah and that could be part of its
popularity is so ASMR kind of relaxing
two people talking uh but then it gets
weighted as sort of this like you know
uh intellectual uh Bastion of of uh of
higher thinking people coming on and and
I just don't get it of course there's
lots of uh academics and people that go
on there but they end up talking to this
you know grunt who is you know there's a
certain appeal to your interviewer being
kind of naive or kind of you know coming
from a blank slate of understanding to
kind of be in and be curious
and to want to know more and that's you
know kind of putting him as like the
audience you know from it's like you're
you're he's one of the audience so I get
that but then
you know there there's an ins there's
also this sort of inside comedy this
this culture of guys from The Comedy
Store and that kind of bro hang thing
that
doesn't appeal to me but I'm a sad first
you know and I S when I see something
that irks me or bugs me or seems silly
or or and it's in the culture my
instinct is to not like rant about it
like I am with you is to kind of try to
satirize it yeah yeah you know and I
think you succeeded greatly and I love
the idea of the fact that most people
don't make it to the end so people
probably assume you actually talked for
12 hours that's yeah yeah people think
holy they actually but really it's
like an hour and something right and
then you Loop that's the thing is you
can pop in a double broken yeah you can
pop into any Joe Rogan episode yeah I
love that kind of like all right we're
in the middle of something here yeah
yeah
um this whole idea I'm so fascinated by
this idea of grifters and I know you're
fascinated by this in a lot of ways as
well this this word is always in my head
because I'm on Twitter all the time I'm
assessing all these public intellectuals
or figures that are sort of at the top
of the discourse how do you discern
between someone that you genuinely will
start to dismiss and believe they're
they don't believe this this is
and they know it first people that like
for example Ben Shapiro I'm not a fan of
Ben Shapiro but I don't think he's a
grifter I would not call him a grifter
in terms of the views he has spouses
yeah but how do you discern because
sometimes I find it difficult
uh
uh I don't know I don't know how I
discern there's a gut instinct I mean
there's there's obvious sort of
Television you know I grew up watching
my dad and I used to have a good time
watching the televangelists of the 80s
you know these guys Boris Cirillo was
one and uh and of course Jim Baker and
Jimmy Swaggart and so that kind of
instilled uh uh context understanding of
like how sometimes raw and obvious it
can feel when you're speaking in tongues
and healing people with your hands that
just immediately like uh you
know alarms go off
so um I mean everyone's grifting in a
way you know like everybody is slinging
something and there's an ulterior motive
to everything uh and Ben Shapiro I agree
I agree is probably more uh he he is a
genuine uh beliefs that he is trying to
uh persuade people into believing and
but even that it's an It's Entertainment
like anything anything
right yeah yeah is a business model for
to create outrage or to create your
attempt to grab your attention to keep
you there so that he can sell products
and and that I'm not picking on him I
think everybody in all media does that
to some degree
um so yeah I think it's Case by case
there's very obvious ones uh and then
there are there are sort of nebulous
like yeah okay they they might believe
this but they're ginning it up for views
or for you know their own their own
attention
Elon Musk is taking up so much oxygen
right now especially if you're on
Twitter half the tweets are about
something Elon Musk did his tweets are
speaking of grifters well exactly but
I'm curious a I kind of want to lead in
in a bit of a cheeky way because I was
reading some stuff about you and I think
you drive a Tesla at least you did so
yeah
product but what do you think I don't
know the man versus the the designer
well I yeah I got I got them the Tesla
like the four years ago I mean I know he
owned the company but at the time it was
he he was not sort of the Pariah that he
was yeah I know like no and the and the
car is great like I mean it's
the cheaper one just so it doesn't seem
like you know I'm a Kardashian out here
but it's the the bass lot model one and
it was like gee I'd love to have an
electric car and I needed and so it was
like uh it was just it's it still is
just an exciting I'm not a car guy but
it's it's if you've ever been in one
it's just a blast to be in it
and it's good I guess for the
environment I don't know you know
there's arguments but
um yeah and I'm not too lazy to trash it
because uh of his his Antics and you
know I know a company is bigger than a
man or a man is different than a company
but
um yes so you've you've outed me I have
conflicting feelings about it but
whatever
um
yeah and be but he just seems like a I
mean I read this thing about him as I
guess it could be not true but you look
at his background and there's so much uh
you know uh grifty kind of activity with
his you know the the schooling he said
he received versus what he actually
received and all these like you know
this he's a he's a he's like Trump you
know he's a there's a is a self-made
there's a self-made image of him that
has caught on with people that isn't
really true but it's working you know
for him and uh and the the Fanboy is
fanboyness of it is uh perplexing to me
because he just again another guy where
at the core is like this is like a
boring dude you know it's like a boring
uh kind of bad sense of humor
reactionary megalomaniac kind of
personality or no it's like super
intense narcissism involved and and and
yet people people like care about what
he thinks
um and so yeah he's just he's just a
weird one and and most people care
because they're obsessed with money and
they're obsessed with their you know
they're completely uh fast you know sort
of like want what he has or the you know
there's sort of this desire to be rich
and we we put tremendous importance and
value on on people's wealth and so you
know he's a sort of a byproduct of the
society's perspective on that but yeah
no fast I mean I think you should burn
the Tesla live on office hours
there you go um just quickly Switching
gears to something a little bit serious
and if you don't want to get into this
too much and I'm framing the question
the way I think you might be engaged
with but you talked about cancel culture
not really you know being a thing and
people can be canceled then sell out
Madison Square Garden right but there is
this accountability sort of metoo area
and you had a very close sort of brush
with that with the whole Andrew Callahan
situation a guy that you were working
with who put out this this great doc
this place rules and you know has since
sort of backed away because of sexual
assault allegations he's come out and
apologized and seems to be working on
himself you've said I think everything
you want to say about this on office
hours and I watch that but on that
um as someone that was so close to sort
of a me too thing and maybe has taken
time and was already probably thinking
about it any Reflections on sort of what
is at the root of sort of that sickness
I think uh again going back to like
culture changes uh relationships how you
see relationships change and
uh what's acceptable in those
relationships change and sometimes
people are slow to catch up to those
changes I guess would be my only thing I
I live a pretty boring life I mean it's
not a boring life but I you know I have
been married for 15 years and have kids
and I don't
I don't have that uh I'm not in the I'm
never in those positions to be
navigating the new world of you know of
dating and sex out there in the world
and uh I can only imagine that it can be
confusing and mistakes can happen uh and
misunderstandings happen and all that
kind of stuff so I'm glad to not be in
the uh the field of of dating that's all
you know it just seems like a confusing
time and um and uh but there are there
are people out there that should know
better and and
should uh definitely uh always you know
you know it shouldn't be hard I think
generally but I can understand
uh being young and and making mistakes
but you know that doesn't necessarily
apply to the Andrew situation uh but
yeah I mean I I I
my preference is just to not have
anything to do with any of it because I
just live my life and do what I think is
is best for me and uh I can't be I can't
control how other people behave and I
can't uh be responsible for how other
people behave you know that's on them so
that's about it
yeah fair and hope for the best in that
situation and yeah I do believe people
are you know redeemable it's something
that I for sure even and I hope for the
best in that just really quickly I just
remembered you know you're when every
time I study you and keep digging into
your work I realize how transformative
sort of the stuff you've been involved
with has been on me Nathan for you I
think is is one of the greatest shows of
all time and I I read too that it seemed
like At first maybe you didn't get
Nathan Fielder or at least couldn't
really Envision him being the lead on a
show is that true like can you remember
your first impressions like oh this guy
thinks he can be the star of a show and
then when you yeah I mean it's not a big
deal it's just you know he's a very
understated kind of dry quiet guy and I
think he was in the office doing this
other show called John Benjamin has a
van and he had a small part and I I mean
I was just obser I just met him and oh
yeah there's seems like a nice guy I
didn't I didn't know he was as smart and
funny as he is and so that's only that
my you know your first impressions I
don't think I've ever had the right
first impression on anybody you know I
have pretty good instincts but uh I
think yeah it's just sort of like oh
that guy hmm okay good luck you know and
then he proved himself very quickly
I want to get into music because I'm I'm
a huge music nerd myself you know you
just High School love that album and
just super impressed the collaborators
read up my alley Mac DeMarco Natalie
from wise but lemon Twigs who are
excellent uh Kurt vile how much joy do
you get sort of producing this music for
people and working with your friends it
seems like you have a blast oh yeah
um it's really really fun it's chat it's
challenging because uh
I'm not a I'm a knob I'm not a novice
but like you know I'm not a top player
or anything so I kind of do rely on
other more talented people to help me
get the music I I hear my head out
um I just did an album and we're still
working on it and mixing it and stuff
but I just did it with the very good
band who I've been on tour with and I'm
going to the UK with we did it was sort
of the first time I was able to like get
a full you know the same band in the
same space uh for an extended you know
like a week or so just working on the
record not doing anything else so
um
that's just so much fun playing with
these guys
is a joy and I have a lot of uh you know
it like anything I do there's a lot of a
lot of deliberation and thought and work
and and fine-tuning and going back and
fixing and stuff to get it where at
least I'm happy with it so it's a mix of
Pleasure and Pain
um I like to think like
the the joy I get from doing like the
the joy I get is in the writing
and the solving the puzzle of the song
you know is sort of you know all right
where is this song going what's what's
the message or what what's the third
verse going to be and then how does it
sound and what's the all that stuff is
is
extremely joyful and and satisfying and
then I kind of then the record is done
and and it's no longer mine you know
it's yours it's not for me to have an
opinion on even or you know just sort of
like yeah it's it's uh I've I've had my
experience with those songs and that
music so
um but I love the process and I love
working with talented friendly fun
people that I get to uh you know that I
don't know what else I would do with my
time uh with these people you know sit
and have a beer and watch sports or
something but to be able to play music
together is is super fun I mean you
struck gold with your friends and access
to them I think if I could have Natalie
do harmonies over any track of mine I'd
be like I'm set everything I know right
so look how nervous do you get when you
release new music or especially when you
started dude I'm sure you're more
comfortable now because as someone who
has dropped songs Just on like Instagram
from my friends or something there's
something like posting this interview is
way less nerve-wracking than posting a
song I'm curious what that feeling is
like holy I'm gonna put this out
there as a piece of art yeah I've gotten
better at it and more used to it I think
by the time I'm happy enough to put
something out I feel good about it and I
feel like I'm not putting out stuff that
I'm like embarrassed about it's not you
know it's something we put a lot of work
into so I feel like it's good
um I unders and I know I understand that
there are people that uh don't like that
kind of music don't want that from me
um you know so I know that that's gonna
come
and uh but over time in the past couple
records high school and fear of death
there's more of just like oh I actually
like your music
on its own like I don't even need the
context of who you are or I you know and
I I can separate your comedy from your
music and so that just keeps happening
more and more and people are like for me
it feels like it's a cool thing it's
just like a cool
I don't know anybody else doing it that
way where it's like oh I can appreciate
appreciate your work on a couple of
different levels it you know and I I I I
don't I'm not cringe it doesn't it's not
cringy to listen to your music because
because of the fact that you're a
comedian you know what I mean no the
comedy the comedy cringe doesn't
transition to the music man it's great
stuff it's great Indie indie rock and
Indie pop and yeah um thank you yeah no
it's a genuine compliment and I also
just as a quick Point as someone who
dabbles in songwriting I think the less
you overthink and try to get fancy with
chords and just feeling it and putting
it out that's the classics like I'm
always shocked like when I look at like
a Mac DeMarco chord structure like this
whole song is C and G that real song is
just DNA because I'm thinking if I don't
have four or five chords people are
gonna think I suck yeah I almost think
the more limited you are and the less
you overthink it that's where all the
classics come from in my opinion yeah I
agree I have a song that I just uh that
on this new records I think it's going
to be the opening track that's that's
one core
it's a d but it's a capo so it's a play
played like a c shape but
um it's uh yeah and we're like my bass
player now uh my bass player Ellie uh
was like ooh the one Chord Song and
that's like the that's like the thing
that you're always trying to get you
know trying to find uh was the Beatles
song Love uh the word you know there's a
there's a few that you can kind of uh
strive towards and it's short enough so
it doesn't get too boring but
um yeah I agree I don't play I don't I
don't get fancy with chords and I I
think the most amazing thing is the just
bottomless well of three chord four
chord songs that are still out there to
be written you know and I'm like oh
this little the song buddy on my record
I'm like this is just a g c g D7
I've been thinking about you
don't love the that
you've been through
and boy I don't think I've quite heard
it done exactly like this uh right with
this melody you know and like you're
just I'm sure there's things that are
similar to it but uh yeah over thousands
and thousands of songs that I've heard I
think this one's different enough you
know and that's always sort of the
things like Is this different enough
that I can get away with this yeah yeah
no that's such a that's it I'm glad you
agree with that because I think that's I
needed to get that in my head to feel
comfortable doing that kind of stuff
um I loved hearing and reading that that
a Neil Young performance an unplugged
performance was basically the Catalyst
for picking up the guitar there's this
performance I'm curious if you've seen
it too the BBC old man version oh yeah
that's like one of my favorite
performances of all time but you see
that concert yeah yeah there's like a
small crowd around him what do you
remember about that performed that's
like such a pivotal moment for why you
even do music if I if I read correctly
what do you think it was about that
performance in Neil himself
yeah I think it was the quietness of it
and you know he's doing the little
harmonics and in in context of SNL which
is very loud and busy and they often
have big rock bands on just to see a man
in the center of the stage on a stool
kind of command the audience and create
total you know uh focus on him
uh and then there's I there's like a
little bit of a lie in the song because
there's there's that performance which
is just just him and then I think later
in the week or a few weeks later he's on
The Tonight Show and he had a small band
with him and and for the for the drums
he had a guy with a broom and it was
going yeah I watched it in advance of
this it was awesome yeah so I combine I
combined those two memories
um but yeah it was uh yeah I mean there
was I mean of course in any story you're
like simplifying and just and Distilling
something down to for the sake of the
song of course there was tons of things
going on in my life at the time that
made me want to play music so that was
just the one I kind of picked out of the
memory box for the sake of the song but
yeah it's it was strong enough that it
stuck with me I think seeing Randy
Newman is one of your big influences
really struck me a bit because I think
I'm one of those people who have
dismissed him for so long and just only
knew him from The Toy Story stuff so to
the to the Randy Newman haters or like
what is a your argument why he's great
and where should they actually go to
look for the stuff that inspires you I'm
assuming it's not the Toy Story stuff
although I'm not saying no I mean it's
all great I think like the you know if
you you get uh sail away and good old
boys those two records are just
beautiful concept records they're
beautiful
um sounding they just sound the great
top session players of the 70s are on
that record uh stories are great songs
are great you know there there's a real
uh Singularity to both of those records
that are very warm to me and and it's
just a very intimate listening
experience I think you just kind of warm
up to his voice it's that that thing of
like he's got a very distinctive voice
um and it's not for everybody but for me
it really it really struck a a chord
no pun intended the artificial
intelligence in the creative space I was
struck by the fact that Sirens of Titan
kind of looks like what an AI is
creating for artists today and I feel
like you might must have strong opinions
on whether or not you think AI coming
into the songwriting process music video
uh album covers is this something that
you're against are you for it are you
okay with this sort of evolution I'm uh
on the fence I think you know I always I
assume the AI is already making most of
the music I hear at the mall or in
Waiting rooms you know I don't I don't I
don't get most pop music that I would
hear in like the salon or anything it
just it sounds completely
manufactured by you know algorithms
um and so that that's gonna that I mean
there's that's an inevitable uh
trajectory for sort of consumer pop
music that just fills spaces and Airway
you know and public spaces
um I think it I think AI can be a great
tool
um
it's I think it's uh from talking to
some people that know more about it than
me there is I think it's another in the
same case as the transgender thing it's
a little bit of an overblown story I
think it's still many years from kind of
truly replacing a lot of the things that
creative people or any people do it
still requires human input in a lot of
in a lot of ways and Direction and so
um I don't feel like I'm gonna be
replaced by it I think it's going to be
helpful as a tool in a lot of ways so
I'm not like anti-ai I think there's
probably going to be a lot of good that
comes of it and the crap that comes out
that's already crap if it's made by AI I
don't really care one way or the other
you know nice
um are there any cryptocurrencies you
want to shout out the listeners should
go by right now uh before we add Five
Points
yeah awesome I know you hate
cryptocurrencies
um dude you've been so generous with
your time super pleasure honored to meet
you thanks for doing all the creation
you do and inspiring people like myself
I'll see you in London yeah see you in
London cheers
Wanna Know


## Keywords:
