---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mRT5zXAwvBs
---

# Video
Tim Maudlin | Bellâ€™s Theorem and Beyond: Nobody Understands Quantum Mechanics | The Cartesian Cafe
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mRT5zXAwvBs)

## Transcript:
it is the requirement of locality notice
right not causality which is the
determinism part it is the requirement
of locality B couldn't be clearer than
this where does Copenhagen fall into
this Copenhagen falls into this as not
being a clear Theory okay I see okay
they're just not clear enough about what
they're doing despite it being textbook
quantum
mechanics welcome everyone to the
cartisian cafe I am your host Tim win
today we're very lucky to have Tim
modlin here with us Tim is a philosopher
of science specializing in the
foundations of physics metaphysics and
logic he is a professor at New York
University a member of the foundational
questions Institute and the founder and
director of the John Bell Institute for
the foundations of physics welcome Tim
how are you doing today I'm fine I'm
glad to see you again likewise um I
thought we could start out by you
telling us a little bit about your
career trajectory uh for myself uh when
I was growing up I always knew I wanted
to do some combination of mathematics
physics and philosophy I mathematics
ended up being the more dominant of
those three but I I feel that if
circumstances or opportunities had been
different I I could have easily done
some other combination of the three uh
you ended up doing a combination of
philosophy and physics uh how did that
come
about well this was just I was one of
those undergraduates who was interested
in everything um so I took a lot of
different courses when I when I started
out actually I my intention was to
become an architect in my freshman year
I took courses in civil engineering um
and I I took course you know I took a
course on Bach I took I mean I took all
kinds of stuff but there's a kind of
past of mind that naturally leads you
into physics and into philosophy and
into mathematics actually to to to an
extent as well which is a kind of
foundational interest in a certain sense
of
foundational um so like to say there's a
there's a sense in which it's it's not
quite what many people think it is but
there is a sense in which people say
well biology that's just really fancy uh
cellular stuff and cellular stuff that's
just fancy chemistry and C CH chemistry
is just fancy physics and once you get
down to physics that's not fancy
anything else that's the bottom level um
and that the laws of physics for example
are supposed to be completely Universal
and exceptionalist whereas the
principles of biology or economics or
chemistry or whatever are not um and so
in a way physical law is more rigorous
or more objective than the principles
that are used in other Sciences so
there's a
certain push down W in a certain sense
of downward that leads you into into
physics um that same push downward on
any topic leads you into philosophy sort
of well what is this after all at base
um you know what are beliefs after all
or or you know what what is the good
after all um where you're not so much
interested in the particular cases as in
the fundamental
principles um and and that will also
lead you and led Plato into mathematics
because mathematics seems to have rigor
in its proofs it's a place where you can
actually demonstrate things where you
can get at the truth and know you've
gotten to the truth so certain
epistemological issues come up there so
I think math physics and
philosophy certain parts of philosophy
form a natural
group
um in the in the the John Bell Institute
that I founded by Charter and I wrote
the charter um there are six Governors
and two have to be philosophers two have
to be physicists and two have to be
mathematicians
because all of these fields give you
expertise that's relevant for doing
foundations of physics so it wasn't too
much of a surprise that I was interested
in both physics and philosophy lots of
philosophers of science their background
is either in math or sometimes in logic
um and of course if you're doing physics
and you're interested in a foundational
way you get interested in math because
math is the language in which physics is
written and then you need to think about
how that works and how you can use
mathematical objects to represent
physical reality it's a very subtle
question um so yeah I I I can imagine
going off in any of these directions and
being pushed a little bit about what
you're just naturally best at I mean I
was a pretty good physics student
but there were ones that were better and
there were certainly much better math
students than me so I ended up getting
my PhD actually in history and
philosophy of science which makes sense
and specializing in in physics and
that that's great um in in terms of
going further along in your career not
now you're a professor and uh uh you
work at the I guess intersection of
philosophy and and and physics uh my
experience with Academia has been that
it can be very uh let's say
compartmentalized right to have a to to
to be in Academia you need to be
squarely in one Department you're you're
in the physics department or the
philosophy department and and there can
be kind you know maybe very little
interaction between the two if at all
and it can be quite dangerous even to to
work at the intersection of fields if if
you're you know the physicist might
think you're a philosopher the
philosophers might think you're a
physicist so you can kind of easily fall
through the cracks if you try to do uh
interdisciplinary work um is that at all
mitigated by being a philosopher of of
science yeah uh I mean it's certainly
mitigated in the philosophy Department I
mean it it's certainly the case that you
that physicists will look down not just
on philosophers but pretty much anybody
who doesn't have a degree in physics
right um I mean that's the
stereotype and and there's you know more
than a smidgen of Truth in it so you
have to overcome a certain attitude that
physicists often have for somebody who
who who doesn't have a an official
degree in the subject um not the other
way really that is uh
philosophers are quite welcoming and
they appreciate technical background
they understand that if you're going to
do philosophy of science sure it's a
really good thing that you understand
the science and you've studied it so
it's it's not as if I've never come
across anybody in philosophy who said oh
you know too much physics to be doing
philosophy you know that this sort ofes
just doesn't make any sense um and and
historically of course many philosophers
were also physicists and mathematicians
I mean Dart and lietz and I mean Newton
was doing natural philosophy and he's
somebody we discuss so there's not a
there wasn't a historical division there
and and contemporary philosophy for
philosophy departments are if anything
very welcoming to people who have
technical backgrounds that seem relevant
to philosophical questions um much more
than physics departments are welcoming
to people who are have been trained to
do a certain kind of conceptual analysis
and Clarity of
argumentation um which is really what
you get out of a out of a uh philosophy
training is a very
self-consciousness about arguments and
argument forms and where arguments can
go wrong um and what tacit
presuppositions there are and what
follows from what um that's what a
training a good training in philosophy
will make you very sensitive to and I
think that's why you know
Einstein complained about the physicists
of his time that they didn't have enough
philosophical background um you know I
when he was young they had reading
groups reading Hume and he appreciated
philosophy and he appreciated the kind
of rigor that philosop that good
philosophers bring to their arguments um
of course bad philosophers it's the
opposite the world yeah lingering on
that that uh interplay between physics
and philosophy a little bit longer do
you think in in uh today's climate there
uh with you know the current interaction
or lack thereof between physics and
philosophy do you do you feel that there
there should be more interaction it
seems that
Einstein uh you know his philosophical
thinking very much informed his his say
formulation of uh general relativity and
maybe his view of physics at large um do
you think the next breakthrough uh
conceptual breakthrough in physics will
will require maybe some some
philosophical uh
considerations I I mean there are two
parts to that there's the kind of plain
vanilla part that nobody should disagree
with which is that any such breakthrough
requires really rigorous thinking
Clarity of
thought um and
unfortunately that is sadly
lacking in many physicists even about
things that aren't controversial um I
mean sometimes I feel like if if by the
time I give this up if I can manage to
just explain how the twins Paradox works
correctly so people don't make mistakes
about it that would be an accomplishment
and there's nothing controversial about
it nothing really that hard about it but
but physicists physicists get it wrong
all the time I mean Fineman got it wrong
in his lectures explaining what's going
on in that case um why not because
there's anything really hard there but
they're just not careful enough and they
they kind of repeat what they've been
told this is the way most people work is
They Don't Really Work Out things and
understand them they kind of if they
hear it 10 times then they'll repeat it
the 11th time um and think they
understand it and that that happens all
the time now you know in in
relativity the real experts in
relativity understand all this it's not
news to them in in quantum theory it's a
mess and even the people who would be
considered to be the greatest experts
are often completely confused um and
just conceptually confused um and that
needs to get cleared up so it's much
more
that rigor of method that's needed here
than philosophical insights in the sense
of some big I don't know Conan or healan
or
whatever you know system that's going to
clear all this up that's not going to be
it but you certainly need to be more
careful in argumentation and in
understanding the fun Al principles of
the theories that you're
using um and that has not been
encouraged in physics departments for
over a century largely because of
quantum
mechanics actually uh in a in
a separate uh conversation we had uh we
were you actually thought that maybe U
current physicists were working on some
some of the wrong problems I don't know
you mentioned the black hole information
Paradox things like that I I don't know
if you want to comment on that as maybe
a specific example that oh yeah I
mean that that's a case what's going on
everybody realizes correctly that
there's a difficulty bringing together
relativity and quantum theory I mean
there's difficulties just at a
mathematical level and there's
difficulties at a conceptual level
and kind of grasping its straws for some
way to make progress and they hit on
this
idea more or less quasi
accidentally that that oh I can describe
black holes that that the laws that
govern black holes look kind of
analogous to thermodynamic laws right so
that was noticed by Hawking and um and
so on and then and then that got pushed
further oh well once you do Quantum
field theory on a curved manifold you
get this Hawking radiation so
really uh there is a thermodynamic
entropy to black holes and then we can
somehow have to think hard about black
hole thermodynamics that that's going to
help us put together quantum mechanics
and relativity and I think that's
just that that that's just pure
desperation to begin with because we
have exactly zero empirical evidence
about black hole thermodynamics and zero
empirical evidence there even is hawking
radiation um and very little I in my
opinion understanding of how the
calculations that give you Hawking
radiation work and what the principles
from which it is derived are and then
you just kind of get this mess that's
jammed together and all these people
think oh if I can just calculate the the
number of possible interior states of a
black hole and then calculate the black
hole entropy and if I can get that
number to come out right that shows I'm
on the right track I mean string
theorists have been saying this kind of
stuff for quite a long time and and then
doing calculations that everybody ad
nobody can follow from beginning to end
and kind of wheel in all these different
weird principles and nobody can give you
an intuitive explanation for how they
work and they say but look we got the
right number at the end it shows what
that string theory must be correct
because it's giving us black hole
entropy I mean this is just I mean it's
the kind of thing that doesn't stand up
to scrutiny it's just the kind of thing
that picked up steam because it was
something you could
do um there were kind of rules of the
game sort of AI rules of the game um but
if you really step back and say is the
right way to understand how to put
together relativity in so far as they
can be put together relativity and
quantum theory going to run through the
root of black hole
thermodynamics that just that that
that's just so off-the-wall
um and unconstrained certainly by
anything
empirical and you can't I I I literally
can't understand it on the other hand I
mean to give you the contrast what do we
know we know we have experimental
confirmation of violations of Bell's
inequality the the the Nobel Prize was
just given for that experimental
confirmation that's a fact that's an
established experimental fact and if you
understand the significance of Bell's
theorem you're going to say man that
gives me a real conflict with relativity
right
there and a conflict that doesn't come
out on relativity side because general
relativity could not predict violations
like that general relativity is a local
theory in Bell's sense and general
relativity taken as it was written down
could not possibly explain or account
for or predict what you see in the lab
with respect to violations of bells
inequality that's real hard stuff I mean
that's not fantasy that's out of the lab
and with some very simple argumentation
so I think it would be much more
fruitful for people to be thinking hard
about getting non-locality into a theory
that
still from which relativistic
constraints emerge in some natural way
so you you you of course you need to
understand why relativity works as well
as it does and why various relativistic
principles have led to good
predictions um even though EV there's
every indication that the fundamental
picture of Relativity can't really be
right oh very interesting and I think
that's maybe a good segue for us to get
to the uh main part of our discussion
today so uh today we'll be talking about
uh Bell's theorem which is uh quite a
remarkable theorem in that it's both uh
profound and overlooked at the same time
profound because it's it's a surprising
and Central result in the foundations of
physics but also overlooked because uh
it's not something you're taught in any
standard Physics course I've never seen
it advertised on a on a physics syllabus
and so many of physicists can go through
their entire career without ever uh
needing to think about Bell's theorem um
but it's it's it's also kind of funny
because mathematically it's it's quite a
simple theorem it's not not at all
difficult to prove uh but the the really
difficult part is really getting the
conceptual understanding correct what
are what are the actual assumptions um
what are the different trade-offs if you
try to vary the assumptions and maybe
want to hold certain things to be true
um getting the terminology straight uh
and and that's really where the
difficulty lies um and in fact the
difficulty is is is sufficient that um
even the Nobel Prize committee when they
wrote the description for um for the uh
2022 prize uh for the work of espe uh
clauser and Zinger when they described
the significance of the prize they they
also uh messed it up and I we'll get
into that later um so so yeah so so
Bell's there is quite funny for for all
these reasons um maybe before we dive in
and give an outline of what we're going
to talk about uh I guess you sort of
already alluded to it but maybe uh can
you can you just give us a summary of of
how to think about Bell theem what it is
and why um anyone should care sure so
the the the topic of Bell's theorem is
locality and you you have to just stop
there and say that's what it's about
it's about in in particular local
causality in a certain sense that Bell
makes clear sometimes people call it
Bell
causality um it's not about just as as
far as the misattributions of the of the
Nobel Prize committee it's not about
so-called hidden variables theories of
quantum mechanics that's what many
people think it's
somehow they mistakenly
believe that uh
the net effect of bell was to rule out
so-called hidden variables in quantum
theory
and the the the problem I mean there are
many problems with that but for anybody
who doesn't believe there's a problem
here's an observation the most famous
hidden variables understanding approach
to quantum theory is the de BR bone
pilot wave theory and John Bell wrote a
very nice paper called on the impossible
pilot
wave advertising the theory and he
claimed elsewhere it's the best
constructed Theory it has it shows the
best craftsmanship of all the approaches
to Quantum Mechanics he says that in in
Quantum Mechanics for cosmologists or in
six possible worlds of quantum theory
one of those he says of these different
approaches you know bom shows the best
craftsmanship so people somehow managed
to convince themselves that Bell had
ruled out a theory that he himself long
after his proof was advertising and
supporting and promoting and that should
tell you right off the bat you don't
understand what bell
did you know he he wouldn't be out
advertising a hidden variables theory if
he thought he had ruled out hidden
variables theories right that just makes
no sense and it it it wasn't his point
in fact the point of the the the theorem
has nothing to do with quantum mechanics
and it has nothing to do because even
the term hidden variables only makes
sense in the context of quantum
mechanics and the theorem is not about
quantum mechanics it's about any theory
that is locally
causal and by that essentially we can
just say this if you're if you're
familiar with relativity any theory in
which all of the causes of an event lie
in or on its past light cone okay so
let's just take that I mean we could get
go into maybe much finer detail but just
take that so take a theory where
anything that could have a causal effect
on a certain event is in or on its past
light cone which means that light at
least would have would be able to get
from the cause to the effect right so
cause as as it were causation can't go
faster than light in the context of
Relativity um that's a causely local
Theory and and of course in in that
sense for example maxwellian
electrodynamics is a causely local
Theory um and if all you had was
maxwellian electrodynamics you would
never predict violations of bells
inequality um that's not a quantum
theory and that has nothing to do with
hidden
variables uh Newtonian mechanics is
going to be causely local as long
as causes only influence their effects
by some process that doesn't go faster
than life then it'll be causally
local and what Belle shows is that there
are
constraints on the sorts of phenomena
that a causally local Theory can predict
or account for and then what you notice
is that two things the first is that
quantum theory predicts violations of
those
constraints that's very interesting but
more interesting and much more important
is that you go into the lab and do some
experiments and irrespective of quantum
theory the experiments violate those
constraints the outcomes the data from
those experiments violate the
inequality and so that tells you leave
quantum mechanics aside
entirely that physics cannot be locally
clausing um and to that extent yeah
something as it were goes faster than
light it has
to um that brings immed immediately the
tension with relativity into sharp Focus
if you think that relativity forbids
that now you've got an absolutely clear
attention there um now you can argue no
relativity doesn't really forbid it well
what really does relativity forbid what
really are the principles of Relativity
what does really relativity say um you
can then get into a lot of detailed
questions that are very interesting and
very important um my first
book quantum locality and relativity was
just saying okay if if you think
relativity forbids something from going
faster than light just what is it that
it forbids going faster than light and
then finally maybe you don't think it
forbids anything from going faster than
light then what does it do right what
are the fundamental principles of
Relativity and these are questions which
can be asked and answered and
investigated but you have
to have a a very high premium on Clarity
and making distinctions and so on to do
that kind of work and often people
don't all right and on that note that's
that's why we're making this episode so
that uh we can try to get the story I'll
say one more word maybe that'll help
people it is often again a mistake
commonly repeated mistake it's well
known that Einstein didn't like quantum
theory as developed by bore and the
so-called Copenhagen school he really
didn't like it
it is often mistakenly said that what he
really didn't like was the indeterminism
the god plays dice stuff but that's not
what he really really didn't like what
he really didn't like was the spooky
action at a distance stuff okay what he
called telepathy that that the that the
Copenhagen ISS had to use telepathy to
get their to get to get their
predictions and he said he couldn't
accept that that's
non-locality that was really the issue
from the beginning for Einstein was that
he saw quantum theory as exposited by
bore and Heisenberg was non-local it had
this spooky action at a distance and he
couldn't accept that um so it's
worthwhile you know to see that that the
nub of the whole thing from the
beginning was nonlocality and that what
bell what Einstein Podolski and Rosen
were focused on in their paper in 1935
was non-locality what bell is addressing
is
nonlocality only Bell's consequence is
that you have to accept it right you
can't avoid it so his his conclusion is
anti- Einstein but it's on the topic
Einstein was worried about so as you
mentioned we talked about Bell theem but
of course to to properly understand Bell
theem we have to understand it in the
context of the work of Einstein Podolski
and Rosen in fact you know Belle's paper
was called on the Einstein Podolski
Rosen Paradox of course we have to look
at that first so anyways let let me
write down what I think is is going to
be a suitable outline for us and and
let's just uh well let's just see how it
goes so the first thing we're going to
talk about is as you mentioned the sort
of the Prelude to this whole
business which is the uh EP Paradox
coming from Einstein pilsky and uh Rosen
um so that will set the stage for for uh
therefore Bell's theorem so we're going
to look at it I think from the you know
try to try to follow Belle's uh paper
first of all because well that's the
source of the theorem uh and and uh well
we'll go from there and we've been
talking about Bell theorem but Bell
theorem produces an inequality there
have been several versions of this
inequality uh going by various names but
but they're all kind of collectively
referred to as Bell's inequality and so
that we'll we'll get there when we talk
about Bell's theorem um but uh the thing
with Bell's theorem is that it the the
kind of inequality that you get from
that paper is is maybe not so um easy to
understand uh it's not that intuitive
and what's really nice as I learned from
talking to you in the book that you
wrote there's a simplification uh that
one can uh Implement I'll call it the uh
GHz version named after uh
greenburger uh horn and
Zinger and what's nice about this
version is that we can get a much more
tangible um feel for how Bells
inequality is violated um in a way that
the original paper doesn't make so clear
so so it'll be very instructive I think
to to kind of do that and it also
separates a lot of sort of the
extraneous kind of assumptions and and
and you know kind of uh thoughts around
Bell it just disentangles things very
very cleanly so so it's it's nice to do
that um I thought what we could do after
that is then maybe we could now that
we've kind of put all the technical
details out there maybe you could you
could maybe um uh uh State what exactly
the 22
Nobel Prize significance was um yeah you
know what they did in terms of the
actual experiment or inequality that
they they showed was violated um and
then after maybe we do that we can kind
of uh clean up a few things and talk
about uh misconceptions you've already
alluded to those uh pertaining to beler
and there's there's uh there there are a
lot of them and they're persistent so I
think it's good to to to to really kind
of uh uh make it clear what what what
those misconceptions are um and then
sort of On a related note there are also
well once we've kind of um explained
things mathematically we can also talk
about what are really the necessary
assumptions behind Bell theem so Bell
theorems necessary assumptions as
opposed to uh maybe the happen stance
assumptions that that people often
describe Bell's theorem and then we can
therefore talk about uh you know and
once we actually have the necessary
assumptions we could talk about say
loopholes things like super determinism
and whatnot um and then just to round
things out we can maybe finish with say
talking about uh interpretations of
quantum
mechanics so uh yeah a lot of lot of
fascinating topics uh a lot on our plate
today how do this look let let me just
make one correction okay sure of course
here uh hold on let me get my P here
where you've written
Paradox it's an argument ah okay
and this is this is you know again a
point that Belle makes they they didn't
regard that paper as producing a paradox
a paradox is something that you kind of
don't know you don't know what to make
of it right um they thought no there's a
very clear question before their mind
when they write the paper and it's the
title of the paper is a quantum
mechanical description of reality
complete so it's just a qu you have a
thing a mathematical gadget called a
wave function and when you do quantum
mechanics you ascribe to any system a
wave
function and the question they asked was
does that give me a complete description
of the system that is if I know the wave
function does it somehow represent
either directly or
indirectly all of the physical
characteristics of that system um there
are many ways to to phrase this one way
to phrase it is take any pair of systems
that are given the same wave function
are they physically identical or there
can there be any physical differences
between them right
um that that question either is yes or
no and the whole paper is is arguing no
it's not complete that quantum mechanics
that that description whatever it is
cannot be a complete description it's
got to have left stuff out in in the
same way that um I mean maybe this would
be an analogy if I have a box of gas
okay it has a temperature let's say
classically but that's not a complete
description of it because lots of boxes
of gas that are different in their
microscopic details can have the same
temperature um that's you know the
temperature gets at something but it
sure doesn't get at everything because
you have you know avagadro's numbers of
particles with particular positions in
momenta and a complete description of
that system
would specify all of that and if all I
do is say well it's a 38Â° Centigrade I
sure haven't done that um so there are
various ways in which a description can
fail to be
complete if it's complete then you're
saying physics is done right somehow all
the physics there is I've I've
represented there's nothing more to find
and and what they were doing was arguing
that quantum mechanics hasn't done that
right and unfortunately bore and so on
were arguing that it had I mean it was
they're only making this argument in the
context of the Copenhagen
insistence that you can't go beyond what
they'd done that they'd reach the end of
the
road um they'd gotten to the very bottom
of things and the very bottom of things
was first of all not deterministic and
second of all had various other
characteristics of complimentarity and
so on um that Einstein thought no I mean
why should I believe that why should I
think that what you've done is is the
end of the story and they were giving an
argument that it
isn't um so that that's what I I want to
say if you say it's a paradox you would
think at the end of the day Einstein
scratching his head and saying oh I
don't know what to make of this but it's
just the opposite I know exactly what to
make of it right qu mechanics is not
complete okay let's say in contrast I
don't know Zeno's Paradox were because
they didn't have calculus they didn't
know how to think about it is that is
that right yeah I mean Zeno's Paradox
exactly you know you you you hear Zeno's
Paradox say about the about Achilles and
the
Tortoise and you say well gee this
argument seems to suggest that Achilles
can't catch the tortoise but of course
Achilles can catch the tortoise right
you don't I mean at the end of the day
you can say yeah now I understand Zeno
that the fastest runner can't catch the
slowest animal right so you're just you
you know something's gone wrong
somewhere um but you don't quite know
where I mean Einstein's not saying
something's going wrong somewhere here
he's saying I'll tell you where it's
going on okay all right well well the
name stuck so I don't know I mean uh it
is called
the and I'm not blaming you for that but
it is important to see quite honestly I
think this is why again I'm just
channeling Bell here when he said they
didn't think it was a paradox I think
calling it a paradox already puts you on
the wrong foot about what exactly it is
right and then if you're on the wrong
foot at stage one it's not going to get
better going forward um I think you know
what what bell saw was that was that
from their
premises epr provide a perfectly good
argument and he saw that one of their
premises although this one's a little
buried it's a little bit hidden is a
locality
assumption and so what he saw was yeah
if you accept the locality assumption
that's implicit in epr you better you
have to accept their conclusion which is
that quantum mechanics is in complete
sure okay why don't we dive into the uh
what what the epr argument is so so that
now we're going to start unfurling with
these with these uh terms we've been
talking about uh mean so uh yeah why
don't we go to the next slide and maybe
you can give your your formulation of
the epr argument I know we've talked
about this before that epr sort of well
they have the formulation in their paper
I know you like to think about in terms
of a simpler setup I I would agree with
you because it's going to make things
simpler later so what yeah go ahead feel
free to describe it in the way that you
think is most help so the the
the the place where locality is going to
be
buried is is in what epr write down as a
Criterion of reality okay and they're
very careful also about their
terminology here so I'll just write and
I'm sorry again about
my
handwriting um they're very careful
about what about their words okay then
they say a Criterion
is not a
definition a Criterion is a sufficient
condition but it doesn't have to be a
necessary condition right that is I'm
not it would be a much bigger task to
say I'm going to as it were give you a
complete definition of physical reality
or of what it takes to know that
something's physically real I mean
they're not attempting such a thing they
wouldn't know what to do but they're
they're doing something much much much
milder but they think completely
uncontroversial and I think it is what
they say is completely
uncontroversial um so what do they say
they say look how do how do I tell that
there's some real physical
characteristic or feature of a
system well suppose I'm in the following
situation suppose they say without in
any way disturbing the system so let's
just put that that's going to be
important right so
without
disturbing the
system I can do what if without
disturbing the system I can predict with
certainty how it will behave right so
then you get can predict with
certainty so my predictions are never
wrong right it's not a
guess this is with complete accuracy
suppose the system is such that in this
situation I can predict with complete
accuracy what it's going to do in some
circumstance say if you you know subject
to some
experiment then there must be some
element of reality in the
system that makes it do that I mean
there there has to be something in the
system that that is going to be
responsible for producing that
behavior yes I mean if I can know what
it's going to do and I'm not disturbing
it something in the system there is
making it do that that's the Criterion
right so I can predict with certainty um
then the conclusion is there exists an
element of
reality can I just uh um get a
clarification here because we know for
example that uh we have indeterminism in
quantum mechanics but more generally if
you have a situation which of
indeterminism uh could you state what
this Criterion who it's the same
Criterion I mean look it might be that
you're in a situation where you can't
predict anything and therefore the
Criterion just doesn't apply that
doesn't mean the criter wrong it just
means it's not useful okay okay in order
to apply it I have to be able to make a
per a perfect prediction this this this
means it's a very it's a very narrow
Criterion I mean it's a
very it it it doesn't apply in many many
many cases interestingly enough it
applies in the of course it applies in
the case that epr
analyze right they can apply it because
they are in a situation where you can
make perfect predictions
under under certain well-defined
circumstances according to Quantum
Mechanics so all you're all you're
accepting here about quantum mechanics
is its predictive
accuracy and that's something that even
bore is not going to want to you know
throw overboard right everybody's going
to agree that the quantum everybody to
for this argument it's taken for granted
that these predictions of quantum
mechanics are correct
yes so you're right if if if I were to
say gosh in my theory I can't predict
anything with certainty then you'd say
well then this argument will not get any
purchase so let's talk about the Brit
now now what the what happens to
understand the history
here is that when Einstein Podolski and
Rosen write this paper they're doing a
couple things as far as I know for the
very first time or anybody any in any
case anybody paying
attention they're first of all looking
at a system that involves a pair of
particles that can be separated
arbitrarily far apart so as we now say
you create a pair of particles your
system is a pair of particles one is
sent to Alice way over there another is
sent to Bob way over there in their
separate
Laboratories and that's something you
can
do um certainly according you know you
just can do it and in of course
according to Quantum Mechanics you can
do it so it's not really an issue but
you've got this pair of
particles and the
only
experiments that they're interested in
are ones we call and you have to be
careful about this terminology but we
would call position measurements and
momentum measurements that's all they
discuss that is the only degrees of
freedom in the system are position and
and and
momentum not spin not polarization and
the reason I'm saying that is that part
of the history is epr formulate their
experiment with position and
momentum later David bone reformulates
the argument for spin or
polarization and then Bell picks up the
spin and polarization example because he
can do things with it that have clear
physical significance that you couldn't
do at all with just position and
momentum I mean it wouldn't work it
wouldn't you wouldn't know
experimentally what you're talking about
so the
transition to the spin example or the
polarization examples that everybody
uses now is important conceptually now
the next point to make is that even
though Einstein Podolski and Rosen make
their argument separately for position
and for momentum given the state they
write down it's
really unnecessary for the argument you
can make the argument just looking at
either just looking at position or just
looking at momentum and I think that's
often a mistake that people make is they
think it's really important that you can
do both it isn't um rhetorically it's
useful that you can do both because it
it it gives you something to shoot at
Heisenberg uncertainty
relations um but that's not but but the
conclusion that the quantum state is
incomplete which is the main conclusion
follows just from thinking about either
momentum or position so let me do it
just for
momentum okay so are we all sure if
we're all on the same page we're going
to simplify this down so what do we have
we have two particles they're prepared
in a certain Quantum state which they
write down the epr
state particles are sent off to two
different Labs arbitrarily far
apart now what is the characteristic of
this Quantum State it's what we would
Now call an entangled State although
that terminology didn't exist at the
time
and it's a state of of net total we
would say total momentum
zero so the the momentum of the pair of
particles for sure if you check both
particles if you as we say measure their
momentum the total momentum will be zero
which means whatever momentum one shows
up with the other will show up with the
opposite right if Alice's is going at a
certain velocity in this direction Bobs
is going I mean they're equally massive
Bobs is going at the same velocity in
exactly the opposite direction okay
that's the important thing is that that
there will be according to Quantum
Theory a perfect correlation or in this
case
anti-correlation between the outcome of
Alice's momentum experiment and the
outcome of Bob's momentum experiment and
they know that they know that because
they know how it was been prepared now
it turns out and again this is just a a
on the side it's also true for position
measurements that is if at a certain
time Alice makes a position measurement
on the basis of her outcome she can
predict perfectly the outcome of Bob's
if he's making the same kind of position
measurement so you can make the same
argument either just for position or
just for momentum I'm just going to use
momentum because it's easier it's
actually mathematically simple sure and
I think math just to just to write a
form to ground what you just said I
think basically what you want to write
is something like this so your wave
function s will basically be a
superposition of states that look that
look like the following you have say I'm
just going to use you know cat notation
because that's it's just easier to write
instead of all the variables that you
don't really need to write down but
there's like basically P of Alice and
let's say tenser with minus P of of Bob
say and then you could just take a you
know a super position a sum or an
integral of them depending on how you
want to think about it but that's
basically for all the different right
for all these different right so so if
you ask Quantum
mechanically given how this pair of
particles was
prepared Can I with predict with
certainty what Bob will see what result
he'll get answered no there's a whole
range of different results he could get
and quantum theory will give you
probabilities for each thing in that
range there's a whole range an equal
range but in the opposite direction for
what Alice could see right so Ed bym
here the sum here tells you what that
range is right yeah and and and the the
theory does not make a strict prediction
for either what Bob will see or what
Alice will see but the Curious thing is
it does make with certainty a prediction
that whatever Alice sees Bob will see
the opposite and vice versa
right this is the this is the source of
the
puzzle because what we we get these so
let me just write down what you get and
again you don't need this for for a bell
inequality but it makes the argument
simpler if you have it you have perfect
correlations right you have predicted
sorry just write that down perfect
correlations so here's something here's
something absolutely nobody can
possibly object to if the predictions of
quantum theory are
correct then if if Bob makes a does a
momentum experiment in his lab
once he sees the outcome of his
experiment he is now in a position to
with perfect accuracy predict what the
outcome of Alice's similar experiment
will be whatever he sees he knows she's
going to see the opposite he doesn't
know before he does this experiment what
he's gonna see but he knows whatever it
is it's gonna you know she's gonna see
the opposite that's right so if we look
up at at at at the Criterion of reality
we've got the can predict with certainty
part right Bob can once he's done his
experiment he can predict with certainty
what Alice will see yes now the only
other part of that Criterion of reality
is without
disturbing the system that is did Bob by
doing his experiment in his lab in any
way disturb the actual physical state of
Alice's
particle yes now Alice can be 100
billion billion miles
away it's here that that in a kind of
tacit way they think it's so obvious
they don't even say it this is where
locality comes into the epr argument
they just thought it's obvious that if
Alice and Bob are are are in their labs
and they're sufficiently isolated from
each other far apart and maybe even
light doesn't have time to get from
Alice to Bob or Bob to Alice in doing
these experiments then clearly whatever
Bob does he's not disturbing Alice's
particle that's the Loc
assumtion yes so let me just write one
one more thing so basically what's going
on here is that uh let's say Alice is
going to uh make a measurement of
momentum right and then she's going to
get let's say some value P star and as
soon as you do that uh you're going to
collapse the wave function onto now uh
this uh Vector which is just P star
tensored minus P star and since Alice
and Bob are very far away away they
could not have Disturbed each other
nevertheless there's now this perfect
correlation between the the measurements
that they've gotten yeah I mean I I mean
what you say is perfectly correct and
people who understand that will follow
it the the main question and this was
the question Einstein had from the
beginning from the 1920s was when you
talk about collapse of the wave function
is that a physical thing or is that
merely an epistemic thing right when you
collapse the wave function do you think
that that is literally a physical change
in something or is that merely getting
information now what what bothered
Einstein was that he thought they had to
treated as a physical effect and if it's
a physical effect then Bob by doing some
experiment in his lab has a physical
effect on Alice's particle because
Alice's particle goes from being in a
state of indefinite momentum to a state
of definite momentum that's a physical
change
right and that would be SP spooky action
at a distance that would be telepathy
that would be the the very thing
Einstein couldn't believe in that that
Bob by doing something in his lab has
any physical effect at all on Alice's
particle but if you take the collapse as
a physical event it does because the
normal thing would be to say oh Bob does
his experiment then I Collapse the wave
function the collapsed wave function is
now different with respect to Alice's
particle
right so you've changed Alice's particle
State and Einstein thought that's crazy
right that's buy action at a distance
that's telepathy that's
non-locality so their assumption is no
no no no no all all Bob does is find out
about his
particle and on the basis of what he
finds out he now knows something new
about Alice's but nothing has physically
changed now Bell
uses this example of berlman
socks to get this
across so let me just talk about the
example for people who haven't read this
this wonderful paper berlman socks and
the nature of reality which is a funny
title and it's a funny paper but um you
know the the physicist berlman who's a
friend of of of of bells apparently
actually as a matter of fact for
whatever reason decided he would always
wear socks of different colors um so he
gets up in the morning and he puts on a
pair of socks and you can't really
predict what color any sock will be but
you can predict if you know burlan
they'll be different so if you see one
sock and it's pink now you know
something you didn't know about the
other sock namely it's not pink right
because there's a perfect correlation
there but again there's nothing spooky
about that there's no action in distance
there's nothing like seeing one sock
suddenly changes the color of the other
sock no no no they had their colors all
along right they had their colors since
he put them on in the morning and all
you're doing is finding out something
you didn't know which is what color is
on the right foot and when you find that
out and you know also about burlan you
now know something new about the color
of the sock on the left foot but you
didn't disturb the left sock right
you're looking at the right sock did not
change the state of the left
sock and Bell's point is that that's the
way Einstein thought about all this he
thought there's nothing at all puzzling
about these
correlations if you think they have
their momenta all along if you think
Bob's particle and Alice's particle
already had the momentum when they were
created one p and one minus p and maybe
you know if you do the experiment many
times you'll get a range because it the
experiment doesn't prepare exactly the
same right state every time but it
always prepares a state where one is the
opposite of the other then all of this
is very easy to explain and there's no
spooky action at a distance but suppose
you deny that suppose you say no no no
when the particles were created they had
neither of them had any particular
momentum at
all then you have two puzzles right one
puzzle is why when I do what I call a
momentum measurement I get any result
because you're telling me it didn't have
any momentum coming
in and maybe there you IND you you even
say oh it's really indeterministic right
there's nothing that explains why you
got this result rather than another any
of these results could have come out but
then you have the much deeper puzzle how
does the other particle know what the
first one did and this is what you know
Belle says in this paper he says it's as
if a child had had asked but when you
look at you know suppose you think the
socks don't have any color at all until
you look says how does the second sock
know what the first sock did when I
looked at it right so there there's a
connection between the indeterminism and
the
non-locality if you have this perfect
correlation and there's anything
indeterministic on one side then you
need
telepathy or action at a distance to
communicate that result or to restrict
the result on the other side so it
always comes out different for the side
what you're saying is that basically if
you have
indeterminism which is what we have in
in in quantum mechanics right um and you
have uh perfect correlation corations
then that requires spooky action at a
distance right okay right and then we
can just turn that around and say if you
have perfect correlations with you which
you do and you don't want spooky action
at distance then you can't have
indeterminism right then you infer it
has to be a deterministic theory sorry
says if there was any residual
indeterminism it would just spoil the
perfect
correlations right sorry I was busy
writing could you could you repeat that
uh last part sorry so yeah so you've got
indeterminism plus perfect correlations
implies spooky action in a
distance logically that's equivalent to
giving you
correlations plus no spooky action in a
distance right
okay gives you no indeterminism that is
gives you
determinism sorry
equivalent it's modus Pon modus tol yeah
yeah sorry perfect correl I'm just I'm
just being dense
here yeah plus plus no spooky action at
a yeah yeah yeah Okay no Okay so let's
just say Okay so locality yeah no no no
action at a distance

yeah implies determinism I believe you
said implies determin yeah okay and
that's where I mean I have this quote
we've in in barrelman socks because it's
I I think it's very
important you have to hear Bell's own
personal frustration here right um so he
says
uh this is on page 143 if anybody has
has this version um it's important to
note that to The Limited degree to which
determinism plays a role in the epr
argument it is not assumed but
inferred right it's not an it's not an
axium it's a
theorem right it's not something he
starts with it's something he arrives
at what is held sacred right what really
is the fundamental Axiom or the
fundamental principle held is the
principle of local causality or no
action at a distance of course mere
correlations between distant events does
not by itself imply action at a distance
but only correlation between the signals
reaching the two places so if you you
you can imagine setting up these cases
where yeah um you you have a signal you
know that's sent out to to to Alice on
one side and Bob on the other and and
when Alice gets hers she knows what
Bob's GNA get or people say you know
terar a dollar bill in half and send one
half out to Alice and one half out to
Bob they don't know which one's coming
but once one sees theirs they know what
the other one is right that's there's no
spooky action in the distance in that he
says um these signals in the idealized
example of bone must be sufficient to
determine whether the particles go up or
down now we're going to repeat this for
spins for any residual indeter
indeterminism could only spoil the
perfect
correlation right if if whenever the
particle gets to Alice something really
indeterministic
happens and that result cannot be
communicated to Bob then Bob can't
always get the opposite
result right I mean that whole paragraph
is it if you read that paragraph
carefully you see first of all the main
thing is epr do not assume determinism
they derive it they what do they derive
it from they derive it from the perfect
correlations which were predict by
quantum mechanics and a principle of
locality
right and that's what you have to
understand Belle Belle understood and he
kind of assumed that anyone who read the
epr paper would understand that is a
good inference now how do you get out of
it well it's easy to get out of it if
you don't like action in a distance you
just have to deny the completeness of
quantum mechanics because you say no no
no you know in this experiment when Bob
got this particular value and Alice got
that that particular opposite value
those were determined from the beginning
and in the next experiment when Bob got
this different value and Alice got this
different opposite value that was also
determined from the beginning but the
quantum mechanical states that you use
in both cases are the
same but that means the quantum
mechanical states were not complete
there was more information there was
more stuff going
on and that stuff extra stuff was what
determines the
outcomes right that was already
determined at the Source what the
outcomes would be and but but the
quantum State used to make these
predictions does not give you that so
it's incomplete that was their total
conclusion they said look quantum
mechanics is not giving you the whole
story the only way to maintain it is is
to is to buy this spooky action at a
distance and take this wave collapse
seriously as phys as a physical event
rather than just conditionalization on
new information I mean one way to put it
is the only way you can conditionalize
on new information is if there's new
information you didn't know from the
beginning right if you already knew
everything you can't get new information
you knew the wave function of this pair
of particles if that's all there was to
them then you can't get new information
about them because there is no new
information about them sure let me let
me make a few comments just to kind of
maybe um summarize and state where we
are right now so the the first thing we
uh observed in terms of what we talked
about in the previous slide and which
can be thought of in terms of wave
collapse uh was was this first thing
that I'll start right here indeterminism
plus perfect correlation equals uh
non-locality uh and this is this is
logically equivalent to this
reformulation down here and this
reformulation is the is the epr argument
right that that is the conclusion of the
paper that uh perfect correlation and
locality which they want to keep uh
leads to determinism and uh well they
don't say it in those words what they uh
what we mean here by determinism in the
language of epr is that the wave
function is incomplete right the quantum
wave function that's
right so that that's the way e form the
again the title of the paper is is
quantum mechanical description of
reality complete and the answer they
offer is no and and and and furthermore
that the only way out of that conclusion
is is to embrace this spooky action at a
distance which they just regard as being
insane I mean I mean they certainly
think if you're going to embrace that
you better have a better
reason than has been offered here right
because this is a huge thing you're
taking on and I can easily give you a
local
theory that will make all these
predictions right I can easily give you
a local Theory where Alice and Bob
always get opposite momenta and Alice
and Bob also if they do position
measurements can now predict the other
one's position measurements without any
spooky action at a distance I just
predetermined both what the momentum and
the positions will be now at that point
you know you run into the in into the
Heisenberg uncertainty relations and you
can make a kind of slightly sharper
point and say the quantum mechanical
formalism doesn't even contain a state
of definite position and definite
momentum right I mean there's no such
even mathematically
the the the formalism of the theory
doesn't allow for such a thing a state
that has a perfectly well- defined
momentum and a perfectly well defined
position so of course if you say well
the way to get out of this non-locality
is to preassign a momentum and to pre
you know to predetermine the positions
then you're just going to have to go
beyond Quantum formalism but that's okay
that's just because Quantum formalism is
incomplete it's a kind of I mean
Einstein always thought the quantum
formalism was more like a statistical
description of a system which is an
incomplete description or or say a
thermodynamic description as I said if I
give you the if I give you the
temperature of a box of gas I'm telling
you something about it but I'm certainly
not telling you everything about it yeah
let me let me just say what maybe
another thing here because I know it
took it's also you know it's uh taken me
a while to kind of get used to this
language but in terms of uh maybe
another way to illustrate this last
Point here at the bottom right if we
think about it in terms of coin flips
right this the thing about deter ISM
versus indeterminism if every time I
flip a coin let's say I get heads you
get tals or if I get tals you get heads
there can't be any indeterminism because
if there was still some Randomness left
in your coin flip result then there's no
way we could always get opposites right
so the only way for us to get opposite
coin flips is if there's a deterministic
connection that always guarantees the
opposite result exactly exactly so let's
just think about this case I mean it's a
perfect case I give I give you a coin I
take a coin we go just go separately in
our labs and flip our coins and and we
record the results and we see no pattern
right it just looks random each of us is
getting heads half the time and each of
us is getting Tails half the time and we
there is no algorithmic pattern to H the
H's and
T's um so both of us say well maybe this
is really a random coin I mean really
really an indeterministic random coin
every time you flip it there's just a
50% chance it comes up heads and a 50%
chance it comes up tails and nothing is
determining that but then when we get
back together we notice that whenever
you got H I got T and whenever I got you
know you got T I got H that there's this
perfect
anti-correlation then the natural say
well they can't be completely random in
that way now there are two things that
could happen it could be that from the
beginning your coin was programmed to
come up tth you know blah blah blah and
mine was programmed to come up with the
Opposites that would do it or maybe one
of the coins really is random but
somehow when yours comes up heads it can
communicate telepathically
to my coin even though my coin is very
far away and instantaneously hey I came
up heads you come up TA you know you you
come up tails that would do it too right
then you would as it were have a little
bit of
indeterminism together with a a causal
connection that's keeping them tallied
right those would work but once you
notice that the that the streams on the
two sides are perfectly correl
ated you got to that's something you
need to explain sure sure but and let's
just pause here so in the in the way
that epr are thinking about it if this
were the coin flip scenario they would
reject the communication between the
coins and say wait these coins are
actually determined right exactly they
would say look if you can all right we
have one hypothesis they would say yeah
this is a hypothesis that they're
communicating with each other how can we
rule that out well let's just take them
further and further apart let's put them
in rooms further and further apart first
of all even if they were communicating
by I don't know radio waves or whatever
the the signal should get weaker and
weaker right because I'm separated but
also now if you really want to be sure
flip them at the same time or as we
would say it's space- likee separation
so even if they had were jam-packed with
radio transmitters and radio receptors
there wouldn't be enough time for a
signal to get from Alice to Bob or Bob
to Alice then it's hopeless right they
they would say I mean then you need to
violate relativity you have to have the
information get there faster than
light so they would say of course even
even if you can't quite figure out how
these things are being
predetermined now it's not it's of
course not so bad because in the in the
case they have it's not like there's
just I give you one coin and give me one
coin and we keep flipping the same coin
we do it every time on a fresh pair of
particles so all you need is to say okay
this pair of particles is prepared so
this one will come tails and that one
will come heads the next one is prepared
so this one will come heads and that one
will come Tails right I don't need but
you know in each case you say look the
the preparation procedure just
predetermined what they were going to
yield and predetermined them to be
opposite and nothing spooky is going on
at all right it's just the particles
bring that information with them when
they get there yeah but it has to be
deterministic right they have to bring
enough information so each one knows
what to do right sure sure maybe just as
an aside and I I think I think we'
probably uh well U stated the epr uh uh
argument by now but let me let me just
kind of Linger on this determinism for
for a second here because it's I think
there's something interesting uh maybe
uh going on here in the sense that um so
so so we all learn uh at the very
beginning when we learn about Quantum
mechanics that the results are not
deterministic when I measure the
momentum or position I'm going to get
some distribution of values um now it's
interesting
that that in and of itself um is not
something that Einstein was upset about
or wanted to uh to to counteract but in
the end he does get this conclusion of
determinism not from vanilla quantum
mechanics but from this coupling of the
two particles experiment that we just
did where there's now uh a potential
non-locality and it's by sort of
opposing that that you end up getting
determinism but it's not determin it's
not opposing determinism in and of
itself when you first introduce the
axioms and the wave claps it's it's it's
the outcome of this so it's it's
actually kind of I think that's worth
noting it's very the thing that epr
bring into this discussion which is
novel is this entanglement between
distant particles that's right that's
right it's standard quantum mechanics
it's just nobody had thought about how
to apply how standard quantum mechanics
applies to a pair of particles where
each of the part the particles have been
well separated from each other yeah
right and what Einstein realizes is wait
just standard quantum
mechanical technique allows you to write
down what we now call these entangled
states where you can predict these
correlations out of these entangled
States even though you can't predict the
particular
values now the word correlation gets so
abused here many people will say um the
following thing which is kind of
incoherent they would say in the state
that they write down
e neither particle has a momentum but
the two momenta are correlated or
anti-correlated and this is just kind of
syntactically doesn't make sense you
know if if if something doesn't have a
value for its
momentum you can't say it is correlated
or anti correlated with something else
that doesn't have a value I mean you can
say correctly that the the physics is
such that if I do a momentum
experiment on both sides the outcomes
will certainly be correlated or
anti-correlated but you can't say that
that A A system that doesn't have a
value for some quantity also that value
was correlated or anti-correlated with
something else that doesn't have a value
right it just it makes no sense I mean
it's just literally gibberish to say
that but people say that all the time
say oh it's it's not so puzzling because
the the entangled state is correlated no
it's not correlated right it's entangled
and it predicts
correlations but if you say the state
doesn't actually have a
momentum you can't say the momentum is
correlated with anything yeah I mean I I
me it's just a a wording issue but of
course what they really mean I'm just
I'm back on on the uh second slide now
it's a superposition of these perfectly
correlated States yeah yeah any anyways
uh let's not get boggled with the
semantics we're gonna maybe have many
more opportunities for that which will
be more meaningful but uh yeah so I
guess just just just to uh wrap this up
I think the the the point I was trying
to make and and I guess you agree is
that um if you were only dealing with
the quantum mechanics of a single
particle no entanglement then there
would be no argument against determinism
and you would just have indeterministic
Quantum Mechanics for a single particle
State it's only when you bring in the
second particle use entanglement you get
this uh non-locality phenomenon and then
you if you're epr you say no we we don't
allow that and though we have to get
determinism absolutely because if you
have only a single particle I'll just
say a word for people understand this
the only condition where I can make a
prediction with certainty if if it's
already in an igen
state right but if it's in an igen State
then I can read that off of the quantum
state right so I don't have to say the
quantum state is incomplete because the
quantum State just is an igen State you
say oh yeah that gives me the
information already mhm so you would you
wouldn't you wouldn't have any latitude
to argue for the incompleteness of the
quantum state if you only had a single
particle okay great um all right I think
this now sets the stage for um Bell's
response to this epr argument right so
so the E argument just to again
summarize that's that's basically kind
of this box here that we've sort of
discussed at length now um okay why
don't we pick up with now how Bell
enters into the story good so and and
let me do an intermediate step I
mentioned this before epr paper the
discussion is only of position and
momentum measurements so kind of the
only experimental setups you would even
discuss in that paper are you know what
we call a position measurement what we
call a momentum measurement whatever
they are as I said you could really just
do it with one
set what between that when when when
David bone writes his textbook on
quantum theory
he takes the same setup but rewrites it
for
spin for the quantum mechanical property
of spin what year is this by the way so
you epr was 35 what was yeah well his
textbook came out in 51 I think okay
okay okay because bom bom produces this
textbook called quantum
theory he's at he's an assistant
professor at Princeton he would like to
discuss it with Ein I mean there's this
famous story he really would be
interested in discussion he's kind of
scared he doesn't know Einstein he's
trying to find somebody who can ask
Einstein and he gets a letter from
Einstein just out of the blue and says I
read your book it's a really interesting
book come talk to me about it and and
that's 19 that must be 1952 I think
because 1951 1952 because after that
conversation and again bom writes this
book which is very much in the
Copenhagen style it's an exposition of
quantum theory from the point of view of
Copenhagen and Einstein says this is the
clearest Exposition I've ever read I
think you've done a really good job of
clearing out a lot of the obscurities
right of what bore was trying to say but
I still have problems and and and bom
goes to talk to him for an afternoon not
more than a couple hours and he famously
comes back I think his I think actually
his roommate was Gman or anyway he was
talking to G man who was also Young and
he comes back after that and he says
after this he says I'm back to square
one Einstein has completely convinced me
you know this is on the wrong track and
I assume that it was exactly the
discussion of non-locality anyway with
then by 1952 he's already written this
paper quantum mechanics in terms of
hidden variables of the pilot wave
theory which is a deterministic theory
deterministic non-local Theory um that's
what wakes up
Bell that was you know
the the that that's what awakened him
from his dogmatic Slumbers was you know
he was told when he learned qu mechanics
Bell well yeah it's kind of weird but
you might think there's a deterministic
theory that could give you these results
but there isn't and that was supposedly
proven by vanon noyon and
um Bell at the time didn't read
German and he couldn't check what Von
noyman had written and he says he just
put it out of his mind he said well
that's strange I don't you know he says
I guess you know the the normal thought
would be a kind of Einstein's thought
maybe quantum mechanics is more like
just a statistical Theory because it
deals in incomplete
descriptions um and it's only giving you
statistical predictions because it's not
taking everything into account yeah and
and Bell raises this with his professors
and the professors assure him that Von
noyman has proven
no such Theory could give the same
predictions and then Bell says he he One
Fine Day in 1952 he wakes up and reads
bom's paper and he says bom has just
done what I was told was impossible I
mean I can see in this paper he has
produced a deterministic theory that
makes exactly the same predictions as
standard quantum
mechanics right so he immediately knows
that what he was told as an
undergraduate was untrue or as a
graduate it was just untrue it was just
false um it takes him a while to get
hold of a English translation of an
noyman when he does he very quickly puts
his finger on the assumption that van
noyman makes that he says is unphysical
and kind of a silly assumption to make
foolish he says foolish assumption what
what is that assumption the assumption
is that so you have these operators
right so in quantum mechanics you have
these hermiss operators that are
associated with what are called
observables like position and momentum
or spin in different directions and
those operators mathematically are
related to each other by certain
mathematical operations okay they're
linear combinations of each other and
what vanoyan assumes is that if there is
an additional quantity that's
determining the actual
outcomes that those quantities have to
be related to one another in the same
way that these operators are related to
one another
mathematically
and it's easy to see that can't work and
Belle says you know you see immediately
off the but there's no reason for that
to be true there's just no reason to
believe that these additional quantities
that you're going to
introduce have to have the same
mathematical relations among them as
these Herm Mission operators have among
them so you can see it's a very clear
assumption right mathematically it's a
clear assumption it's just physically it
makes no sense it's not a natural
assumption physically if for example if
two if two Herm Mission operators are
some linear combination right if if a
third operator can be written as a
linear combination of two of these Herm
Mission operators then the associated
underlying values that determine the
outcomes of the experiments these new
things I'm introducing they have to be
mathematically related to each other in
exactly the same way the other things
are these additional variables that go
beyond the quantum description that
actually determine the outcomes oh oh I
see okay I I okay I think they're just
not in the normal part of quantum
mechanics that I'm I'm these are the
things that people mistakenly called
hidden variables there's additional
variables I mean go again go back to e e
says look the quantum state is
incomplete okay then to complete it I
need additional variables right I see to
complete it I need to add some stuff and
I'm gonna add stuff that actually
determines the outcomes of these
experiments right the experiments are
already associated with these Herm
Mission operators but that doesn't
predict exactly what'll happen that only
gives me statistical predictions yes now
I'm going to add some variables that
determine the actual
outcome but they don't have to be
mathematically related to each other in
the same way that the permission
operators are mathematically related to
one another so anyway I mean what
whatever it was you know Bell says look
I just have a counter example I mean Von
noyman can't can't have proven that a
so-called hidden variables theory is
impossible a deterministic in fact a
deterministic hidden variable theory is
impossible because I have one in front
of me here it is you know it makes the
same predictions B you know bone proves
it in this paper so Von noyman made a
mistake or at least I mean some people
try to defend Von noyman certainly
everybody understood that's what V Lyman
had proved and this was just a counter
example now the thing about the theory
that bom writes down which was already
de Bry had the idea back in
1925 so this is not a new Theory it's
and and and and Einstein himself had
been fooling around with theories like
this in the interim we know but he never
accepted them why not on its face this
thing is non-local I mean there is
explicit in your face spooky action at a
distance in the Dynamics of this
Theory so of course if Einstein looked
at that theory he would see the theory
but he would say that's not the kind of
theory I'm looking for I'm looking for a
local Theory this is a manifest
non-local
Theory but it is a deterministic theory
it's a theory where there's no
fundamental Randomness at all the
outcomes of all the experiments are
already determined from the initial
State and the
Dynamics so Bell asks himself the
question huh I wonder if I can do what
bom did only get rid of the
non-locality right I know I can have a
deterministic theory that gives me all
the right predictions the one I've got
in front of me is also non-local can I
actually eliminate the non-locality in
the way that Einstein wanted let let me
just what Einstein wanted all yeah so so
basically bom uh right so uh bom right
he
eliminated
indeterminism but there're still uh but
still has nonlocality right and now bell
comes along and says oh can I get rid of
uh well I don't know how you phrase it
but get rid of non-locality is that okay
can I can I have a theory like bomes in
the sense it's deterministic I mean look
Einstein had already proven in the epr
paper if you want locality you need
determinism right well bom gave him
determinism but he didn't he didn't get
rid of the non-locality right it's a
deterministic but non-local Theory
there's still
non-locality and so of course it's going
to occur to you but wait if I'm if it's
a deterministic theory i c at least in
principle I can get the epr correlations
without any
non-locality that's kind of trivial
that's like berlan
socks just predetermine the outcomes and
predetermine them so they're always the
opposite yes yes so so so Belle says but
now can I as it were do something like
what bone did get me give give me a
deterministic
theory there's no longer the epr
argument that you need
non-locality so can I do a full theory
that gives me all the quantum mechanical
predictions but is is local and
therefore local and
deterministic right that's the problem
that he has in front of him but notice
it's not again it's not because you care
about determinism it's because you care
about locality and you already knew if
you wanted to hang on to locality you
had to go to
determinism right that's the part where
epr infer determinism they don't
presuppose it they infer it from
locality so he says I wonder if you can
do this have do this and get all the
quantum mechanical predictions now the
advantage that that bell bell had that
Einstein didn't have certainly at the
time of epr was was because bom has
reformulated this in terms of
spins he's got a whole bunch of new
experimental conditions to think
about so
um the way to put it is this if in the
epr case the only experiments you talked
about even in principle were momentum
and position and the whole point that
bore makes is that if you set up your
lab to do a momentum experiment you
can't simultaneously do a position
experiment because the experimental
conditions exclude each other if you do
one you can't do the other right you
can't check both for position momentum
at the same time this is the basis of
complimentarity um so as far as Einstein
pulski and Rosen are thinking Alice and
Bob each have only two choices they
either check position or they check
momentum and so either they're both
checking the same thing or one's
checking one one's checking the other
those are the only conditions they could
think about but now you've got spin now
the thing about the spin experiment is
that to measure spin of a particle you
measure it in a certain direction in
space and there's a Continuum of
directions you can choose you can CH you
know there there are infinitely many
directions you can choose so in terms of
the experimental condition between Alice
and Bob you not only have that they
could measure spin in the same direction
and say measure in orthogonal directions
one Z and 1 x but they can measure
offset by 45 Dees or 30Â° or 60Â° or 10Â°
or 5Â° okay they're all all of there's a
Continuum of different experimental
situations and quantum mechanics makes
predictions about the correlations you
ought to see between these results for
all of these
offsets
now in in the case of Spin and we could
we I mean we can go into the physics of
a spin measurement if you want or not I
mean it would take a little you know to
describe Stern gck magnets but anyway
you've got an apparatus it has it
creates a magnetic field that's pointed
in a certain direction and you can
adjust the direction that's really all
you need to know and you need to know
that you set up a state where if Alice
and Bob measure in the same direction
whatever it is this way this way this
way if they set their devices in exactly
the same direction they always get
opposite results if if one one's
particle will be deflected up and the
other one's particle will be deflected
down you can't predict from the quantum
state whether which one will go up and
which one will go down half the time
it'll do this and half the time it'll do
that but all the time they'll do
something different so you get these
perfect correlations that sets up a
situation exactly like epr Bob if he
knows Alice is measuring in the same
direction Bob when he sees his outcome
can now predict with certainty Alice's
let me let me just write down sort of
what you just said um so now we're we're
in the setting of
Belle's uh theorem and sort of let's
just call it setup right now and uh we
have Alice and Bob we now have our
entangled wave function and uh it's such
that let's see how how do I want to
write this but um so let's just write
size the sort of the
entangled wave function and uh I guess
following the notation of Belle's paper
um Alice and Bob can each perform a
measurement let's say Alice will uh say
measure spin in as in the a direction
and Bob in the little B Direction so
these are these are arbitrary vectors in
in
R3 right uh uh unit vectors right um and
uh the point is that whenever um B is
set equals to
a uh right so let's call let's call the
um let's see they're going to measure
spin
actually let me let me back up here so
so right so this is what they uh this is
the
outcome of a
spin uh you know
measurement for Alice in the direction a
and then likewise for Bob and the point
is that whenever B is equal to
a then there's this perfect correlation
right that happens anti-correlation they
always get the opposite sort of like our
our heads and tails U example earlier
right yeah so so now there's basically
an infinite family of perfect
correlations for every unit Vector a
um uh whenever you choose B also that
same unit Vector you get the exact
opposite result right and so by the same
argument that epr gives if it's a local
Theory
right if if if
Alice's laboratory operation has no
influence at all on Bob's particle or
the outcome of Bob's
experiment then the outcomes have to be
predetermined for all directions at the
source because you get the perfect
correlations in any direction if we look
at Bell's paper right okay let's do that
let me let me pull it up
now on the Einstein Podolski Rosen
Paradox
yep just read the let's just read
paragraph
one introduction the Paradox of Einstein
Podolski and Rosen was Advanced as an
argument that quantum mechanics could
not be a complete Theory but should be
supplemented by additional
variables right that's just if it's not
complete then there additional variables
that's just by definition these
additional variables were to restore to
the theory causality and
locality now causality is determinism
but as Bell later said the main point
was to restore
locality and the only way you could
restore Lo locality if you have these
perfect correlations is also causality
that is
determinism in this note that idea will
be formulated
mathematically right so the the what
they were trying to do
to restore
locality will be formulated
mathematically and shown to be
incompatible with the statistical
predictions of quantum mechanics it is
the requirement of locality notice right
not causality which is the determinism
part it is the requirement of locality
or more precisely that the result of a
measurement on one system it be
unaffected by operations on a distant
system with which it is interact acted
in the past that creates the essential
difficulty I mean he B couldn't be
clearer than
this but the problem is if you don't
know epr paper and You' even thought
about it this goes by too
quickly right he's taking for granted
what epr have already proven and now
he's going a step
further um there have been attempts to
show that even without such a
separability or locality requirement no
quote hi variable interpretation of
quantum mechanics is possible Right This
is V noyman and elsewhere these um these
attempts have been examined elsewhere
that's his earlier paper which is called
on the problem of hidden variables in
quantum mechanics that one was published
that one he wrote before this one and
this is because he was thinking about
this can I supplement can I do what
Einstein Podolski and Rosen wanted can I
actually carry that out and found
wanting that is he says the there have
been these things claim to be no
additional variables proofs they don't
work and read the earlier paper to find
out why they don't work there are
different ones none of them work Bon
nyman's doesn't work right all the other
ones they don't
work
moreover a hidden variable
interpretation of Elementary quantum
theory has been explicitly constructed
that's
bone so he knows they don't work because
there's a counter example right that
particular interpretation has indeed a
grossly non-local
structure this is this is characteristic
according to the result to be proved
here of any such Theory which reproduces
exactly the quantum mechanical
predictions now everything of of what
bell is doing what's been done before
how this relates to what's been done
before is in that paragraph everything
it's there it's clear it's
unambiguous you just have to read it
carefully well what I'm going to do is
show you that the attempt to restore
locality which epr had already
proven gives you the necessity of
determinism cannot be carried through no
local
Theory can reproduce these
predictions quantum theory was obviously
the Einstein non local that's what he
always complained about I mean quantum
theory as exposited by bore he always
complained it was non-local he said it
has spooky action at a distance it has
telepathy it has this weird thing I
can't believe it right to Einstein it
was om the standard quantum theory was
non-local I'm gonna you know Bell says
I'm going to prove every theory has to
be non-local if it's going to reproduce
the prediction statistical predictions
of quantum mechanics he says
um it is this is characteristic
according to the results be proved here
of any such Theory which reproduces
exactly the quantum mechanical
predictions right in all cases including
in these cases that Einstein never
thought about and and B never thought
about I mean everybody you know they
were thinking about these perfect
correlation cases where Bob and Alice
are measuring in the same direction and
you might think well let me look at the
the the furthest they can get apart let
Alice measure in X and Bob at at right
angles in Z but that doesn't give you
anything because then there's no
correlations then they're completely the
results are random and uncorrelated
right it would really be like you and me
flipping
coins right a fourth of the time we both
get heads and a fourth of the time we
both get Tails there's no the the the
real trick is to look at the
correlations in the in
between thing where these are
offset by an amount but not not by 90
degrees now in fact for for Bell's case
all you need to do is imagine a
situation where Alice let's call this
zero Alice and Bob have a device they
can me each of them can set their device
in one of two orientations they can both
set it at zero in which case they're
going certainly going to get opposite
results Alice can offset 30 degrees this
way Bob can offset 30 degrees the other
way so either they're measuring in the
same direction they're off by 30 or
they're off by
60 just just that is enough to set up
the situation if you want to do it the
way Bell did it with a an entangled pair
of particles in a singlet state I mean
we can go through that proof that that's
given in many books it's a kind of
statistical proof and what he shows is
that inless what Alice does affects
Bob's result or what Bob does affects
Alice's result you cannot get the
predictions of quantum
mechanics let me let me write down a few
things here because I think we said a
lot of things and it might be hard for
people to um absorb all that what is
bellm going to arrive at we're going to
get a bell in
equality which is a
constraint on local
theories okay and here's the key thing
this is this has nothing to
do uh with quantum mechanics it's just a
very right General mathematical result
now right you can apply it to Quantum
Mechanics because quantum mechanics does
make certain predictions but that's
that's an application of it that's not
that's not part of the inequality so I
just want not about quantum mechanics
the theorem is about any local Theory
right but you but but but in sort of the
fact that we're using spins and working
with certain numbers that's that's the
application of the inequality but it's
not it's not Central to to its
formulation right and all this talk
about spins and so on which again we
could go into more details but as far as
anybody needs to know all you need to
know is Alice and Bob each have it's
actually a magnet we're imagining they
can Orient it in one of two ways
and whenever they do an experiment they
get one or one of two outcomes which we
call spin up or spin down it essentially
means the particle is either
deflected up or down relative to this
Magnet or you get a DOT on the screen
that's either here or
here how that works doesn't matter all
that matters is Alice and Bob have two
choices you know one one choice out of
two to make and whatever they do they'll
be a definite outcome which we can call
either up or down and that when they
happen to set their devices in the same
direction they always get opposite
outcomes right then then you get a
perfect
anti-correlation I can say all that
without mentioning quantum mechanics
right you know you you could throw
quantum mechanics away tomorrow it would
still be the case that you can build
these magnets and you know do this stuff
and get these dots that's just that's
just a description of the experiment
it's not a theoretical description at
all it's just a description of the the
experimental
condition um and the experimental
outcome so it has no it it Bears no
theoretical
weight right except that you think well
yeah magnets you can you can put them
this way or put them that way right sure
sure and dots they either occur here or
they occur here that's it sure let me
let me just write down Bell's inquality
we're not going to go deep Y into it but
let's just let's just finally write
write it down cuz we've been sort of
verbalizing things a lot so Bells
inequality let me just write it down and
and the algebraic steps are in the paper
they're not that enlightening so we're
not going to go into the details but if
you just
um well let me just write it down what
what it's uh right so now here A B and C
are are these arbitrary uh unit
vectors an R3 and the the only
assumption was essentially this this
thing I had um ah I didn't write down
what P was sorry so P of A and B are
just exactly the these correlations I'll
just write it as an expectation because
essentially all that's going on is that
you have Alice and Bob you could think
of them as just random variables they're
they're they're random variables that
depend on the the detector settings
right so you you pick a setting a or a
setting B and what Alice and Bob each
get are random variables and P is the
correlation between those random
variables um and essentially the only
the only constraint that we have is uh
that say p of AA equals minus one
because as we noted earlier um whenever
Alice and Bob choose the same direction
to with which to do a spin measurement
they have perfect anti-correlation so
that expectation is minus one um so
unless I'm missing any other uh implicit
assumptions that basically as long as
you have random variables that are
valued in plus or minus one the outcome
of which you can think of as the outcome
of spin experiments um but they don't
have to be interpreted that way but as
long as you have plus or minus one
random variables that have this perfect
anti-correlation whenever the two
measurements are aligned then you have
this inequality that I've written here
and this is this is
Belle's
inequality right and the point is that
if you reason about this even though
it's not that clean mathematically we'll
look at a cleaner example in a moment if
you reason about this in the
instantiation
of the case in which A and B happen to
be quantum mechanical experiments then
with some effort you can derive a
contradiction thus um showing that
quantum mechanics cannot be local but
that that's that that's a a separate
issue than formulating the inequality
itself yeah I mean we we've gone right
we've gone so far in the direction of
doing this for a pair of particles in
the spin state that if you don't mind
let me just take five
minutes and say what you just said in a
concete example sure I think anybody can
follow very easily so so again we're
going to imagine this situation we
create a pair of particles in this
quantum mechanical State it's called the
singlet State we don't really care what
it's called All We Care is what it
predicts Alice either sets her device at
zero or 30 degrees Bob sets his device
at either zero or minus 30 degrees okay
so at the end of the day either they're
in the same direction they're off by off
by 30 or they're off by 60 so the top
part of this grid this is going to be
this is going to be Alice this is going
to be Bob okay on the bottom we're gonna
have these entries the the the entry
here for zero degrees is going to mean
remember we we already know because
Alice and Bob get always the opposite
results at zero degrees those have to be
predetermined right that was the whole
point that that you know it can't be
anything random or how would the other
one each one know so we have Alice and
Bob at0 degrees they always get opposite
results right now it turns out we we'll
call these results up and down it turns
out it's not really important here that
they actually on each side just look
random they each get up and down half
the time but they're always they're
always opposite so you say I want to I
want to pre-program particles to do this
so this is what I have here is this is
pair of particles sorry one two three
I'm sending out these pair of
particles and so for pair number one
let's say I'm going to say well Alice if
she measures at zero it's going to be up
that means Bob has to be down her next
one will be up that means Bob has to be
down then her next one will be sorry
down so Bob's has to be up and so on
right I just randomly put in a row for
Alice and then the opposite Row for Bob
right however I will all right up down
is now plus or minus one but okay yeah
that that corresponds to plus or minus
one that gives me the perfect
anti-correlation the only way to get the
perfect anti correlation when they
measure in the same direction now
suppose Alice happens to set hers not at
zero but at 30 degrees okay and Bob sets
his happens to set his at zero so now
we're comparing this row to this
Row the prediction is they'll again get
opposite results not all the time but
most of the time in in fact 75% of the
time
okay so what I want to do is put in here
things for Alice such that if I compare
30 to zero they agree 75% of the time so
that means they're only
25% of these can be
changed right so in other words I'll
I'll just put same meaning it's the same
as for Zer degrees so this would be up
same same
then change then change then same then
same then same right whatever it is I
can only change I need to change exactly
25% because I want to go from 100% IND
correlation to
75% yes and then the same thing if Al if
if Bob goes at minus 30 and Alice is at
zero I want 75% anti-correlation so
again I can only change I need to change
exactly 25% of these
randomly distributed doesn't matter
right so change same same same change so
if it's same then that means this would
be a d d here this would be a u here and
so
on now here's the key if if everybody's
following me so far I've only changed
25% going up and I've only changed 25%
going
down so no matter how I did that at
least 50% of the time I didn't change
either of them
yes so at least 50% of the time they
have to
disagree but when you check when Alice
is at 30 and Bob is at minus 30 and you
have a 60 degree difference they only
disagree 25% of the
time in fact they what quantum mechanics
predicts and what happens is they agree
now 75% of the time they disagree only
25% of the time so yeah I think uh they
um let's see the exact formula is U
cosine squar this is the the
disagreement rate
right right so when it's zero it's one
that's right and then when it's 30
degrees that's uh Co um right cosine squ
of that okay so so when this is when
this is 30 right this will end up being
three quarters right so
disagrees 75% of the time yep yep and0
degrees that's one quarter that's all
that's
the now you you can just see you can't
put 's and D's down on this so that they
always disagree when you compare zero
Alice to zero
Bob they disagree 75% of the time when
you
compare Alice zero to Bob minus 30 or or
Bob zero to to Alice 30 and they
disagree 25% of the time when you
compare minus 30 to 30 it just can't be
done right if you only change 25% going
up and you only change 25% going down
you still have 50% no you know that have
to have to be the way they were
originally it can't be done so in a way
the math is that simple now in this case
you have to look at these long-term
averages and and you have to assume
you're making random selections whenever
Bob and on every run what essentially
Alice and Bob are doing are taking a
random selection out of this graph and
you're just saying you can't set up this
graph I don't care what you do put 's
and D's however you want you can't set
up this graph to give me those
statistics this is an instance of Bell's
inequality or I mean Bell equality would
say you know that the implementation of
what you wrote down as the general
principle would be because the
030
you know correlation is 75% is as it
were anti-correlation is 75% and the
zero minus 30 is oh I see you're saying
you know it the one for 30 minus 30 has
to be at at least 50% right that's where
the that that's where the let's pause
here because I think people who haven't
thought about this before maybe not
aren't so clear about the significance
of what we just did so basically um if
you um look at this setup in terms of
spin um the statistics that you
described were encapsulated by this
formula I had here this cosine squ
formula right the point is that by
simulating Trials of ups and downs or
plus or minus ones that are uh
attempting to be consistent with these
statistics um you will end up getting uh
inconsistencies as we did with the 60Â°
separation and and that
inconsistency uh it was very subtle but
that inconsistency was due to the fact
that we did not allow communication
between the results of A and B we we
tried to do it sort of independently so
to speak without any communication and
and then we just saw that it failed and
what we assumed is that Alice's result
cannot depend on what Bob measures
that's exactly right can't depend on
Bob's decision to either do zero or 30
and and Bob's result can't depend on
Alice's decision to either do yes let me
just make this so basically this is this
this bright red line here that says Bob
has a trial Alice has a trial at 0 de
and then the
30Â° uh the plus or minus 30Â° outcomes uh
only can refer to what Alice or Bob are
doing respectively because again Alice
and Bob can't communicate and when you
are constrained by that then when you
compare Alice and Bob again at the 30
and minus 30 you get a contradiction
right the assumption is just that what
happens in Alice's lab is independent
causally independent of Bob's decision
decision and what happens in Bob's lab
right causally independent now of course
they could be correlated because the
correlations were already set up at the
source I mean it's not again it's it's
just silly to think it's not as if
Einstein thought oh you've got a a
correlation you must have a a spooky
action at a distance of course not his
whole point was no I can get
correlations without spooky action at
distance but only by predetermining the
outcomes right so so let's just so the
correlations are this Zer these 0 rows
here that that was the perfect
anti-correlation and then from going to
0 and 30 that was essentially using the
blue formula and and the fact that A and
B don't communicate that's right that's
right that's right beautiful obviously
if if what Alice's particle does can be
sensitive to what Bob how Bob sets his
device then we can't even write in a row
like we we can't write for for a row
well what will Bob do at minus 30 we
would have to divide that and say well
if Alice measures zero then say he'll
get up and if Alice measures 30 then
he'll get down right but then you just
make his outcome explicitly dependent on
Alice's measurement Choice that's spooky
action in a distance that's tele that's
telepathy that's the very thing that
that Einstein doesn't like you know I
hadn't thought about these statistics in
I knew it was like you know very simple
fractions in mathematics but I just
never wrote it down in this kind of nice
T actually quite nice yeah I think this
presentation I learned out of Nick
Herbert's book Quantum reality I think
it's in there I mean you know it's this
is not original to me and this is
because what bell was actually thinking
about was these correlated pairs in
singlet State this is what he first
comes up with in the examples now
eventually greenberger horn and Zyer
realized that if you look at triples of
particles you can do something even
niftier right so what we're going to do
now is look at an even
cleaner example of statistical results
you cannot recover from any local Theory
that's the deal um we're gonna instead
of looking at a case where we have two
particles that we start off in a state
and send to Alice and Bob we're gonna
have three particles that we send to
Alice Bob and Charlie so we're just
going to uh put
them on our
in SpaceTime in Labs that are separated
and again as far as the theory goes they
can be separated as far as you like the
experiments can be done at space likee
separation so that even light couldn't
get from any one of these experimenters
to any other before they do their
experiment we at the center of all this
we have a little device that's producing
triples of particles in a certain
entangled state it doesn't matter matter
what it is and sends them off to Alice
Bob and Charlotte and then Alice Bob and
Charly again each one is going to do a
spin experiment which means they've got
a
magnet and this time instead of it being
zero and 30 and 60 or something like
that it's really either say Z direction
or X Direction it's a some direction or
Direction at right angles to it we'll
call them Z and X so Alice you know
she's going to choose to either measure
in z or measure in X Bob is going to
choose either to measure in z or measure
in X and Charlie is going to choose
either Z or Z or or X these choices can
be made by them in any way you like they
can flip coins they can use Lotto balls
they can uh use as as Belle says the par
of digits of pi starting at the
millionth digit so plus any string of
plus ones and minus ones that are random
in any way you like they can use they NE
none of them knows what the other one's
doing
okay so under those circumstances since
there's a binary Choice made by Alice a
binary Choice by Bob a binary Choice by
Charlie there are eight possible Global
conditions when the three particles come
in right which are obviously they could
all measure X which we would represent
XA XB XC Alice could measure X and Bob
could measure X and Charlie could
measure
z
um or just Bob could measure Z or just
Alice could measure
Z I mean this is going to get a little
boring but okay it's just combinatorics
or uh let's say Alice measures X and
both Bob and Charlie measures Z and so
on now I'm I'm not going to really Bore
You by writing all eight there are
obviously eight possible Global
configurations that can occur and the
nice thing about this case is we don't
even have to say well 75% of the time
you'll get this and 25% of the time
you'll get that we don't have to use
anything like that we can only say
things that happen 100% of the time
right so these are perfect
predictions and they involve the kinds
of perfect correlations that allow you
to say what's going to
happen given any now any two of the
outcomes you can say what the third one
is going to be okay now the only cases
we really care
about are where all three measure
X or where two measure Z and the other
measures X so so really down here the
case where Alice measures X and the
other two measure Z the case where Bob
measures X and the other two measur Z
and the case where Charlie measures X
and the other two measure z um there
there are four more cases but we don't
care about them because there there will
be predictions for those cases but they
don't come into the argument okay yeah I
mean just maybe make make a few comments
because this looks maybe a little coming
out of nowhere but basically behind all
this there is some Tangled state with
all uh for all three of these observers
um and you can think of a b and c again
being binary random variables because
spin is valued in plus or minus one but
it's set up in such a way that even
though all three are individually
independent coin flips 50% plus one or
minus one their joint distribution
however are not independent and it's
such that if you had set your uh
measurement conf configurations remember
each random variable it depends on this
direction uh and in this case we really
need two two elements uh x and z for our
directions if you choose the three sets
of measurements such that they're all X
or one of them exactly one of them is X
then their joint distribution is such
that any two of the measurements
determines exactly the third one that is
a property these of these probability
and we can show that because but just by
saying what the predictions are because
they're very simple to state
in the case where they measure all three
X's the prediction is with
certainty that you will get an
odd
number of up
outcomes okay now it doesn't tell you
that number could be one it could be
three but that we don't care about that
it certainly will be odd it'll be either
one or three you won't get two you won't
get zero okay okay and because that's
made with certainty if I know two of the
outcomes I know what the other one has
to be right because if if if the two I
have are UPS then the third one has to
be an up to make it odd or if the first
two you know if the if the first two is
one up then the the last one has to be
down because it has to stay odd so again
you have the kinds of perfect
correlations which means from Alice's
and Bob's outcome You can predict with
certainty Charlie from Bob's and Charlie
you can you know predict Alice's
whatever and it's those perfect outcomes
that again if you say that what happens
in any of these Labs has no causal
effect in any other lab then you can
make those predictions without
disturbing the third lab right you can
you can find out from Alice and Bob what
they got and now predict Charlie without
disturbing Charlie because all you need
is their outcomes yes so it if they
happen to all Pick X then the
predictions are you'll certainly get an
odd number of UPS if they happen to pick
One X and two Z's then the prediction is
certainly you'll get an even number of
ups and again of course if you know two
you know what the last one has to be
sure should we yep yep maybe just a
small finicky thing should we change UPS
to Downs because I think of up as plus
one and and uh down is minus one I think
it's cleaner when you think about
uh sure sure sure not going to change
the argument you
want uh yeah yeah yeah let's let's do
that all right even number of downs yeah
because in terms of what we wrote in
terms of Bell's the the the the notation
in Bell setup right we we talked about
uh when we're going to take um
expectations of of products of variables
then we want to multiply things in Nei
plus or minus one and so in this case
basically in in in this setting here
what we're basically saying is that um
uh okay going going back to Bell's
notation you could think of a ofx b of X
and C of X is being
minus1 because we can think of up as
plus one and down is minus one right
again these are up or down or plus or
minus one valued random variables but if
we're going to do arithmetic we should
do plus or minus one so that's that's
this case and then in the second case
then uh let's say
ax b z CZ will be one and and likewise
with the three other cases or the two
other cases where there's exactly One X
yeah yeah exactly right I mean it'll
work out however you want yeah sure sure
sure I just wanted to you know it's easy
enough to hold in your head yeah all
three x's in this case will say odd
number of Downs in the other case where
there's one X and two Z's even number of
downs yeah now by the
reasoning of the epr paper if there's no
spooky action in a
distance then from the results of any
two I can predict with certainty the
results of the last one without
disturbing it because if it's local and
the two of them do their results get
their results at space likee separation
and you say look they what they did
can't make any difference what they
chose can't make any difference the
outcome that they got can't make any
difference I can now predict without
disturbing it what the third one will
get then the third one has to already
there has to be an element of reality
that determines what it'll be right I
mean it can't be
random how could it be random if from
looking at what Alice and Bob got I can
tell you for sure what Charlie's gonna
get there can't be something random
going on in Charlie's lab right you
wouldn't always get the right result
exactly this is the three coin flip
version of the thing we did earlier it's
just I have three people two people
right yeah yeah it's just the epr
Criterion of reality under the
assumption that by separating Alice Bob
and Charlie we causally isolate them
from each other right we causely isolate
their choices about what how to orient
their magnets and the outcome that they
get what what happens in one lab can
have no influence on what happens in
another
lab now if we do that now it's very nice
now you say okay so in a local Theory I
have to be able to
predetermine what the outcomes would be
in such a way as to respect these
statistics to to respect these
requirements and the nice thing about
this is you can set this up in a
beautiful diagram again this I think was
was invented by David Murman and it's
just extremely pretty you can show this
to somebody and you say all right this
circle
here that's what Alice the result she'll
get if she happens to set her magnet in
the X Direction This is what Bob will
get if he happens to set his this is
what Charlie will get if he happens to
set his in the X Direction then Z for
Alice over here um Z for Bob over here
and Z for Charlie here
so that's all there is right that that
that each each Alice Charlie and Bob
each has two choices the nice thing
about this diagram is that the sit
situation where they all pick X's sorry
the situation maybe I'll choose a color
here the situation where they all pick
X's is this axis with the red dots and
the situation where one picks an X and
the other ones pix a z is this
one this
one and this
one right so nice symmetric little Di
diagram and so what is what what do the
prediction say they say well if they
happen to all Pick X we need an odd
number of down outcomes right so in
these three circles again here here and
here I have to put an odd number of D's
and on the other rows the ones connected
by Blue lines I have to put an even
number yes so now the first thing to do
is just try right I mean let's just try
something at random and see what happens
I need an odd number along the red row
it's one or three just for fun let's
make it three because that's easy so
I'll put d
d d so now if they happen to pick all
X's we're
safe this zc in the
middle it no nothing's required here
I'll just put a u in there again and
we're just trying something but now we
start to the constraints start to bite
right so along this row I need an even
number I've got a d a u I'm forced to
put a d
here and now the I only have this one
Circle left but I'm screwed because to
have an even number coming down this row
I've already got two D's this has to be
a u but to have an even number coming
down this row I have a d and a u it has
to be a d so I can't right right there's
no way I can finish it so that no matter
which triple they happen to hit on I'll
get the right
result now you might say well okay try
something else I mean you just made some
random choices but then there's this
beautiful argument of mermans it says
you can't do it there's no conceivable
way to put U's and D's in these six
circles and that's all there is to do
here that satisfy all the requirements
at the same time why not here's the
argument it's by reductio
suppose you could do it suppose you
could put the U's and D's down in such a
way that you get odd along that one and
even along the other ones so pick up the
three along the red throw them in a hat
you just threw an odd number of these
then pick up these three throw them in a
hat even number these three throw them
in a hat even number these three throw
them in a hat even number so odd even
even even I now have an odd number of
D's in the Hat but I picked up every
disc twice because every single circle
is on the intersection of two of these
rows so no matter what I do I can't get
an odd number right if I pick every one
up twice so it's just easy to see you
can absolutely convince yourself there's
nothing up my sleeves there's no hidden
anything right you just it's just a
simple mathematical fact that you cannot
put U's and D's in these six circles
that satisfy all four of those
constraints at the same time so that
means
no matter what you do there's some
chance if it's a local theory if if what
Alice gets if she measures X for example
is independent of what Bob and Charlie
decide to do then there's no way you can
predeter you can pre-arrange this so
it'll always give you the right results
it can't be done but it always does do
that right I mean nature then then you
say well let's go check in the lab what
does nature do answer nature does what
quantum mechanics
predicts nature does always give you an
even number in this case and an odd
number in those cases you know so nature
is doing something that no local Theory
can do therefore nature isn't
local that's it right the experiments
the experiments which originally were
done on like the the the bipartite case
that we talked about ex you have to go
to the lab and check you know what
quantum mechanics predicts fine but
that's not the issue the issue is what
does nature do and the answer is nature
does what quantum mechanics predicts it
violates Bell's inequality it gives you
results that cannot be replicated in any
local
Theory even if it's on entirely un
quantum mechanical grounds I mean
doesn't matter again quantum mechanics
kind of drops off to the side the issue
is locality can you come up with a local
theory that will make these predictions
answer no this is what happens in
reality so real physics can't be local
actually on this no okay um let's see a
few maybe I should make one comment here
that was uh maybe implicit but just to
help our viewers it was very important
that
the choice of which measurements to make
the you know all X's or One X um that is
not known in advance right and therefore
all the constraints have to be satisfied
because uh well you since you don't know
which Which choice is going to be made
in order for it to be uh satisfied in
general it has to satisfy all all of the
constraints right right so on the one
side of course if you knew from the
beginning oh Alice is going to check
this Bob's GNA check that Charlie's
gonna check that then of course
trivially you could arrange to give a
good answer right but you don't know
that right I mean and if again if you
think of all the different ways that
that those decisions could be
made how could you know you can't
pre-arrange it you know there's no way
that anybody has the
information about what they're all three
gonna be
right um yeah yeah so that's the the the
the the the there is you know I've said
from the beginning and maybe this is the
right time to bring it
up the main thing that Bell keeps saying
is the the fundamental principle that's
kept sacred is locality
right no action at a distance
mathematically the the only mathematical
assumptions that go in is the
mathematical expression of that which is
to say that the
probability of Alice getting some
outcome can't depend on what Bob decides
to
do but then there's another one which is
called statistical Independence it says
that that essentially these choices are
random choices that Bob and Charlie and
Alice are making with respect to the the
state of the particles coming in right
in other words if I pre- what you see
from this diagram is that if I
pre-arrange these then there must be at
least one of these experimental
conditions that it would get
wrong and the assumption is but these
experimental conditions are being chosen
completely randomly at least
occasionally you'd hit the bad one right
I mean if if every time they come in one
out of four would go bad and you keep
doing this randomly after a while you'd
hit a bad one and you'd get a bad result
now you know someone can say no no no no
it they just never hit a bad one it's
true that there's always at least one
that cannot be pre-arranged but they
never actually choose that one right
they always miss that
one and then you think well this is just
crazy why would they miss it I mean by
what mechanism would they miss it by
what what would keep them right what
would their coins or they're you know
using the digits of pi or whatever to
make these choices what's going to
somehow magically steer them away from
the bad choice every single time right
um so this there's this second
assumption called statistical
Independence Belle writes a nice paper
about it uh after this comes out and
people are looking for every loophole
they can find and they say look you're
making this assumption that the that the
choices that are made are statistically
independent of the state of the incoming
particles and B says yeah I mean that's
the assumption that underlies pretty
much all scientific
experimentation If you deny that then
you can do anything I mean If you deny
that
then experimentation just does you no
good right as we say it it's the same
way I always like to say the the the
tobacco people really would like to deny
that smoking causes cancer and so you
say well what's the evidence that it
does well the gold standard evidence is
a controlled experimental random trial
where you take a bunch of rats and you
randomly assort them into two groups and
then expose one to smoke and then don't
expose the other to smoke and treat them
otherwise exactly the same and then see
do you get more cancer over here than
over here now someone could say yeah but
you know maybe these rats that got
cancer they were all predisposed to get
cancer answer and it just happened when
you sorted them you put all the certain
to be sick rats over in the you know
experimental group and all the certain
to be well rats over in the control
group and you say wait I just sorted
them by flipping coins I just sorted
them by the digits of piie right how in
the world you know no you're saying no
matter what I do no matter how I set
this up always the sick rats are going
to go this way and the you know not sick
rats are going to go that way you'd say
of course as a logical purely logical
Point you'd say well that would explain
the outcome without the smoke having
anything to do with it but that would
undermine all Scientific Method All
experimental method right then you could
never draw any conclusions from any
experiment I mean it's just it it's so
desperate and you have theories that
make these predictions they're non-local
theories but they're not
conspiratorial they don't involve they
accept statistical Independence and they
actually account for these results but
they do it in by nonlocal means these
exist people some people are so upset
about non-locality that they're willing
to literally grasp at any straw to avoid
the conclusion and I just don't get it
of course you know I'm a philosopher we
read dayart and you say well gee maybe
you know maybe we're all asleep and
dreaming maybe no experiments are ever
done maybe it's all you know maybe we're
all plugged into the Matrix and after a
while you shrug your shoulders and say
okay fine but then you're not doing
science anymore right if you're going to
entertain skeptical hypotheses at that
level then you're not you're not engaged
in the scientific activity anymore
because you're you're involved in
situations where you're saying science
can't be done right you can never find
out about the world if you're plugged
into the Matrix you can never find out
about the world
because no matter what you do you're
just going to see whatever they've
programmed into the computers right you
have no access so of course logically
that's possible but then give up on
science right okay great um okay so I
guess we've uh you just summarize the
two uh essential assumptions of Bell's
theorem locality and statistical
Independence um uh maybe there's there's
uh at least two more things I I want to
cover
um why don't we step back a little bit
and summarize what the Nobel Prize uh
confirmed what what kind of experiments
did they do and which inequality did
they they they were testing the yeah
that so that's easy to they were testing
the original Bell one the one we talked
about where you just have a pair of
particles in a singlet state or a pair
of photons you can do with photons too
um what's the trick about it well first
of all you need the two labs to be far
enough apart and the experiments be done
fast enough for the thing to be its
space like separation that is that that
that that the as it were the the choice
of which experiment is
done on on Alice's side even light a
light signal couldn't carry that
information over to Bob's lab fast
enough to have an influence on his
outcome oh is this the 030 minus 30 set
of experiments okay so there there you
would say Alice's choice of either 30
zero or 30 and Bob's choice of either
zero and minus 30 those have to be made
so quick now of course that means really
quick if you're doing this in a lab you
know there's not much time okay for
light from one side to the other what
what what aspe did which was really
clever because it's of course much too
fast to actually reorient a device so we
set up two devices one set as it were at
zero and one set at 30 and then set up a
really fast Optical switch he was doing
photons that can send the photon either
to this one or to that one okay and this
has to do with polarization not spin
yeah this this is you're checking
instead of spin you're checking
polarization but it's the same thing
either the photon gets through or it
doesn't there's a binary response right
you've all all that's important is you
have two settings and you have a binary
response right so he sets up these
Optical switches to make these decisions
as it were unbelievably
fast then of course there there are some
there were some technical loopholes in
the early experiments the the detectors
were not perfectly efficient so a lot of
these photons would just go missing they
wouldn't show up because you know the
detector efficiencies aren't great and
if if some of the the photons go missing
or some of the electrons go missing it
it creates a technical loophole where
you could actually manage in a clever
way to get these results in the recorded
data with a local Theory so one thing
you wanted to do is improve detector
efficiency one thing you wanted wanted
to do was move the labs further and
further apart so now Zyer is doing these
down on tenna Reef between different
Islands you know that are kilometers
apart they're not within a lab or you
know and you're sending you're sending
these entangled Pairs and they're going
to do it up they do it up in space right
I mean you can you can keep stretching
the labs further and further apart and
you can keep improving the detector's
efficiencies and and thereby get rid of
these loopholes and so that's more or
less from the earliest experiments were
done by clauser um because he was a he
was told by Abner shimone who was one of
the first people to appreciate B's paper
hey these are interesting experiments I
mean we know what quantum mechanics
predicts but nobody's checked and so
clauser did the first kind of much more
simple experiments and aspe made these
quick Optical switches and then Zinger
kept stretching these further and
further apart and improving detector
efficiencies to where nobody questions
the experimental the fact that nature
violates these inequalities right I mean
the the kind of technical loopholes have
all been filled by now you just you have
to somehow account for Nature's ability
to give you these
results and as I say the only the only
things that go into the theorem are
locality Bell locality and the
statistical Independence condition and
and denying the stat statistical
Independence condition first of all
nobody has an actual Theory that does
that and makes these predictions it's
just a kind of vapor where well if I
deny that that you know if
somehow you know if somehow these aren't
really random selections but you know
then you're in such a Cloud Cuckoo Land
of fantasy that you couldn't do physics
anymore the right thing to do is just
accept the result I mean you know suck
it up
okay um let's see actually I think this
might be a good place to transition to
one of the other things I think we
should definitely talk about are is
misconceptions around Bell's right so we
we um we I know hidden variables is kind
of a dirty word for you but we did see
it explicitly in in Bell's paper when we
were looking at before he does use the
term and so do so do follow-up papers um
maybe this is a good point to clarify in
what sense it is a legitimately used and
what in what sense it's not and where so
the the right term and this is again
Bell will say in the right place the
right term is just additional variables
why that connects to the epr paper the E
paper was exactly is the Quantum State
complete if it's not then there must be
additional variables right you can give
me the quantum state of the system but
if the quantum state is not complete
there must be more to it physically than
that those are additional variables Bell
at one point says that the term hidden
variables is a piece of historical
silliness because if there are these
additional variables they better not be
hidden I mean that's his point it's it's
those variables that are actually giving
you the outcomes and the outcomes are
not hidden if the outcomes were hidden
so so what the outcomes the what is a
correct usage of hidden like you know
there must be some correct usage I don't
I don't know I think what I think that
terminology comes in when PE by by
people who think the real issue is
determinism
indeterminism so they're thinking oh if
it's really deterministic
then whether you get this outcome or
that outcome must be determined by some
variable you don't know about because
quantum mechanics only makes statistical
predictions so call that the hidden
variable the thing that determines the
outcome but in in something like bom's
Theory these additional variables are
particle positions sure sure so in the
theory you actually of particles and
those positions are not hidden they
better not be hidden they're the kinds
of things you actually see like did the
cat live or die well if you know where
its particles what its particles are
doing you know whether it's alive or
dead yeah they're they're a non-hidden
part right it's as as it were the
quantum State or the wave function
that's more or less hidden harder harder
to get your hands on maybe I should say
let me just write this since we're
talking about it um I I in that regard I
I would say okay if you if if you accept
this as a as a reasonable definition of
a hidden variable which is basically a
variable that you just marginalize out
then I think Bell's usage of the word
hidden variable is Justified because
that's exactly what he does he has this
Lambda and he marginalizes out and
that's it doesn't appear anywhere else
yeah yeah I I I understand in that
calculation you you you I mean you you
take the statistical you do your
statistics by summing over them you
could say that but again if you if
you if you think about the the main
example of a theory that adds these
additional variables is this pilot wave
theory of De BR and
Bone and they the additional variables
the things that are not nailed down by
the quantum state are particle
positions
and to say that those are hidden gives
you entirely the wrong idea about how
those particle positions connect to what
you literally can see they are kind of
what you can easily see um when you look
around you right you can look at your
cat and see whether it's alive or dead
in this Theory what determines whether
it's alive or dead is what the particles
are doing so that's what you can easily
see so you know one could have a
puzzle well why should I add additional
variables anyway if they're hidden it
must be for some you know I don't know
metaphysical reason or something because
they're hidden I mean I can't see them
why should I care if they're there but
then you don't understand when you get
Beyond Bell to the more general question
of understanding quantum theory and this
is one of the things you wanted wanted
to talk
about you need to understand how the
theory connects up to experience in
general and that means you need to
understand what is and isn't really
visible right literally what you can see
and what you can't see and and there the
term hidden variables will give you
entirely the wrong idea okay about how
these work yeah so I think okay so I
think okay this is this is helpful I um
if if it to be the most charitable to
the people who use the word hdden
variable let's just say they really mean
extra
and extra just okay okay if you if you
just did that then that carries no more
connotation but something not coded up
in the wave function sure sure okay so
uh there was this other actually point
that uh might be a little contentious
but we've discussed uh uh um outside
this interview which is that um some
people also claim that part of Bell's
theorem is this assumption called local
realism so we know what locality is but
there's realism and my interpretation of
that is
um if we think about quantum mechanics
right uh in the Copenhagen
interpretation there's no fact of the
matter about the outcome of a
measurement until you perform the
measurement the wave fun function
collapses but before then there's no
fact of the matter about what uh the
value of a measurement is the realism
assumption is that there is this extra
variable Lambda that determines the
measurement for you know for for um for
all time as it were I mean okay that's
not right so so so and so when you look
at Bell's paper he does write down you
know a of little a of Lambda things like
that so so it at least seems
superficially like he's introducing this
Assumption of realism so C can you
respond to that how do you want to think
about that I I can respond to that but
because I already have what you just
described the right word for it is the
word you used it's
determinism and as Belle said yeah he
does assume determinism but not because
it's a fundamental assumption but
because epr had already proven as a
theorem that a local theory has to be
deterministic right that was that's why
I say you have to start with epr if
you've got perfect
correlations and
locality that forces determinism on
you so the problem is when people say oh
that's just an assumption of Bell as if
you can deny it and you're out of the
woods no you can't deny it If you deny
it then you're back in the woods with
just the epr correlations you don't even
have to go as far as Bell's INE equality
If you deny determinism you can't
explain the perfect
correlations if you've got a local
Theory yeah I see what we said earlier
on Lo right locality plus perfect
correlations imply
determinism so if you deny determinism
you have to be either denying locality
or denying the perfect correlations now
you better not be denying the perfect
correlations because those are
predictions of quantum theory so that
means you're denying
locality so you're already
some yeah okay I'll have to think about
this more uh offline I I I understand
the words you're saying I think I'm just
um as with many things it it takes a
while for it to kind of sink in i i
what's puzzling me right now is
that uh there is a historical fact of
the matter about how B wrote his paper
and and his position in relation to epr
now if I were just to scrub all that and
just do the bare
mathematics uh I nevertheless do write
down you know a of uh you know Lambda
and I'm just trying to figure out if you
just forget epr rightly or wrongly and
just think about in terms of math it
does seem like the notation suggests
that it's an assumption you see what I'm
trying to say I I understand what you're
saying but again I've I've already read
the relevant quotes from Bell one is
when he's talking about epr when he says
I can't get across to people that
determinism is not an assumption of VPR
but a
conclusion right it's an
inference they don't S I mean if you
just started out saying well I'm gonna
assume we have a deterministic theory
then somebody's gonna say well so what I
don't think we do have a
determinist is irrelevant let me start
they don't they assume locality sure
sure I guess what I'm trying to say is
think of it as a relay race right so so
you're saying epr ends with determinism
as a conclusion and yes uh uh um Belle
picks up the Baton and starts with that
all I'm just saying is that if you only
saw the end of the relay and not the
whole thing then it looks like it looks
like
Bell picks up the Assumption when in
reality he he he picked it up as a
conclusion inherits it yes he he
inherits not an assumption he inherits
conclusion no no he inherits a
conclusion which becomes a quote unquote
assumption in you see what I'm saying an
assumption at that point you've missed
right okay or let's Okay assumption is
maybe not the right start starting point
his starting point is determinism which
looks superficially like an assumption
but when you backtrack and look at the
whole pipeline it becomes inheriting a
conclusion right and that's why as you
say you know the papers called on the
Einstein Podolski Ros in Paradox and I
read the entire
introductory par
where he tells you this is as far as epr
got they I'm going to show you they they
showed you already if you want a local
Theory it's got to be deterministic I'm
now going to show you that even then you
can't get all the predictions of quantum
mechanics right but you just have to
read that first paragraph carefully I
mean yes if you if you thought that that
Belle is starting out of
nowhere
but what more can he do I mean he says
it's on the E paper and he tells you in
the first paragraph what he's taking
from the epr paper and and then he tells
you later you know epr do not assume
determinism they infer it he can't be
clearer right I think it's just people
who don't again people don't like the
conclusion so they want something they
can deny and they say oh I'll just deny
determinism now I'm home free now
whatever B wrote has no relevance
because he assumes determinism whatever
he proved is a theorem doesn't apply to
my theory because it's not a
deterministic theory that's what
millions of people have done but it just
completely misunderstands the dialectic
here and he insists over and over again
what's held sacred is locality locality
locality try to make a local Theory you
will soon find you're forced into
determinism and then you'll soon find
that doesn't even even with that you
can't get you can't get all the bels you
want I see we've talked a lot I think
we've made a lot of progress um maybe
just one one final fin thing if there's
nothing else how do you think about um
interpretations of quantum mechanics
because there's several there's also
many worlds which we haven't talked
about yet um yeah do you do you have
anything to say about interpretations
interpretations of quantum mechanics and
and uh and you know how Bell's theorem
plays a role in it at all yeah I I mean
first of all I'll say what I always say
I hate the word interpretation because
it sounds like quantum mechanics is some
Theory which is then f interpreted but
that's not right there's no there are
different theories okay there's Quantum
phenomena you can talk about the
predictions of standard Quantum
formalism that's fine um there are
quantum phenomena which are the kinds of
things that that that those n standard
predictive stuff predicts and turn out
to be correct in the lab as far as we
can tell but there's no there just is
nothing that would count in a proper
sense as a theory that You' call quantum
mechanics you have different theories
that are trying to account for these
phenomena and there's a general argument
that I've given that I think is
perfectly correct which says there there
are three things you'd like to hold
there are three principles you would
prefer to
hold but you can't have all three as a
logical matter they are mutually
inconsistent right you can't have all
three you can have any two but you can't
have all three and what that means is
you can then any approach to this the
first thing you want to do is identify
which one of these does it give up right
so let me just State what they are the
first one is the very one that epr is
worried about is the quantum mechanical
wave function complete that is if a
system is described by a certain wave
function does that capture all of its
physics or contrarily could you have two
systems described by the same wave
function but that are nonetheless
physically different right so that's one
question the certainly bore wanted to
maintain heis and ber wanted to maintain
the quantum description is complete and
Einstein and Podolski and Rosen were
arguing it isn't complete so that's
question one question two once you've
got this wave function how does it
evolve in particular does it always
evolve by schroer Evolution which is a
linear unitary
Evolution or does it sometimes not
evolve by schroer Evolution which is
what we normally call the collapse of
the wave function which instead of being
smooth and deterministic and linear is
stochastic and sudden and wildly
nonlinear okay so okay that's a binary
choice is it always Schrodinger is it
sometimes not
Schrodinger most people would like it
always to be Schrodinger because as soon
as you say sometimes it collapses you
then have to confront the question when
you know how how did these collapses
occur if you again if you say the wave
function is incomplete then you're
confronted with the question well what
what else is there give me the
additional variables right the third
thing you'd like to believe is that when
you do an experiment like scher's
experiment on the cat it has a unique
outcome right you start with one cat you
end with one cat and the cat you end up
with is either Alive or Dead period end
of story
okay um that seems like a kind of basic
Assumption of all experimental science
that when I do experiments I get an
outcome and there's one outcome and know
what it is and I can collect statistics
and so on now the problem is you can't
hold all
three because if the wave function is
complete and it always evolves by
schroer
Evolution then in a in a setup like
Schrodinger gives with the cat it won't
end up in a state where the cat is
either definitely alive or definitely
dead so you can't have all three the
pilot wave theory gives up one okay it
says the wave function is not complete
there's in addition to the wave function
if you want to describe the situation of
a system you have to tell me where the
particles are you have to give me the
particle configuration you can't read
that off the wave function yep but the
wave function does always evolve by Sher
Evolution
and experiments have unique outcomes
right sometimes the cat ends up alive
and sometimes the cat ends up dead and
there's a definite fact at the end of
every experiment whether the cat you put
in the single cat you put in is alive or
dead Okay so pilot wave gives up one
keeps two and three okay objective
collapse theories like gerardi Rini
Weber or the sort of thing that Penrose
wants to do take wave collapse
seriously as a physical
change so sometimes the wave function
doesn't evolve by shon's Revolution it
collapses and that collapse
is both sudden and indeterministic and
most importantly Global it's not a local
thing okay so they can try and maintain
the completeness of the wave function
and they get unique outcomes because the
outcomes are determined by the
collapses but they give up on the
linearity of the
evolution if you want to keep the
complete grw gerardi renan Weber
objective collapse Theory this is also
true of Philip pearls has a continuous
reduction theory Roger Penrose talks
about an objective reduction theory an O
theory he calls it those take root two
right they give up on two
okay if you want to keep the
completeness of the wave function in the
linearity then you've got to give up on
the uniqueness of outcomes that gets you
to many
worlds right I do the experiment I start
with one cat I end up with a million
cats or a billion cats or an infinite
number of cats some of which are alive
and some of which are dead where does
Copenhagen fall into this Copenhagen
falls into this as not being a clear
Theory okay I see okay they're just not
clear enough about what they're doing
despite it being textbook quantum
mechanics yeah now now bore says let me
say one thing bore
says the experimental situation and the
experimental outcomes have to be
described in classical language which
means he's not going to go with many
worlds he thinks of necessity you have
to say I set up the experiment this way
and that cat it ended up alive period
end of story so he's not going to go
that way and he seems he insists on the
completeness of the wave function that's
why he didn't accept the epr paper so
they're kind of as a logical situation
rather forced into a collapse Theory and
that's what Von noyman when he writes
mathematical foundations of quantum
Theory it's explicitly a collapse theory
he says the wave function can evolve by
two completely different
equations sometimes it evolves in a nice
smooth linear way when when you don't
observe it or you don't measure it
sometimes it randomly collapses in a
very different way when when you measure
it or observe it well that puts the
measurement problem right at the center
of your physics because then you're
going to say Well when what counts as a
measurement you're telling me that this
fundamental difference in physical
behavior depends on whether I'm doing a
measurement what counts as doing a
measurement now you know Einstein comes
along and says can a mouse do it right
can a dog do it what constitutes a
measurement if you don't tell me I mean
this is the measurement problem as it
appears in that tradition because they
they're really collapse theories I me if
you ask me what they are what they have
to be although they wouldn't
forthrightly admit it their collapse
theories but when you ask but when do
these collapses occur they sayoh when
you make an
observation and then people go nuts
quite rightly and saywell when is that
who has the special ability to make
observations right so I would say that's
really what they're forced into but
they're not happy about
it on this note uh maybe we can finish
up with uh where do you fall in this
spectrum of pick two well I I I I think
uh
I think the many worlds thing has all
kinds of just conceptual problems even
understanding what you could mean by
probability because if every time you do
an experiment you get every possible
outcome what does it mean to say there's
a 50% you know 75% chance of this and a
25% I mean it has all kinds of problems
I find it kind of I'm not at all I don't
see what you get out of it um I I I
think the kind of pilot wave thing is
much cleaner I mean this is
the same thing Bell when he goes through
these he says that the the bone Theory
shows the finest craftsmanship and I
think that's true you write down two
equations you write down the schroer
equation and you write down the
so-called guidance equation for the
additional variables they're both just
equations I mean in the non-relativistic
case they're
nice first order differential equations
give you all the right predictions what
more do you want it's a non-local theory
I mean the main complaint against that
theory from the beginning was it was
non-local but that was before Bell and
after Bell you want to shrug your
shoulders and say okay it's non-local so
what we know the Right theory has to be
non-local so that's not it's not a
reasonable complaint um to me the
collapses don't feel right I mean I
don't like this certainly don't like
this idea of alternating between schroer
evolution and then this collapsi
Evolution right this kind of
jumpiness but it's a theory I mean it's
worth it's worth taking seriously it's
worth working out it makes slightly
different predictions because of the
collapses um Bell writes a nice paper
about that called are their Quantum
jumps where he's expositing the grw
theory he writes a nice paper about bone
called on the impossible pilot wave
where he's expositing that theory he
never writes about many worlds because
he could never make sense of it in a way
that he thought you know even was
something that he could think could be
developed and I guess I'm pretty much in
agreement on that
um I understand why people are attracted
to many worlds because if you do any of
the other things immediately the
question is clear you're adding
additional variables what are they
you're collapsing the wave function how
and when right I mean these are you you
you take on the obligation to answer
those questions the many worlds is so
kind of hard to understand what it's
doing and how it's supposed to work that
it's not even clear what questions
you're supposed to ask right um and and
so I think it it it gives the illusion
of being clearer when actually it's just
it's it's it's obscurity is more hidden
um the other ones because they make
these rather forthright assertions you
say Okay follow up that assertion by
giving me more
details
and you do and then you run into some
problems right you can do it for
non-relativistic quantum mechanics with
bone but then when you get to
relativistic Quantum field Theory and
you get to particle creation
Annihilation you have to do something
else you have to make adjustments when
there are different phenomena that
you're worried about okay um but they're
all non-local they have to
be you're not going to get away from the
non-locality by any of these three
choices it was a mistake it's a it's a
mistake that used to be made I think
it's made less that many world's people
would say oh ours is a local Theory
because decoherence happens at the the
speed of light or something like that
which just doesn't make any sense I mean
we could go into that that claim just
doesn't even have any content and it's
not true um and now people who do many
worlds many of them will recognize yeah
it's a non-local theory too but you say
yeah of course it's non-local it has to
be non-local it better be non-local
right that's not a that's not a bug
that's a feature if you got a theory and
it's a local Theory I know your theory
is wrong
okay um well uh this is great uh Tim and
thanks for this uh overview of the
different uh um theories of quantum uh
mechanics laid out very cleanly here um
any final
thoughts no I think we've probably
beaten everybody into the ground at this
point okay well I I learned a lot this
was a lot of fun uh hashing out things
carefully I think it's um I think this
will be a very rewarding uh well
certainly was rewarding for me and
hopefully other viewers will will find
that to be the same okay great thanks
thanks for thanks for putting up with me
for so long my pleasure uh yeah thanks a
lot for your time


## Keywords:
