---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5_m28pNiMYs
---

# Video
TMBS Doc: The Neoliberal Implosion ft. Mark Blyth
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5_m28pNiMYs)

## Transcript:
the Cold War is over the grim certitude
of the contest with communism has been
replaced by the exuberant uncertainty of
international economic competition and
the great question of this day is how to
ensure security for our people at a time
when change is the only constant make no
mistake the global economy with all of
its promise and perils is now the
central fact of life for hardworking
Americans it has enriched the lives of
millions of Americans but for too many
those same winds of change have worn
away at the basis of their security for
two decades most people have worked
harder for Less seemingly secure jobs
have been lost and while America once
again is the most productive nation on
earth this productivity itself holds the
seeds of further insecurity after all
productivity means the same people can
produce more are very often that fewer
people can produce more this is the
world we face we cannot stop global
change we cannot repeal the
international economic competition that
is everywhere we can only harness the
energy to our benefit now we must
recognize it the only way for a wealthy
nation to grow richer is to export to
simply find new customers for the
products and services it makes that my
fellow Americans is the decision that
Congress made when they voted to ratify
NAFTA

this has been 30 years in the making
this has been a long time coming and
ingrown anywhere soon reducing the
deficit will require difficult and
unpleasant decisions we must face a time
of national austerity hard choices are
necessary
now why is inflation a crisis you don't
invest that you've got an environment
inflation you expect to make five
percent real and your investment and
inflation goes up to seven percent you
might as well take your money around the
back of the house and Bodnar and that
was basically what was happening in the
1970s also by the 1970s labor share of
national income had never been higher
and it was effectively costless to move
from job to job which meant that capital
lost the ability to discipline labor
hence why labor strikes were up and all
the rest of a right across the world
ties of the left still had real
grassroots organizations and they were
connected to trade unions and trading is
the crazy stuff like half classes for
people where they would explain how the
economy works and what's going on and
all this other stuff even in the United
States not as quite as much as places
like Sweden or Germany but they did and
therefore the business kind of organic
connection in this 70 is with the
inflationary crisis in the 70s and the
first globalization shop which is
basically Japan and South Korea
basically there was industries migrated
to East Asia pushed us on top of the
plight of industrial capital that youhad
trying to go to right-to-work states for
example from Wisconsin to Texas and
places like this and you cannot kind of
force following over the Democratic
coalition now what is the lesson that
the Democrats and new labor and Britain
as it becomes in the SPD in Germany tea
is right we're gonna resistance so the
first wave is resistance and that just
feels because of the sense these parties
of the establishment and they've been
seen to fail in some sense now you go
again
so the response of all this was the
neoliberal Revolution Reagan and
Thatcher and politics and new classical
macroeconomics and theories about
credibility and central banks and the
importance of inflation control and the
way that the parties respond on the left
is the higher up technocrats they find
economists who are friendly to finance
strategists who will tell you how when
technocrats will tell you what works and
what doesn't and what policies you can
choose and you create this kind of
technocratic infrastructure the only
talks of a policy rather than politics
so I believe he has been a good governor
I think he's been very good for the
Massachusetts economy I think if he
hadn't been he never could have raised
all the money he raised for the business
community in Massachusetts and it's that
broad base that's got the Republicans
word Dan along comes the second
globalization shot from the United
States that's basically NAFTA and then
the third one the China show and by that
point boom that traditional Democratic
Institute see has been completely left
at the same time as the Democrats have
made this pivot towards basically
embracing Wall Street with a SAP fast
seven years we tried to modernize the
economy and today what we're doing is
modernizing the financial services
industry tearing down these antiquated
walls and granting banks significant new
authority this will first of all save
consumers billions of dollars a year
through enhanced competition
it will also protect the rights of
consumers it will guarantee that our
financial systems will continue to meet
the needs of underserved communities
something that vice-president and I've
tried to do through the empowerment
zones the enterprise communities of
Community Development financial
institutions but something which has
been largely done through the private
sector and honoring the Community
Reinvestment Act the legislation I
signed today establishes the principles
that as we expand the powers of banks we
will expand the reach of that act we
built a whole new models we reconfigured
both the software and the hardware of
capitalism when you want to put it off
with and there was two bugs in the
software the first bug was when you
financial eyes everything when you let
banks do what they do because they've
been walked up in the New Deal
regulatory box for the previous 30 years
then they have a sin and the sin is
called leverage so they will continue to
make loans we plus their assets security
the amount of assets they've got a
security until basically they fall over
left on the road without robust policies
in terms of taxes and distribution
capitalism generates massive amounts of
inequality and we've seen this right
across the world in the countries that
basically protected their ability to
produce public goods and collect taxes
your Germans your Swedes etc have far
lower levels of an equality in the we do
basically you got leverage in the
banking system which everybody has been
using to borrow money to pay for the
middle class lifestyle that they can no
longer afford why cuz their wages have
been stagnant since 1979 why is that
because inflation got squeezed out of
the system and all the funds went to
capital which is the inequalities view
2008 a whole system goes bond start 2009
in the midst of a crisis unlike
we have seen in our lifetime in the
central bank Stephan and basically bail
out the assets and incomes of the top
20% of the income distribution of River
because what you bill at the banks
you're talking about assets and
liabilities ago and when you bill at
months you're billing out the assets and
liabilities of the box which is my condo
and Boston some other guys pension some
of these portfolio of investments and
when you do that you cut and private
they're in a public debt which is why
there's a big spike in public debt
through bill in the bunch and then you
get people like Ryan who Tom Rena go oh
my God look at how huge increase in debt
this is outrageous
we need to cut Social Security so that
sets up a politics were by what people
who have been living on borrowed time
borrowed credit and stagnant wages for
generation almost more than generations
sixty percent if not seventy percent in
the US and communist equation know along
comes a guy called Trump and Trump walks
the places that the Democrat mainstream
Democrats won't even touch they say hey
you know these people that come in every
four years this they vote for me halt
bring hope back to the American dream
vote for me change changes come to
America
how's that been working out for you cuz
they've done right you guys you
used to have manufacturing jobs the
companies are doing well that did better
than ever but peaceably they're all in
China and that's why the only thing that
works in your town now is Walmart
because that will happens when they
import it back to you so you can buy it
with your declining wages but don't
worry but could we'll give you credit
cards that use serious interest rates to
make sure you can keep buying this stuff
until you're firmly who is increasingly
bankrupt and that's basically the
stories apparently on the left and also
to certain extent Trump on the right was
telling and that resonated with millions
people because that's true
so basically people show up and say hey
we're back to full employment as an
aggregate number nobody lives in an
aggregate who killed French your wages
are started why are y'all complaining oh
you're a bunch of deplorable right you
can just see this beginning of snowball
I was thus deeply shocked and alarmed
this Friday to hear my opponent attack
slander smear to mean
these wonderful amazing people who are
supporting our campaign by the millions
now my favorite one for brags on this is
months before it was going on a couple
ins for clunkers
there was a rally up in Sunderland and
there Sunderland is a place where there
is a putin in the northeast the main
employer is nissan automotive and they
make all these cars that exported to
europe so the entire precious tablished
meant links arm and arm because of
course the Europeanization globalisation
has been very good for them the top 10%
so they all line up labour conservative
mixed with ovens you can't do this we're
a future life in Europe so the goal
displaced is sales to Europe
mixture for Europe you think well come
on on honestly these guys all understand
right
and then this guy stands up and says you
realize of course there'll be a huge
loss of GDP if we leave Europe and one
of the guys who makes the car show so
you GDP that guy understands the
distributional effects of capitalism
bear that you do effort GDP growth is
going to go into London it's going to go
to the people who already have assets
every contract he's signing he's working
longer hours he's getting more squeezed
he's getting monitored for these periods
oh you have to stay in this this is
awesome well it might be awesome for you
but it's not awesome for him once you
figure out that this is the common story
particularly across the kind of
anglo-saxon developed world the European
story is slightly different because of
the neuralgia over migration in
particular but you've got basically
stagnant incomes life chances have been
shredded 20% of people have made off
with 80% of the returns within not 20%
20% of the 20% of really made off with
60% of everything
astonishing levels of inequality and
basically he
Brooke and they've had enough and they
don't believe what anyone's saying
anymore so once you tap into that as a
third ego structural story you kind of
get why we where we are and you also get
why this is the way things are this is
the new normal deal with the Democrats
the mainstream Democrats they're dead
they don't even realize again it's like
the German Social Democrats they're
signing their own death warrant by
continuing to support policies which
have eviscerated the support and
impoverished the supporters and until we
recognize that there's nothing left for
them



## Keywords:
