---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ze2jBiV2kdo
---

# Video
TMBS Crew: Why Marx Matters
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ze2jBiV2kdo)

## Transcript:

then of course this author of give them
an argument logic for the left it's got
a great new book out he's working on
called canceling comedians while the
world burns which I've been enjoying
reading drafts of and you can check out
his patreon page he teaches and Ben is
now officially you're ready to you the
co-host of dead pundits Society now yep
TAS emo yeah get it well you should you
should come on soon talk about against
the web be my absolute pleasure um
before we get to we have a couple of
different debunks we're gonna actually
talk about a pretty masterful Joe Rogan
performance than you had a collision
with one of the most odious people in
the history of the internet before we do
that it's like it's Marx's birthday guys
and I want to be too uh you know I don't
want to go over the top here but it's
obviously in the in the ether of this
show so there's anybody I mean I don't
know a an influential essay a fragment
whenever you first read Marx I don't
know any reflections does anybody want
to do on on the guy's birthday he would
have had he would have had an extremely
brilliant and incredibly under produced
podcast oh I think it's like sloppy he
would have been all over Twitter drama
totally most of it most of this text
really all start out with a call
donation of some you know obscure rider
here so that was a Bhaskar pointed that
Bhaskar was like a lot of the stuff that
it is really intimidating but you also
just start to realize that it's like oh
like that's just his version of like a
Twitter subtweet yes
actually I was just looking at this
quote from Marx from a letter he wrote
to Engels in 1863 where he's talking
about his factional rival Mikhail
Bakunin
he says that quote the Cuban has become
a monster a huge mass of fleshy fat and
is barely capable of walking anymore
- crowd at all he is sexually perverse
and jealous at the 17-year old Polish
girl who married him in Siberia makes
his martyrdom that's good writing
particularly like the body shaming which
we should bring back yeah any any
particular reflections you guys want to
do on this other than the fact that he
would have been a you know messy
I remember the first time I
read Marx was in in a 18th century 19th
century philosophy class we did Hegel
Marx and Nietzsche and I read German
ideology I remember reading to the
library and this was like 2007-2008 like
first couple years of college so like
right during the financial crisis and
but I remember be and then I remember
the class period talking about it like
as if sort of at that point it was still
sort of like a dead language Marxism
like it was I found it fascinating and
found it very intuitive actually but it
didn't seem like it was like a language
of power by any sense the imagination
and then now it's I mean definitely out
of those philosophers I mean he's the
one who dominated my life more than
anything that I really was introduced to
in college so shout out Minnesota State
University Minnesota State University
Ben David yeah I mean you know there's
there's so much to say about about Karl
Marx not only was he you know I think
that I would just like to hit like two
things one would just be some
suggestions of a couple like essay
I think our foundational cuz I don't
want people get lost there's so much
that Marx put out and people are very
intimidated by capital for example I
really I really hit bet have been
hitting on this a lot I think people
should spend the 30 minutes it takes to
read the Communist Manifesto there's a
kind of feeling that some people have
that it's so Elementary that if you're
already a socialist and you skipped it
for whatever reason that you know you
don't need to go back but it's a really
important text that really comes in and
makes clear like the ideas of historical
materialism and the kind of communist
project and the mindset that you know he
was putting forward and and a lot of
really important work when it comes to
class consciousness - I also highly
suggest the the German ideology which is
something that you know I've been sort
of returning to more and more lately you
know because that was a really crucial
text in laying clear like the idea of
ideology as a very important like
political concept that we needed to
break through and you know for some of
the more interesting you know writings
on communism that Marx ever did like
explicit and I just wanted to you know
share this one line you know from the
German ideology where Marx says
communism is for us not a state of
affairs which is to be established and
ideal to which reality will have to
adjust its itself we call communism the
real movement which apologies which
abolishes the present state of things
the conditions of this movement result
from the premises now in existence and I
think that really encapsulates the kind
of Marxist materialist politics which is
completely separate from a kind of like
idealist politics right that you know
these are things that will come out of
like these movements rather than
something that will just be able to be
imposed top-down I think there's a lot
of lessons and reflections that we could
that people really need to be doing and
return the Marxist is very rewarding a
process yeah I guess I guess I have
three quick thoughts one is to second
the recommendation about the Communist
Manifesto
I actually think about it a lot when in
the context of
certain kinds of like intra left debates
and disagreements about tactics and
strategy because it often occurs to me
that like the last chapter of the
Communist Manifesto
everybody knows the last couple lines
reading it like you know workers have
nothing to lose but their chains in a
workers world unite but nobody seems to
read or remember what the actual chapter
that that's in is right so the actual
chapter title is position of the
communist in relation to various
existing opposition parties and it's all
about how under different concrete
conditions you have to support an ally
with tactically different existing
movements that fall short of what you
want right so you know in the in Poland
we support the struggle for independence
at this place we support you know the
boudoir Democratic opposition party etc
etc and and I find it really striking
because I think there people who who
think of themselves as Marxist just sort
of categorically reject the idea that
you even that those kinds of tactical
calculations strategic compromise
whatever would even come up that would
even be something you'd have to do the
second the second point would be as far
as like what people can read that's
that's it's short you know that I mean
you know you don't like even in
quarantine you have a limited amount of
time you're not going to dive into all
three Kent values of capital one thing
that that I think is like really
rewarded is you go to like Marxist or
where all this stuff is free and they go
to the critique of the Gotha program and
read just just chapter one the critique
on cots program just on its own it's
like a five minute read and I think it's
really important and kind of
underappreciated because the
distinctions that he's laying out of
there if you wonder about things like
okay so do socialists or Marxist or in
Marxist view should socialist advocate
absolute equality no matter what or or
how should they think about that issue
is you know is sort of distribution what
we should be thinking most about or
should be thinking about
all that stuff marks lays out in a very
you know in a way that's like very quick
for you to read and you know it's it's
not really too abstract because he was
he was writing it not for his own
satisfaction like I think Marx has a
line somewhere what is talking about the
German ideology what he says that his
and Engels original plan was to was to
write it to like work out their own
thoughts and then leave it to the nine
criticism with the rats you know but
like the critique you got the program
isn't like that he's writing it for this
immediate context for this factional
struggle in the German Socialist
Movement you know so he's you know he's
writing for people who are immersed in
left politics but aren't necessarily
philosophers or theoreticians final
thought I was often think about one of
the best pieces of Marx's writing you
know other than stuff like his body
shaming of the Cuban which is also you
know good writing in its own way which
was in his introduction the critique of
Hegel's philosophy of right and you know
in the context he's talking about you
know his his critique of religion but I
think it's just generally applicable to
to illusions and disillusionment of any
kind right you know it could think about
in terms of the whole enterprise of
debunking things right you know when he
says that the purpose of the purpose of
trying to combat these illusions you
know what he refers to is plucking the
flower from the chain is not so that
people can wear the chain without
consolation but so they can throw off
the chain and pluck the living flower
and that's both very good right in and
just very insightful yeah that's that's
awesome I'll just add quick so I took
capital in college and I and again it
was this was a very good class very
demanding I was a Chomsky kid very
influenced by the economy
anti-globalization movement which I was
peripherally peripherally involved in as
a teenager and you know I was a
interested in fact and I was interested
in some green party formations so I
think a backdrop of a lot of my thinking
was very much that you know I would read
some like Alexander Coburn and sort of
have some strategic understanding of the
Soviet Union as a counterweight to
America and of course like everybody I
had some interest in Cuba but you know
it was very much of that time which is
that in this sort of big picture sense
communism is discredited and from
Liberatore standpoint you know you know
basically some version of sort of
basically progressive liberal politics
with some sort of anarchists flourish
and varnish was kind of the best you
could hope for and then I also would say
I was desperately I felt so marginalized
frankly by my upbringing that I was like
terrified of getting involved in like
some type of hopeless enterprise and
that played with my own psychology and
and you know various promise that I
won't get into but I will say it's
important for context and what what I
read Marx and you know I I went in you
know I understood I mean I've read some
philosophy I had some understanding of
continental philosophy not in any deep
level but I knew that Marx wasn't just a
pamphleteer I was certainly not ready
for the level of economic vigor rigor in
it and I was not ready for the scope and
but I would say that really the biggest
thing that hit me was just basically
just the idea of profit as stolen labor
time just to keep it really simple
that reframe of
looking at a factory or looking and and
then actually because I wrote a piece
that applied it to Silicon Valley and
did well on that paper and that you know
and and it was great to look at like hey
all of the new rhetoric of production
and different types of work is being
valorized but if you accept this frame
of what actually generates value and
that basically wages conceal the true
relationship between labor and value is
mediated by a boss I throws that just
the it unsettled me in my worldview I
mean it well it wasn't just a sort of
additional you know I already came in
obviously with a understanding of
injustice and inequity and and so on but
that's that's no different than the kind
of utopians and people with various
moral rejections this was a alternative
way of systemising how the economy looks
and I thought that was pretty compelling
and then the other one I was very
interested in the African National
Congress at the time and of course I
still am and I wanted to do a piece kind
of fitting this stuff with what I was
learning about the liberation of South
Africa and then the challenges going
into governing South Africa and so my
professor guided me to one of these
essays that like you know it gets popped
up with this sort of generic like Marx
is bad but one of the most i won't even
attempt to summarize it but on the
jewish question one of the most
demanding and rewarding things I've ever
read in my life and the distinction
between political emancipation and human
emancipation anyway I would just say to
make a long story short I actually think
a lot of the real basic anchoring of my
politics which like everything else is
in motion but has gotten more and more
anchored into this materialist base
actually does go back to reading that
essay seeing how I could correlate it
with what was happening with South
Africa how you could achieve the most
difficult unimaginable Liberation's
imaginable against the most entrenched
despicable forces whether it be
anti-semitism as he was writing about or
obviously the South African apartheid
state and that there was nothing but
movement and motion in them and then at
the same time you could completely leave
other aspects of state and private
relationships entirely unaltered and in
fact not only unaltered they could merge
with the new forms and again it was just
another one of those experiences of like
it was really frustrating and exhausting
and unpleasant but actually like I
really that's a different way of looking
at things and one that's quite
compelling
yeah
absolutely I never went to the synagogue
again definitely not the point of that
essay yeah I think I think I actually
we're talking about on the Jewish
Question the the first time I was ever
on TM yes yes you know talking about how
this is like really the way that people
quote on the Jewish Question is really
like one of the best signs of like how
LED internet like makes it well I'm not
gonna say makes us dumber it makes it
easier for us to be done right you know
because it used to be that if you wanted
to
to quote mine something you had to at
least flip through it first you might
accidentally get a general impression of
what the book is about breath now you
literally just search key phrases and
find shocking sounding passages maybe
more like that so you know if you know
if there's some stuff that you know
sounds anti-semitic in there if in fact
you know there's some stuff that
actually does reflect the fact that you
know marks in certain respects right you
know accepted you know some of the ideas
that were in the air about this stuff
you can excuse critiquing others of them
right you know that they but then like
you entirely miss
the fact that not only is it not an
anti-semitic essay the entire point of
the essay is to criticize his fellow
young gay Liam Bruno bar for who was
making this bad kind of hegelian
argument against Jewish emancipation and
to argue that not only in favor of
Jewish emancipation right not only in
favor of giving shooters legal equality
but also to say that legal equality
wasn't enough we have to go beyond that
mm-hmm yeah and and also the dynamic
which again foreshadows so many other
things of of course there yes like you
can do a psychological read of it and
say what are his own ambiguities about
his own to his heritage what in what
extent is he absorbing prevalent
anti-semitic attitudes absolutely but
he's also and this is also another beef
he's having with the young Hegelians
he's he's also kind of juxtaposing the
need for Jewish rights and actually
questioning beyond it's almost like
three steps I read it it's like okay
there's political rights for Jews that's
not enough because that doesn't go
accredited that doesn't encompass all of
human emancipation but then when we
start to accomplish all of human
emancipation maybe we want to liberate
ourselves from religion generally and
that's part of the you know the tension
and contradiction of the essay but
that's not apology for anti-semitism
that's actually an attack on the young
Hegelians trying to basically saying and
having a secular state liberates you
from religion which of course is an
argument I love because I'm the
structures continue even as the clothing
changes but yeah yeah I would just I
would just add in that's you know spirit
of criticism to that you know people
understand that you know one of marks
the reason Marx is so important for the
socialist movement or the communist
movement is not because he invented
socials of our communism which I think a
lot of people think that is what
happened it was literally that like
there are a lot of tendencies that were
happening around a Europe at that time
that were about like
kind of form of liberation for the
working class but you know a lot of them
were very utopian you had people were
like we're gonna go off into the woods
and build like a magical you know
society of Marx that was a ridiculous
idea obviously and then there were
people who were very fast and loose with
their understandings of economics and
like they generalized oppression under
capitalism it's like what Marx Marx is
like greatest contribution I think to
the socialist a communist movement was
giving it a kind of you know academic
scientific rigor in it so it wasn't just
like a kind of moral Proclamation
against the system right it's like
everyone plenty of people are frustrated
with the system around them but when it
becomes what becomes very powerful is
when you start to understand the system
around you so that you can change it I
mean that's like you know Marx is a
famous quote like the Java Floss
philosophers is not to understand the
world but to change it right and not
merely to interpret the world but to
change it right that's like the real
Marxists a legacy for me at least is
that was just like really building like
you know and not by the way pushing down
your kind of moral anger or anything
like that if you read Marx it's filled
with like frustration and passion but it
was always you know as lemon says like
have your heart on fire in your head
your heart on fire and your head your
brain on ice right it's like you have to
have both of those sides if you want to
make changes in the world yeah awesome
no you know there he came along and
there were these big social disruptions
happening and there are some french guys
that were just like what if we drove a
you know second and the tennis courts no
socialism Marx was just like no I'll
still give rights the nebbish woods no
because there's not economics goddammit
Hegel was smart he was an all
right and far back is a poser
the only reason people will remember his
name was because I embarrassed him he's
the Memphis Bleek of his time all right
so you've got actually it's not a bad
analogy what seem that you don't even
have to read Marx it's all yeah I got
you basically yeah
French politics German philosophy and
English economics none of these other
idiots can do it cuz they're dumb it's
actually kind of true you just watched a
Michael Brooks show video subscribe to
get them all why wouldn't you don't be
foolish
click subscribe below and become a
patron as well patreon.com slash t MBS
thanks everybody


## Keywords:
