---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=99322ZVE-Fg
---

# Video
TMBS Reading Suggestions - Think Tank
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=99322ZVE-Fg)

## Transcript:

anyways David Griscom get it in the air
with some Texas man what you think we
got some questions yeah well we have a
few um let me I don't know let me start
uh so we had a lot of questions for like
book suggestions this thing I could just
sort of like ask those sort of
rapid-fire okay no one had any ones for
them okay um the the first one was for
you I think particularly Michael like do
you have any good this is from a David
do you recommend any books on Lulla yeah
this is kind of tricky um I would
recommend there's a book that or books
actually put out that maybe I should
honestly just step up and see if I could
find it on my shelf but it's basically
like it's I've I don't have the name off
the top of my head but I have a copy of
it and recommended it to people which is
basically just like Lula explaining like
kind of interviews with Lula during the
lead right up to his political
imprisonment and it was sort of it's
things called while I was condemned
academically there's a book that came
out in 1992 called the Workers Party and
democratization in Brazil I think Perry
Anderson's
long-form essays in the London Review of
Books or actually I just got that
yesterday oh there you go Zillah part
yeah and there's one other book I'm I
apologize what I do promised so those
are good places to start but what I do
promise and I know I've done it before
is that this week I'm gonna do a general
stream and honestly guys I think I'm not
gonna volunteer you guys but if you guys
are moved to do this I think it would be
great if the three of us did this at
different points but I'm gonna do a just
pure you know recommend four five six
books streaming this week but that's how
I get started on on Brazil yeah that
that sounds yeah that was my only
suggestion to as the Perry Anderson who
I think is good on a lot of different
now I have some I have some you know a
few things but I think you know I think
Perry Anderson is basically pretty
good for for for tracking this stuff
yeah um and then the other one I think
the book one that I have was uh
someone's getting into wants to get an
Alexander Coburn as a writer
this is Justin was a good book to start
with I'm ready for this I know Michaels
I know Michaels been been reading this
as well you know colossal wreck you know
like his collection of essays and and
basically those are the Coburn books
that I would suggest costal RAC the
golden ages in us he has a few of these
books and they're really fun to read
because they're basically you know short
little snippets of his essays or letters
or writing study half from different
periods of you know in time it's really
cool because you get to see one his
perspective but you also get short of
track like these major political events
are going on like the elections Bill
Clinton what people on the Left were
saying the invasion of Iraq yeah anyways
they're very they're phenomenal for
having a essayist and I'm excited to
visit Coburn now that you've described
it that way because having an essayist
that you trust their judgment that you
can track through time it's a amazing
history refresher it's almost like
reading the history of that time from
your favorite author but yeah collection
of essays they're always good so I'm
gonna do those are good it this one is I
wouldn't you know I wouldn't push them
with this one is hard but uh I want to
reread his writing on Gary Webb which is
really important Journal dome CIA
cocaine connection and then
oh yeah whiteout whiteout and then the
other one that is it's dated but it's
just kind of fun if you enjoy like this
sort of polemic genre he wrote a book in
2000 I think he actually co-wrote it
called Al Gore and user's manual and
it's just brutal it's really like just
kind of random at this point they even
think about Al Gore in that way but it's
a pretty you know it's it's fun chef
Cooper's gotta get stuff digitized yeah
yeah he doesn't have the same kind of he
really hated the internet - that's an
unhelpful Andrew yeah it's uh well
except it's all on the counter Bunch
archive les worth no and this one isn't
as much as a suggestion just like a
funny thing I probably won't have an
opportunity to talk about when he was at
the nation they made you write like a
book a year and this is he wrote this
book in like the 70s when he was at the
nation or might have been the Village
Voice actually sorry on Ches when
everyone was obsessed with chass√©s like
this idea of like being you know the
smart guy right plays chess every genius
plays chess II wrote a book called idle
passion chess in the dance of death and
it's just simply something some of the
biggest morons and politics in history
or allegedly look very good at chess we
need to bring that back somebody who
plays a lot of chess and is OK at it and
gets beat a lot I can I have that hope
that is true that everyone else beat him
using more honest she's real geniuses
play checkers and then the last book
question is is sort of broad but does
anyone have any good recommendations for
books about apartheid so it's a good
question
apartheid that's um it reflects
apartheid but I really like this book I
know I've recommended it before table
Owen Beck the legacy of liberation table
and Becky in the future of the South
African dream toggle and Becky's a very
fascinating political figure to me I
mean one that there's a lot of
legitimate critiques around but also I
think some important defenses and again
just generally a fascinating person and
I think it's a really thorough bio and
you'll have some insight into the nature
of apartheid how the ancy fought
apartheid in terms of different
increments like an exiled wing that did
really sophisticated basically
international public affairs and
cultural diplomacy an armed wing and
then actually kind of like waves of
labor unrest that happened internally
particularly in the 80s and just the
different factions and then the you know
since the anc itself so I might actually
start there and then you know that what
a thing and then I'll recommend this is
you know this is just a little slice of
it but there's this decent movie called
endgame about one of the one of the
different negotiation processes that was
involved in the end of apartheid and
maybe also Rev Run II casseroles
autobiography as well but this is
another one I'll look into but those are
off the top of my head yeah well unless
I'm at did you have any so yeah sorry
then I guess like that's the book
section somebody asked about my break oh
yeah Soviet Union history actually
you're right you know some of you have
any on those David I don't have any good
notes on that those are those are tough
Oh like I get I can get back to somebody
on the Cuba books I have I have a few
that I've gone through in the past that
are there I mean they're difficult
obviously because a lot of the people
especially in the West you're right
about them or writing about them you
know to be against them and then a lot
of there's also you know another section
of people who are just like complete
ideologues and they don't deal with
those those countries David do you have
a read on the big popular Stalin books
by Stephen Kotkin not not in particular
now well my suggestion my suggestion for
for this actually is there's a really
good Coke or an essay like if you're
interested in like taking a start diving
into this I can't remember the title but
I'm sure you can google it Coburn wrote
a really long essay as the Soviet Union
collapsed in the nation so if you just
like go on the nation and search for
coburn Soviet Union it's a really great
long essay where he sort of Fino deals
with the tradition the hopes that it
represented to him and especially like
the the shifts that happened later and
so the UNIX people are very familiar
obviously a lot with Russian Revolution
and early Soviet Union I'm Lenin but
then like there's this kind of gap I
think in a lot of people's history of
the Soviet Union like the Khrushchev
years and the eighties at least from
like the socialist perspective not just
as like the Soviet Union has like a
geopolitical power but anyways like yeah
Colburn has a really great long essay on
that that I would suggest as a place to
check waffle might read uh it relates to
Cuba but it's bigger
I like Vijay Prashad people's history of
the third world mm-hmm that's a that's
definitely worthy I've been reading I've
been reading Walter Rodney's book on the
Russian Revolution you know the Russian
Revolution a history from the third
world which is definitely a really
interesting text it's a little bit more
late it's it's not really a lot more
like philosophical and Marxist in the
sense that is like more advanced than
the kind of popular history but that's
like an interesting perspective is Vijay
Prashad actually has another one that's
in similar terrain that's called red
star over the east and hoodrats the way
the Soviet Union impacted like you know
he has like one quote from a Mexican
revolutionary contemporaneous leaping
like we don't even know like we don't
read Marx like but we just know that
this is about basically like kicking out
the landlords mm-hmm and so we're down
it's kind of a it's an interesting book
it's a fun book yeah just like just saw
that it's like it was my great
professors with was you know an Iranian
Marxist and who's talking like
pre-revolution Iran like like everyone
was a Leninist because we knew that we
had to be Leninists because like being a
Ron Ian's right in that part of the
world if we don't make the revolution
happen it will never happen for us right
we don't live in like a Germany where we
could just sort of expect the evolution
there like the evolutionary arguments of
socialism didn't receive that viable
obviously for people you know as the
subjects of Empire I will say on the
flip side and we just I would recommend
and I can't wait to have him on TMDs but
on Jacobin on Saturday Anna and I
interviewed John Nichols I'm a big fan
of John Nichols like in the same I'm a
big fan of Harvey Kay obviously I think
it's really important to understand the
American radical tradition and he was
talking and his new book is about Henry
Wallace who was a fascinating American
figure I mean he's you know Roosevelt's
vice president and represented
unapologetically the left of the New
Deal and all of the great things about
the New Deal including
you know he was muscled out and
absolutely hated by both the bankers
because he wanted to push the New Deal
much much further and by the southern
apart tightest s-- because he was
contemporaneously and clearly anti
segregation and racism he called people
many Hitler's and connected the
defeating of races in the United States
with the defeating of fascism worldwide
but we talked a little bit in the book
in in the interview about how like this
whole Midwest populist tradition which
is a really powerful and only recently
kind of snuffed out American tradition
that we need to revive that encompasses
Democrats and Republicans and socialists
like Eugene Debs and really powerful
trade unionist movements and he was
saying like on some level it's just
really intuitive which is that basically
after the 1848 uprisings a fair amount
of German and Swedish and other
continental Europeans who they had read
Marx they were very strong about trade
unionism they came into places like
North Dakota in particular which
Nicholls was like was essentially like
bank-owned feudalism and they were you
know deeply passionate about America and
the opportunities that it had for them
and they were also you know they didn't
leave their politics behind and that's
one of the engines of American history
in a very positive sense before North
Dakota was a state it was known for like
the deployment of these giant harvester
machines and actually there's a Cass
County I think there's a town I've been
out of North Dakota for so long I'm
forgetting what it is but it's just west
of Fargo
Casselton that like it's like the Ohio
of North Dakota where all these
governors I always come from Casselton
because and that's where the original
giant harvester operations were even
before it was the state and yeah we
eventually got the ax Bank in North
Dakota which accomplishment paid my way
to go to study abroad so yeah there you
go
you know just if we're going into that
part of history like this has been what
I've been interested in primarily I've
actually been moving away a lot from you
know obviously I always have got to go
back and read you know Marciano's true
therefore important
but you know I've been thinking a lot
about what happened with Bernie Sanders
in particular like what we should be
doing next so I've really been wanting
to I've been revisiting like the
American populist movement because it's
endlessly fascinating and it's such a
buzzword now it's interesting is sort of
like tease apart the differences between
like actually existing populism of the
United States when this was an actual
viable movement that you know came close
to two wielding power across across the
south and and in the Midwest and and
doing it in a way that was you know it's
quite radical for the time really
uniting people across like racial lines
you know on a very like focus class
politics not saying that it wasn't
without you know issues and things like
that but like that was a map and a model
and a lot of a lot of ways I think it's
very different from the the populist
what people would call like populism in
the u.s. today but it's really
interesting to to see that you know what
really worked with people was the very
clear distinctions of making making it
clear to I don't know if it was clear
that or if it just seems clear now to us
because we have history understand like
working people is particularly like
farmers people who didn't own didn't
have access to the banking system we're
basically all indebted unto a small
glass a class of merchants and that was
able to unite all these farmers that
then united with like organized labor
and in in the cities against this class
of finance ears being the capitalists in
like this merchant class in a way that
was very viable I don't know and it's
like it's very textbook like kind of
like socialism you know like how you
would sort of model things out but it
seemed to happen like very organically
it wasn't like something that was so
planned it was just like people sort of
rising up together and I don't know like
I think the lesson for me and reading
these things is like trying to figure
out where those tensions and those
divisions like because if you want to
have politics you need to create the
people or like an idea of like what is
the United what unites us and I think
one of the problems of this this
movement that we're starting to hit at
is that like we're having an idea sort
of like lost versus the elite but it's
starting to become it's difficult for
some people to tease out like what the
US always means in a way that can like
survive shocks
especially and survived something like
the loss of you know the unifying thing
about the Bernie Sanders movement sorry
to go on the ramp but it's just like
this is very interesting the American
tradition is very rich now has more
lessons than I think a lot of people
realize for today I second that
yeah what I like about that too is and
this is this is sort of you know when I
maybe I'll come up with a better slogan
than cosmopolitan socialism it's just as
exactly what we should take through the
heartland but I think all you
know self-deprecating aside I think that
I want to double up and really reinforce
getting away from slogans and utopian
nonsense that repulses people and I
think creates just untold unnecessary
barriers to to forming you know concrete
political movements actions that are
durable and strategic and on the other
hand but to me I mean of course there
needs to be a deep internationalism and
I think what's exciting when you engage
in history pop you know properly is you
you see all of the historical route like
it's already at play if you understand
that element of the continental European
influence on the American populist
movement it's it that these these kind
of synchronicities or that really moving
clip that we played of tobol and becky
talking about the African National
Congress and learning from you know and
the old man who wanted them to learn
from James Connelly like these things
are actually organic and a lot of what
they require is not a new slogan or
buzzword or trend of today but really
just to retrieve history you just
watched a Michael Brooks show video
subscribe to get them all why wouldn't
you don't be foolish click subscribe
below and become a patron as well
patreon.com slash TMDs thanks everybody


## Keywords:
