---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZxNYQF3LM5M
---

# Video
TMBS ReAir 101: Is China Socialist? ft. Richard Wolff
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZxNYQF3LM5M)

## Transcript:

foreign


said he's coming back Pakistan's former
military dictator and president had to
resign under immense pressure from
political leaders and the courts in
2008. it was a near war with India in
1999 which made bushara's high profile
career controversial from the beginning
he took power through a military coup
from the then elected prime minister
Nawaz Sharif the sheriff chose to call
himself chief executive and then became
the president
but his decision to join the U.S led war
on terror did not go down well in
Pakistan he played a key role in the U.S
invasion of Afghanistan and the military
was deployed for the first time on the
northwest tribal border Pakistan has
taken a considered decision Pakistan's
intelligence agencies and the CIA helped
train Fighters during the Soviet War in
the 80s and developed strong ties with
fighters on both sides of the Border but
Al-Qaeda Affiliated groups targeted both
military and civilians after musharra's
decision to severtise with them the
sheriff tried to sign agreements with
tribal elders but fighters on one hand
and pressure from Washington was a
difficult balance he also tried to
normalize ties with India but wasn't
able to carry it through after he tried
to remove Pakistan's chief justice a
massive movement in favor of Justice if
the car Chaudhary was one of the
deciding factors in ending with
Sheriff's 10-year rule he tried to say
in power by allowing political leaders
in Exile to come back and wiping clean
old criminal cases

welcome to the Michael Brooks show we're
broadcasting live from downtown Brooklyn
USA where left his best as it is
everywhere else with super producer
Matlock yo Chief economists
Leonard Peltier Advocate David griscombe
how's it going and everybody else in the
tmbs universe every single human being
that makes this show possible
on this week's program Professor Richard
Wolff he returns
we're talking about China what is the
Chinese economic system what is the
history of the modern Chinese economy
from Mao's revolutionary days
to the rising China of today what
economy are we talking about then what
is Marx's concept of alienation have to
do with white supremacy Global terrorism
and well alienation
we're also going to be touching on the
concept of primitive accumulation it's a
materialist Marxist orientation with our
great guide Professor Richard Wolff on
this week's program
David Grisham is going to talk to us
about a political prisoner that could
have been released through executive
order
by Bill Clinton or Barack Obama
theoretically George W bush or Donald
Trump for that matter
though obviously that isn't where
they're facing the pressure we honor the
Legacy and memory of Tony Morrison with
a powerful articulation
on the state of this country's history
in light of the atrocities in El Paso
shout out to Mike Revell
yes into go ahead Point your mic a bit
at you toward you point the top of your
mic a bit toward you oh Point sorry am I
off no you're good no I'm good elevator
noise my apologies oh the elevator noise
Grassroots media microvel endorses
Bernie Sanders
major moves there we also honor his
legacy of exposing the Pentagon papers
I didn't know about that that and much
much more on the post game we're talking
about Jeremy Corman Dominique Remy joins
us to talk about an amazing documentary
film that she's making that you should
know about and support
a debunk
with the great Ben Burgess and Richard
Wolff responds to and debunks
his own Milton Friedman video
and an update on cashmere all that and
more on the post game and Main show but
first
we have to talk about
what's happening in Afghanistan and
Pakistan give you a bit of an illicit
history of that region and conflict and
in order to do that we need to
understand some key Dynamics we need to
understand the Soviet invasion the U.S
Saudi orchestrated war against the
Soviet invasion the mujahideen and the
heroin conflict that fuels so much of
the war in Afghanistan today
we are 18 years into the U.S invasion in
Afghanistan which took place after
September 11th
countless civilian lives endless
injuries deaths of U.S soldiers and NATO
soldiers a further destabilized and
significantly reconfigured Pakistan in
terms of enhanced power for its
inter-services agencies its intelligence
apparatus and so forth
but in order to understand the 2001
Invasion to today
which spawned George W Bush's global war
on terror we need to go back to the
1980s
Afghanistan has been at war in some form
or another since
1978. first Soviet troops were deployed
there in the late 1970s to shore up a
communist government which did introduce
significant reforms as well as
significant repression
there was a mujahideen Uprising the CIA
and at that point the Carter
Administration and National Security
adviser Jeb Brzezinski saw an
opportunity to do what the Soviet Union
what had happened to the United States
during the United States is genocidal
Imperial war in Vietnam which was drag
the Soviets into an unwinnable long-term
conflict against the local populace that
didn't want them there
and while I have infinitely more
ideological sympathies with the Viet
Cong than the mujahideen and I am not a
trotskyite in fact I think we can all
agree on the basic human trait that most
people do not want a outside occupying
force in their country
that is almost universally true and
obviously Afghanistan was no exception
the mujahideen was funded by the Saudis
and the CIA and the United States the
money and the weapons were funneled
through Pakistan General zial hook who
had taken power in the late 70s deposing
uh prime minister Bhutto who he later
hung Benazir bhutto's father
ran Pakistan in the 1980s while he
shredded through the remnants of what
had initially been a Muslim identified
country in the sense that Pakistan was
supposed to be a safe harbor for Muslims
after the partition of India rightly or
wrongly
Ali Jinnah the founder of Pakistan was a
secular-minded independence leader
General zial hook with the funding of
the Saudis the National Security
partnership with the United States
increased his own personal dictatorial
Powers the power of the military
establishment and intelligence
establishment in Pakistan and
introduce significant radical and
far-reaching religious Draconian laws
and rules that still distort Pakistani
politics today
in the 1990s after fueling a horrific
Civil War and resistance there the
United States pulled out without any
interest in the long-term consequences
of funding radical forces letting
weapons fly all over the place and of
course other forms of blowback like
Osama Bin Laden who got his career start
as a young Saudi Shake helping the
mujahideen efforts in Afghanistan in
1996 the Taliban took power a young
religious fervent movement backed by the
pakistanis there was strong interest in
establishing diplomatic relations with
the Pakistan with the Taliban from the
United States in the interests of oil
pipelines
a Taliban would host Osama Bin Laden and
after of course September 11th the
United States engaged in a punishing air
campaign and invasion of Afghanistan
although of course key Al-Qaeda forces
and Osama Bin Laden would deploy to
Pakistan and this double game would
continue then that would also lead of
course to the proliferation of the Drone
war in Pakistan which has claimed
thousands of innocent lives now as we
speak there are peace negotiations
between the Taliban NATO the United
States and Ashraf ghani the current
Afghan president this is in the same
year that civilian casualties again have
increased from U.S and Allied Forces
this is a brief clip of Imran Khan the
Pakistani prime minister meeting with
Donald Trump a couple of weeks ago
discussing prospects for peace in the
region I've been looking forward to this
meeting since I assumed office the words
of Pakistani prime minister Imran Khan
as he met U.S presidents Donald Trump at
the White House on Monday
top of the agenda for the meeting the
ongoing peace talks in Afghanistan
Donald Trump sees the opportunity to
take a shot at previous U.S
administrations by saying that Pakistan
was now helping to bring both the
Taliban and the Afghan government to the
negotiating table they're helping us a
lot now I think they could have helped
us a lot in the past but it doesn't
matter we have a new leader he's going
to be a great leader of Pakistan but no
I think Pakistan could have done a lot
but they chose not to that's because
they did not respect U.S leadership a
decidedly more toned down approach than
in the past
since president Trump took office in
2017 ties between the two had all but
stagnated with the U.S regularly
accusing Pakistan are providing a safe
haven to terrorists
early last year Donald Trump translated
that criticism into action by suspending
300 million dollars in U.S security Aid
to Pakistan for what he called lies and
deceit concerning the country's
anti-terrorism efforts
Pakistan for its part has blamed
Washington for making Pakistan's
scapegoats for its failures in the war
on terrorism insisting Pakistan has paid
a heavy economic and human cost for its
cooperation with the United States but
as it looks to withdraw troops from
Afghanistan and end the 17-year long war
in the country Washington needs
Islamabad support now more than ever
with peace talks still ongoing and of
course this is on the heels of a un
report finding that U.S and Afghan
government are responsible for most
civilian deaths in the country primarily
due to airstrikes this year the
pakistanis are under significant
pressure and they've always been under
significant pressure see the the
Pakistani Dynamic is that they need what
they consider to be strategic depth
again against India that is a friendly
government in Afghanistan that's why
they supported mujahideen forces that's
why they supported Taliban forces and
that's why they've consistently
continued to support militant groups in
Afghanistan however those groups have
metastasized inside Pakistan causing
significant problems inside Pakistan
itself which in addition to Pakistani
political instability extreme inequality
U.S interference the presence of U.S
drones environmental pollution caused by
U.S supplying and refuel routes have all
contributed to a broader crisis in
Pakistan
there are multiple factions inside the
Taliban including the Pakistani Taliban
and those that the United States and its
allies are negotiating with with regards
to ending the war in Afghanistan heroin
production is also a major part of this
the U.S has relied on the Pakistani
intelligence service to maintain the
Afghanistan Pakistan border and it has
allowed the intelligence service to
become a major uh have a major role in
the global opium trade the border
between Pakistan and Afghanistan is as
large as the distance from London to
Moscow over rugged terrain
throughout the past decades the CIA isi
and the Taliban its earlier and present
formations have been involved in the
heroin Market to varying degrees you all
remember the previous uh Afghan
government significant members of it
were linked to the heroin trade
in June
Pakistani prime minister Imran Khan and
The Afghani president Ashraf ghani held
talks where Khan said that the
successful peace talks between
Afghanistan government and the Taliban
were a quote unquote shared
responsibility
but even these talks have been derided
in private by important figures in the
Pakistani military who resent being
implicated in the taliban's power in
spite of their role in it and it's
important to understand that there are
differing incentive structures inside
the Pakistani power structure ultimately
the most significantly significant
sources of power inside Pakistan or the
military and the intelligence Services
the isi but there is a fight for
judicial Independence and there is the
effort of Imran Khan that is fizzled out
steadily within the last year but he did
come into office promising a Pakistani
social democracy based on Islamic values
of public social investment
those things have all evaporated
um in his year in office as he's gone
across the gulf and to the IMF and
elsewhere in an attempt to keep the bare
minimum of the Pakistani economy afloat
and again in a place that is plagued by
extreme income inequality so the bottom
line is is that
we are no safer there is no better
quality of life for anyone but that
there is a deep incentive structure from
the U.S military industrial complex the
Pakistani intelligence military
industrial complex various factions
within Afghanistan to keep this going
even as as it is consumed tens of
thousands of lives
and uh we will be covering more of this
but that's a good primer I do recommend
people who are interested in more of
this to check out ghost Wars and
directorate S by Steve Cole those are
both really exceptional books
um
let's get to the shout out
shall we
I'm looking for a remix


do some research for yourself
Dave Rubin is not bright folks
uh
August 20th
I don't know how much like
as I make the final revisions on my book
it's like obviously I'm not gonna
actually write anything on Dave rubin's
book but there just will be a couple of
pages on just the comedic concept of
Dave Rubin having a book is it too late
to change the name of your book because
I have a suggestion it's not too late in
fact suggestions are welcome very mixed
feedback on the working title which
surprised me I thought it was good but
I'm open to Smart Suggestions uh I think
you should call it burn Dave rubin's
book
a little bit off the track what you're
doing remind me what uh what was the uh
title again against the web
Cosmopolitan socialist answer to the igw
and the new right I like that what I
like about that is that it sort of
future proofs it and doesn't tie to it I
think these guys are swirly in the drain
they're swirling so their arguments are
going to be the arguments we're going to
be dealing with for decades and decades
that's why they're relevant but
as a brand proposition it's it's super
shaky although
the thing is though is that when you
have
funding structures in place and a
certain tribe behind you like
it's cooling now but like there's gonna
be a documentary about Peterson in the
fall like approp Peterson documents I
think so I mean there's
there's some resiliency to it right but
worse than that even if those four guys
disappeared tomorrow
the Weinstein brothers or whatever else
the idea the idea infrastructure is what
we're going to be dealing with if you
want to something a funny Dynamic that I
think our fans should maybe um you know
prod out a little bit is how uh air Quan
stands uh new show the portal
if you listen to his first episode yeah
it's called the portal I listened to the
first episode with Peter Thiel and it is
exactly Dave rubin's show it's them
talking about well you wouldn't think we
would agree on this stuff but uh we
actually do agree in this wait why
wouldn't they disagree on that well
because Weinstein is a leftist oh don't
you know left right right yeah and
that's so funny I voted for Al Gore but
both of you and I agree that we should
uh tag nicaraguans with uh electronic
plates exactly and you're a Democrat
yeah down to Glass a little over the
financial relationship between the two
right
doesn't he actually work for people he's
the managing partner at teal Capital so
I wonder how they're able to get along
so well yeah it's shocking making huge
cash
um yeah we're able to get along by
profiting probably like private
surveillance apparatus of the United
States and making an insane amount of
money off of it but some somebody should
go through and clip comparisons between
how Weinstein introduces his
conversation with Teo and any Dave Rubin
conversation ever because it's my
understanding is just stealing Reuben's
thing
um Dave realize what's happening realize
what's happening they're gonna throw you
overboard see that's what's happening
they're pretending they're all this like
oh stop making fun of Dave meanwhile
they're taking your whole shtick you
dummy yeah like look out oh we did we
should we really like come to Dave's
defense here or should we just groom
somebody better who's less of an like
sort of obviously it pretends yeah super
smart yeah and we really do need to do a
style guide for Impressions at some
point because the Peter Thiel impression
is hysterical
but it's like it goes back to like The
Gawker case yeah and we need to explain
the right wing Mandela no I'm serious we
literally need a style guide for
Impressions on this show because there's
a lot of new people we need a Wiki for
Canon lore or whatever yeah all right
shout out Mike Revel
so
you know I I think we were pretty
transparent look I
I take this race incredibly seriously I
was really pissed and the DNC is
absolutely violating its own rules that
microvelt isn't on that stage and if
John Delaney and Klobuchar and all these
other idiots and Jokers are on stage it
is a disgusting shame that microvel who
out pulled all of them who has
accomplished more in his career than any
of them who has much more important
things to say about the
military-industrial complex about U.S
foreign policy and any of them it is an
absolute shame he wasn't on that stage
but I didn't you know we didn't give him
a huge amount of attention because look
I'm sorry
electing Bernie Sanders is a is a to use
teal Weinstein like a language it's an
inflection point and it is a major uh
potential I would call it a mega
application in dealing with our world
systems crisis today so I I take this
race really seriously
and frankly you'll see that like
I don't bend over backwards to always do
a lot of like oh but Elizabeth Warren
has good ideas too like no
I'm a Democratic Socialist
Bernie Sanders and the movement that
that campaign represents unparalleled
opportunity so I didn't cover gravel
heavily because I'm not going to cover
any other candidate heavily this
endorsement that Mike Ravel did of
Bernie Sanders was sharp to the point
beautiful and clear and then we're going
to play some archival footage of Mike
Revell putting the Pentagon papers that
revealed the lies about the uh the U.S
government was telling during the
slaughter in Vietnam we'll play those
two clips back to back but first gravel
endorsing Bernie
my name is Mike Gravel I'm proud and
honored to endorse Senator Bernie
Sanders for the presidency of the United
States Bernie has a program that
benefits all Americans not just the one
percent he will be a great president for
all Americans we have a simple choice we
can have a democratic socialism of
Bernie Sanders to benefit all Americans
or we can have Republican socialism
which benefits the one percent and leads
us to a constant state of war the choice
is yours
also as always of course props to the
gravel kids they did an amazing job
those kids are geniuses those kids they
put in a lot of good work I think
they're really good
this is exactly how to do this you
know what are they doing next in
capitalism where you give credit to the
figurehead sort of leader like those
kids I think deserve as much credit as
gravel on ending I think they can gravel
is the vehicle but they drove that thing
they're awesome having a blue check mark
uh Twitter account coming out against
the you know U.S media in general was
absolutely incredible in the past and
just those like awesome tweets were like
they would just I don't even remember
but just like the general like
you're like You Chuck Todd from
like blue check mark like you're saying
David like you know yeah like you know
they've all decided that Mike Gravel
isn't serious anymore because he makes
too much sense but like it's still a U.S
senator
saying like oh blow me John Delaney shut
the up get the out of here
Loser yeah I think if we're assessing
the uh the run there a plus guys good
work a plus all right this is Mike Revel
this is um basically what he was able to
do
and Emma viglin our uh great friend Emma
viglin who's of course check out all of
her work she's brilliant and a regular
on this show and a great reporter she a
flagged this
he read
four thousand and one hundred Pages
depending on papers these are the papers
that Daniel Ellsberg released in the New
York Times as a whistleblower because
the reality of Vietnam was totally
contrary to what the US government was
saying about Vietnam and he used his
Congressional his senatorial privilege
basically uh you know this is the time
Nixon was trying to put Ellsberg in jail
for doing this they were trying to shut
down copies of the New York Times I mean
it's not nearly as bad but it was
certainly the precursor to the
prosecution of Julian Assange and other
journalists and so could you imagine a
U.S senator doing this now
I'm gonna read uh you know the
revelations of U.S civilian killings in
Afghanistan on the senate floor not
likely Mike Ravel did it
the papers
do not support our public statements
the papers do not support our best
intentions
the papers prove
that for 20 years
and certainly for the last 10 years
we have the victims
of our southeast Asia policy
not masters of it
there you go shout out props the
microvilles props to the gravel kids
obviously I'm sure they're still not
gonna they're still gonna be using the
hell out of that great Twitter account
um
look Let's uh let's talk a little bit
about why everybody should become
patrons and about our Chicago show which
is super close
how you guys feeling about the Chicago
show
finally got my uh my trip book act
booked actually feeling very excited
about I I was in Chicago last year
around the same time
uh and I really like that City so I'm
looking forward to it I'd agree I'm
stoked I got a bottle of malort which
we'll have to try if you guys haven't
had it before in preparation we will
definitely try it I haven't had it
before it's very rough good uh
Scandinavian liquor that's very popular
of course I do one in Chicago I do want
to try that
uh I'm sure I bet Chuck Mertz will want
to try that
truck merits uh look he's Gonna Be Our
Guest along I mean you know Jean bajlon
brilliant guy international relations
and Presario we're gonna talk we're
gonna have fun we'll also certainly be
talking about Kurdistan as Turkey
um amps up its uh Colonial Imperial
Focus there uh Jean bajlon Chuck Mertz
is an icon of Chicago I mean if you are
a leftist in that City he's been doing
an incredible public radio show and I
mean I should say like Community radio
show
Now podcast patreon like everything else
since the mid 90s
he's interviewed everybody I'm listening
a historian Gerald Hurd recently he had
a great guest I forget her name
unfortunately but they did a great P
interview on the Carnation revolution in
Portugal I wanted to do a one after
listening to that he's interviewed of
course you know people like Noam Chomsky
but in addition to such great content he
was also kind of a Pioneer in like he's
a funny guy
um and it's a really good show and it's
a great Chicago institution so I was
really excited that he was down to join
us and bring his community in on it at
these shows we play games we do contests
uh
it's a very fun atmosphere I'll say this
we sold out and packed LA and New York
people were standing
Chicago
were
like
were a little over halfway sold out
so it's not at the same scale and I just
want you guys to show up in the same way
that La in New York did If the previous
pattern applies the next couple of weeks
will take off and a ton of tickets will
be sold but I just want
i Frank I want Heartland love
I don't want just tmbs Coastal Elite
love
(Laughter)
we are really excited about the Chicago
show I've had a great time in Chicago I
was only there briefly but caught a Cubs
game
had a good time it's a nice city we're
excited to come out there uh can you put
up on a screen map where people can find
their tickets
just so they have that all squared away
because I mean why wait just go buy your
goddamn tickets now huh I'm sorry I'm
really testing the new YouTube algorithm
um well I did enough serious content
about Southeast South Asia can I
speak now all right this is at Lincoln
Hall
and uh uh Lincoln Hall August 24th
Saturday August 24th Michael Brooks show
live in Chicago at Lincoln Hall that's
where you get your ticket
and we'll see you there also uh well we
have the pitch music on we just did get
a 100 Super Chat from beer fart68 who
says I agree with Mike about the root
cause of gun Vance in America being Sam
Harris hitting on my Muslim Bros sorry
that's the most that's the shrooms
talking seriously do y'all think
prescription meds are probably to blame
the proceeding was for having Professor
wolf and then three's fists so so that's
not really sure what you're asking
doesn't matter it's all brilliant good
job
uh everybody should follow his lead
definitely hit us with a super chat
donation thank you beer fart you're a
genius
um
I'm trying to tease this out no actually
so the pharmaceutical thing is not total
BS I that that is
I have heard that in a couple of
different cases that there there are
side effects linked to certain
medications which could play a role I
would say it's not a defining role
it's not
um
it's not white supremacy it's not
alienation it's not capitalism it's not
guns but
uh could be in the mix and I also
understood a negative Sam Harris
sentiment from it and so I would
certainly like to Echo that as well
I'm telling you I
the Sam Harris chapter is done
and then every day
there's some new idiocy that emanates
from this guy like
um
uh Aina
Muhammad Aina Muhammad tweeted a thing
I'll just say this briefly and I'll do
the pitch she tweeted a Sam Harris thing
today
where today or in some recent podcast
he's saying about the Christ Church
shooter that like oh it's just some
random loser like lunatic right
and so
what is
stunning I mean it shouldn't be stunning
but it's like
he was so dense that he he never
understood people like me would say no
it's not that
ideology doesn't matter of course like
there's a horrific toxic ideology that
permeates a group like Al Qaeda but you
have to first of all understand that
there's not one ideology in Islam and
then secondly you need to look at the
broader forces that contribute to an
ideology flourishing right which of
course he always just reduced to the
one-to-one relationship between U.S
foreign policy and terrorism which was
never I mean that's definitely part of
it and anybody that dismissed that as
being grossly naive but that wasn't even
as simple as that it was like also you
know the role of what type of you know
Islamic training was funded across the
world and all this sorts of stuff but
anyways I'll just stop by saying
the comments that I have seen and
granted I have definitely given myself a
pass from listening to that guy's
podcast since I finished this chapter
the quotes that I have seen because I
know of course everything's out of
context but the out of context quotes
that I have seen would suggest
that not only can he not see the obvious
parallels he he can't even do
like
the other like he he can't even do what
he dismissed it's either like
all ideology all the time or all nothing
Randomness all the time so anyways he's
a putz thank you beer fart uh guys
uh
uh first of all I just want to say
um you know every time at the first of
the month you definitely have to make
sure that your card's up to date your
PayPal is up to date we're actually
pretty much back up to where but we it
was really nice we we crossed that 2500
threshold so we want to get right back
above that 2500 threshold and of course
obviously power our way uh to the next
main goal which is our first 3000
patrons which is significant it's gonna
help us a lot
um I mean you could see as soon as we
cross 2000 we've already
buffed out what we're doing the
production has improved more things are
going around and being invested in and
that will happen again at 3 000.
um but just make sure your cards are up
to date and everything else and the only
other thing I would say and I know I
promise this every week we really have
to do this but uh
there's like spreadsheets of the illicit
history's idea primers
on everything from international law the
history of Jamaica the history of Brazil
but introductions to thinkers like CLR
James CLR James is someone you need to
read to understand the world we're in
today
um
the post games are really fun
we're having an incredible time and
you're part of it
and you also do really get to interact
with and kind of see people you know
it's a different mode when Trevor bull
you or bashgar some car or Anna
kasparian or big was or Richard wolf or
I mean that's haibi we get
you know Emma viglin Malika jabali we
get these hitters
and uh and they have fun with us in the
post game so join us if you can do it do
it now patreon.com tmbs patreon.com tmbs
um
let's talk about Toni Morrison briefly
and then we'll get to the gem
so Toni Morrison is somebody that you
know I'm not gonna uh claim falsely I
think I read
her briefly in college but she is
someone who
you know
I will take the sadness of this day
actually as an opportunity to remind
myself to reader
um
incredibly important novelist
incredibly important thinker contributor
the American scene have you have either
of you guys read much of Tony Morrison
I've read Jazz
um as far as her fiction goes but what
I'm most familiar with as part of uh
your you know research for literary
hangovers or book plain in the dark
whiteness and the literary imagination
which is
um I don't know if people have read
Ralph Ellison's um oh no I'm blank in
the name of this invisible man but
there's a scene in that book where
they're making white paint and the key
ingredient for that white paint is
actually Blackness black paint and Toni
Morrison really gets at that and how
like throughout American literature like
the the role that Blackness plays is is
a defining thing and she's I mean she
understood that as well as anybody I
think that's ever lived in this country
so I just want to say I mean obviously
you know I don't want a shoehorn uh a
lot into this and there's a lot more to
say about uh the terrorism that we saw
in El Paso and I use that word advisedly
with some ambiguity frankly because I
would like to shrink the use of that
word but frankly that meets any
objective definition of how you would
use that word
I was on the hill this morning
I apologize in advance for the bad sound
quality but it was a very good interview
and there's no contradiction in fact not
only is there no contradiction between
understanding alienation the material
Roots the capitalist byproducts when
Bill Fletcher Jr calls uh right-wing
populism the cat the herpes of
capitalism
not only is there no contradiction
between understanding the history and
the reality of white supremacy and those
conditions in fact understanding that
synthesis
and the mutuality of that relationship
is essential to any proper strategy to
defeat it and unwind it in society
and this is part of that broader
education process let's play that clip
from Toni Morrison now this is her in
the 1993 on Charlie Rose
I take your race away
and there you are all strung out and all
you got is your little self and what is
that
what are you without racism
are you any good
are you still strong he's still smart
you still like yourself I mean these are
the questions it's part of it is yes the
victim how terrible it has been for
black people like that I'm not a victim
I refuse to be one and the victim is the
other person who is morally inferior and
that's what that's a serious question
too of course racism or his or her own
self-esteem and definition if you can
only be tall
because somebody's on their knees then
you have a serious problem and my
feeling is white people
have a very very serious problem and
they should start thinking about what
they can do about it
and and you know right
and that's also I mean that's that's
also in sartre's essay on anti-Semitism
I mean they're that
and you can take it in either direction
there's
the idea when you read someone like
Christian piccolini and you see a
Redemption Redemption Arc which needs to
be in this too for everybody because
that's the only you know
it's the only possibility right whether
we're talking about Isis or
white terrorists white supremacist
terrorists so like there's one way of
recognizing the absolute truth of what
she's saying and recognizing Jesus
Christ that's a really broken person
that needs to be exited and
de-radicalized and and understood in a
broader context as much as we may hate
and be disgusted by them and then there
is like the other reality that you know
is driven through in like the
it it the content there shouldn't be
contempt for individuals but the
contempt and the broader discourse for
the pathetic small insecurity that does
drive that
that you have no healthy group identity
you have no individual creativity and
distinctness
and whether you're doing the upmarket IQ
quackery or the down Market thuggery
you're substituting
nothing that you have
to latch on to this grotesque evil
history she's absolutely right
I don't know if this is kind of loosely
related but we can move on if we want to
no play how long is it uh look at just a
couple minutes this is from um speaking
of things everybody should read
um you know ingest I guess in terms of
culture this uh debate between William F
Buckley and uh James Baldwin is um James
involved with the patience of the saint
I mean this is literally I mean that's a
cliche but seriously this is one of the
best debate performances if you're if
you're concerned about debate
performances and being owned and that
sort of thing this is maybe I I can't
think of anybody who tops Baldwin here
but it talks about a similar sort of
topic here let's take a minute so one
system a reality
it would seem to me the proposition
before the house when I put it that way
is the American dream at the expense of
the American Negro all the American
dream is at the expense of the American
abroad
is a question
hideously loaded
and that one's response to that question
one's reaction to that question
has it depend on effect and effect on
where you find yourself in the world
what your sense of reality is
what your system a reality is
that is it depends on assumptions which
we hold
so deeply as we scarcely aware of them
are white South African or Mississippi
sharecrop or Mississippi sheriff or a
Frenchman driven out of Algeria all have
at bottom or system of reality
which compels them to for example the
case of the French Exile from Algeria to
defend French reasons for having ruled
Algeria
the Mississippi or the Alabama Sheriff
who really does believe when he's facing
a negro a boy or girl that this woman
this man this child must be insane to
attack the system to which he owes his
entire identity
of course for such a person the
proposition of which which we try and
discuss here tonight does not exist
and on the other hand
I
have to speak as one other people
who've been most attacked by
while they must now hear call the
western or the European system
a reality what white
people in the world because the white
box of white supremacy I hate to say it
here comes from Europe that's how it got
to America
all right so
yes and again the idea
that there is any distinction
between
understanding that and the material
relationships and realities is complete
falsehood and anybody who's playing that
game on either extreme I've seen you
know I see the dumb woke hectoring takes
which I will still keep condemning and
arguing against any form of essentialism
all of that toxicity they're ridiculous
you know when when someone tweets out
and says loneliness is part of it and
people object to that ridiculous
objectively loneliness is part of it
then I see some you know random type you
know YouTube Twitter pundits saying that
you know this is a complete distraction
and this doesn't matter our history the
racial realities of this country
nonsense nonsense
all nonsense all two poles of stupidity
which need to be transcended and
synthesized to get to appropriate action
Transcendence and solutions
let's go to the gym
yeah so I mean honestly this flows very
well I wanted to take a moment tonight
you know we're sort of not really
talking about economics I really wanted
to take a a second and talk about a
political prisoner in the United States
Leonard Peltier
um somebody who's been in prison now for
most of his life
um
born a Chippewa of turtle Mountain he
was one of the many people who were
faced with what was called termination
which was a policy by the United States
government to destroy Native American
culture and this is in the 40s and 60s
where people were sent into boarding
schools where they were told they are no
longer allowed to speak their own
language they're no longer allowed to
practice their own traditions and they
were all forced to practice Christianity
during the same period of time you also
saw reservations that were supposed to
be protected lands losing their special
status and 2.5
million Acres were sold off to private
hands mainly white investors and of
course this is a story of American
racism and American white supremacy but
we always cannot forget how
much of a part of that story is to try
to conquest of land and to try to
ownership of resources so Leonard
Peltier as many other people as a
generation grew up through this horrible
moment where they were sort of taken out
of their own history and in the 60s and
70s there was this radical movement
called the American Indian movement that
fought so hard to Proclaim it
and uh they had many many victories many
trials many difficulties we can't go
into the entire history of it here but
we definitely should in the future but
just to hit a couple of quick highlights
there was the occupation of Alcatraz
which by tree laws that belong to native
peoples and they reclaim that land there
was also a massive movement called the
TR um called the trail of broken
treaties
and that was a march across the United
States that and that culminated in
occupation of the Bureau of Indian
Affairs they actually came in and they
took over the government building and
inside of that government building they
discovered documents that the United
States government had been
sterilizing native women not just in the
not just in the past but right then so
you have to understand the moment of
history that we're going to get into
that led to Leonard peltier's false
trial imprisonment and his continued
status as a political prisoner so the
U.S government was so Furious about this
movement that because they were forced
to concede to demands of native peoples
they were forced to change their policy
they wanted revenge and there started to
become more and more violence just a few
weeks later a young Native American
activist Leonard Peltier was in
Milwaukee where he was approached by two
police officers who beat him brutally in
the bar and then tried to frame him for
murder he escaped and went to Pine Ridge
reservation Pine Ridge reservation was a
literal war zone at that time and the
American Indian movement had been
requested by Native American peoples to
come in and protect people from Dick
Wilson who was the chairman of Pine
Ridge but it was very much associated
with the U.S government it was not a
part of the American Indian movement or
the more radical movements for people's
rights he had his own paramilitary Force
called the goons who were the Guardians
of the iguala nation and they were
beating and murdering people in the
streets this is the beginning what was
called uh 64 native peoples were killed
over the next period of a few years and
there were no investigations into their
death so this was a tragic and very
serious situation that was going on
during this period of time two FBI
agents go on to Pine Ridge
to find
to investigate somebody who had stolen a
pair of cowboy boots leather cowboy
boots and they drove up onto a ranch
where there were Native aim American
Indian movement members
there was a shootout and these two FBI
agents were killed a few people escaped
Leonard Peltier was one of them Leonard
Peltier went across the border to Canada
um and then there was a trial for those
who weren't able to escape that trial
was a tragedy of Justice the United the
FBI was putting snipers on top of the
courthouse warning the jury that there
was going to be an assassination attempt
there's going to be terrorist attacks
and those people were all acquitted
because people recognized that the FBI
and the United States government were
trying to have a show trial
Leonard Peltier gets extradited back
into the United States under the
testimony of a woman who later recanted
her testimony and later was revealed
that she was induced to testify by the
FBI who threatened her and threatened
her family basically told her exactly
what to say in a statement to say
that was how Leonard Peltier was brought
back to the United States thinking that
he was going to get a fair trial after
what had happened to his comrades did
not get a fair trial it was filled with
false testimony ballistic evidence that
exculpicated uh Leonard Peltier was
withheld and this is by the way has been
proven over the years in the 90s
um the evidence that the ballistic
evidence that showed that Leonard
Peltier was not the person who fired and
killed on these two FBI agents was
absolutely proven but it was withheld by
the FBI and was withheld by
um the ballistics expert who actually
purposefully hid this information it
wasn't even that it just got blocked out
on trial was actually purposefully
hidden so this trial sorry dude I'm
sorry can you go get Professor wolf
sorry go ahead this trial in itself was
an absolute travesty and then over the
next 20 to 30 years more and more
information has been coming out about
how fake and false this trial was so now
fast forward to today uh we had in 2017
Barack Obama had the opportunity to
Pardon Leonard Peltier and make good
with the Native American people which he
failed to do now Leonard Peltier sits in
prison today
not only is he sitting in prison they've
moved him to Coleman Florida which is 2
000 miles away from any of his friends
family or Community what is an absolute
tragedy and I think it's really
important that people recognize the
history of the American Indian movement
and how radical it was and how serious
we need to be a socialist if we want to
talk about changing this country that
writing the wrongs and injustices that
have been done to native peoples is a
huge part of that what happened to
Leonard Peltier was is not just a case
of an individual being having an
injustice done to him it was the
Injustice and it was a collective
punishment against the people who were
standing up for their own human rights
their own basic rights and a reactionary
government that was afraid of that so I
would just say that in this next uh
Forum that's coming up in August where
Bernie Sanders the first major Native
American forum for Democratic
presidential candidate Bernie Sanders
should very loudly come forward and say
that as president he would Freel Leonard
Peltier because we need to put pressure
on this issue not just for Leonard
peltier's personal freedom but to also
start to repair the ruins of a horrible
history of Setter colonialism and abuse
to our Native American brothers and
sisters
okay that I I remember I first yeah
found out about Leonard Peltier there
was a really stupid movie made in the
90s
I mean what I don't actually I shouldn't
even say it was stupid I tried to
highlight these issues it was a Val
Kilmer movie and he actually but that
was the point was that he was like an
FBI agent on a reservation and he went
in all like apple pie and ready to go
and then he realized that they were the
Baddies
and it sort of but it it and that
basically that the FBI was just like
security subcontractors for a mining
company and so it's tried to tell the
story of Pine Ridge and I remember I was
you know however teenager I remember at
the end of the Clinton Administration
there was a handful of people saying
Bill Clinton should do it and I remember
at the end of the Obama Administration I
actually heard that it might have been
closer under Clinton but then he went
and just pardoned uh probably departed
uh what was it rich instead who that
fugitive hedge fund guy Mark Rich all
right we're gonna take a very brief
break and then the Great Richard Wolff
has joined us so we're going to take
about 30 seconds we'll be right back
everybody Assad
um so yeah go ahead so are you
interested
it's a it's 2008 Turbo
it's 11 miles 11 miles and I would just
like you to sign this this
and this means that you will not be uh
enforcing the lemon laws on it you could
just then I'll get you the car Professor
wolf thank you so much
much appreciated I just sold Professor
wolf of car oh thank you wait
well this this is a very lawyerly
signature this looks like it's designed
to not necessarily hold up it's small
claims court
like Two Can Play That Game joining us
now is Professor Richard Wolff he's one
of our guides and mentors of course you
can find his indispensable work at
democracy at work on their patreon page
subscribe immediately to their YouTube
channel as well and of course he also is
a professor of Economics at the new
school
uh thank you Professor wolf thank you so
much for coming back glad to be here
it's always a pleasure is everybody uh
sounding good first of all I always have
to just ask we don't have to belabor it
but how's he doing he's doing very well
he's doing better do you feel more
comfortable when he's talking about
something that isn't exactly economics
no okay he ranges brilliantly across the
different disciplines oh look at that
we'll cut that later to make it sound
like you were saying that about me
let's do a little edit a little Trump
style edit on that baby
um
so Professor wolf let's just start very
big picture
China is a place that rightly fascinates
a lot of people
it's uh everything from the sort of you
know exotifying racism of certain
discourses it's it's a place that I
guess is replaced like Japan of the
1980s in terms of fear-mongering
but it's also uh you know it's not a
place to romanticize or be naive about
either it's an incredibly powerful you
know it's it's a rising power
it calls itself a communist country and
it seems to practice capitalism as
aggressively as anybody on Earth
can you give us
however way you want to do it the
pathway to understanding
what the economy is of the People's
Republic of China
sure
first what they say they refer to
themselves as
a socialism
because you know most people in the
Socialist world
did not call themselves Communists
that's really more the their enemies who
called them that it's true they were
often governed by a Communist party but
that word communist when it was taken by
a party had to do with what their
objectives were not a claim about what
existed
so in Russia for in Soviet Union
communism was envisioned as something
they were moving toward and hoped
someday to get to but boy it was a long
way off and they did not claim they had
arrived there in fact that would have
been a kind of unacceptable claim that
would have been debunked
the Chinese also say they are a special
kind of socialism the phrase they like
is socialism with Chinese
characteristics right okay so what does
it mean
for most of the 19th and 20th Century
socialists around the world
basically focused on two things that
distinguished them from capitalism one
whereas capitalism had private
Enterprise owned by citizens who had no
relationship to the state
socialism in contrast was conceived of
as the government acting on behalf of
the people as a whole coming in and
taking over economic Enterprises
factories stores offices the idea was
simple if you have capitalism a small
percentage of the people own the means
of production they own the Enterprises
think of the the individuals the
families or even the shareholders you
know ten percent of shareholders United
States own 85 percent of the shares so
you're talking a very small percentage
of the people uh own everything and make
all the big decisions you know how to
produce where to produce what to produce
and what to do with the profits and so
the Socialist argument was
that's on Democratic that's a small
number of people who have all this
economic power they will inevitably use
it to control the politics so that the
political system doesn't undo their
domination within the economic system
and so the mass of people are
effectively frozen out and the
Socialists then identify themselves as
the people that are breaking that
situation apart bringing the means of
production back into the hands of
Everybody by having the government
presumably
representing everybody take over so the
first idea of socialism was that the
government comes in takes over the land
and the factories and so on in order to
run them for the benefit of everybody
rather than as in capitalism for the
owning minority and the second big idea
of socialism versus capitalism in both
the 19th and 20th Century had to do with
markets that the mechanism of
Distributing first Distributing the
resources that go into production and
then Distributing the products that come
out of production and in capitalism you
celebrate the market that is the
institution that distributes
um in socialism the argument was made
well here again that's fundamentally
unjust why because a market allocates
whatever is scarce to the people with
the most money
and a socialist argued back then which
is one of the reasons why it was so
popular socialism and grew so quickly
that this is fundamentally immoral can
we correlate this with use value versus
exchange value and in part you can it
resembles that kind of an argument okay
but I think a more simple way to put it
is simply to say look if uh if milk is
scarce the cows got sick or some virus
called whatever if milk is scarce and a
rich person has several cats as pets and
a poor person has several children
the market will allocate the scarce milk
to the guy with the cats and those are
profile the New York Times I'm sorry to
interrupt but during Hurricane Sandy
they did a water piece yeah right people
charged for water and stuff people
charged well this that was serious for
sure this one I'm thinking of though is
just an example of you have people who
you know this is right in the beginning
it took years for certain neighborhoods
in Staten Islands in Brooklyn and so on
to get back on right right this was in
the upper west side and people's
electricity had been out for a couple of
days and this woman was joking she said
oh yeah we're we're using Zinfandel in
the toilets
(Laughter)
and it was a nice little adventure for
them so the Socialists had a field day
by saying look markets are not what we
want markets are ways of Distributing
that favor the people with the most
money because they're the ones who can
get what they want and other people
can't right and so the the idea of
socialism was you take the private means
of production and socialize them and you
repress the market and substitute
planning in other words you have a
theoretically a democratic conversation
what are the criteria for Distributing
so for example a child has higher
priority than a pet for scarce milk or
scarce diapers or whatever else there is
and so socialism was take over the
industry socialize it have the
government run it and planning and that
was the idea well if that is your idea
then you can understand why after the
Russian Revolution 1917 that's really
kind of what they did not with the land
not that distributed to everybody
violating everything that socialists had
always said because they had to for
political reasons to hold on to the
Russian peasantry the first thing Lenin
and Stalin and Trotsky did was to
distribute land to The Peasants who had
been hungry for it for for centuries
that's why for example when people say
socialism is against private property I
always look at them and say did you have
to get faintest idea what you're talking
about the first thing the Soviets did
was distribute the land the most
important resource they had as the
private property of individual peasants
but they did take over industry and they
did plan their economy the Chinese have
basically done that too the two big
differences between China and Russia in
terms of how they developed was that the
Chinese
decided early on that they were going to
become an export economy they were going
to produce for the rest of the world
something the Russians either didn't
think to do or couldn't do because of
their isolation it's a little mixture of
both the Chinese were isolated at first
too but after Kissinger and things
opened up and also because the United
States and Europe didn't behave in the
same way they began to see a road to
Economic Development by basically
offering to the west to produce
everything the West had accumulated as
consumer goods and capital goods cheaper
and better so then the 70s there's the
political opening when Nixon and
Kissinger visit Mao right then there's
some
continuity with Carter
but then in the 80s dungshell ping comes
into power and what does he what did he
say he said something like I don't care
what color the cat is as long as it
catches mice right and that was the
signal and it's good to be rich and it's
good to be rich he even said that's
right and that's why it's it's funny
dang Xiaoping belongs on the cover of
that David Harvey book about
neoliberalism even though he's a
communist it's if you notice in the
cover of that book it's Thatcher and
Reagan and I think Pinochet and then
there's a guy in a mouse suit and you
would think why is he there yes and then
you read it you're like oh he was
actually at the center of it so the
Chinese said we're going to be the the
place that produces everything that the
West wants
um and so they entered on to a strategy
different from the Soviets partly they
designed it partly they had the option
to do it and and it's very very
important in terms of the struggles now
they made the decision to be different
from the Soviet Union because as part of
getting in to the rest of the world
getting their stuff
sold in the United States for example
they wanted to demonstrate a kind of
will meet you halfway so what they did
was they said we will allow private
Enterprise we will have the state with a
very dominant position the state-owned
and state-operated Enterprises which
remain to this day important in China
but we will allow private Enterprises by
the Chinese and even more we will allow
joint Enterprises in which the private
Chinese can cut a deal with German or
Japanese or American companies and we
will allow that as well
the Glee in the west that they were
going to be brought into this was
fantastic Western companies began to
understand that this was a successful
strategy I mean that the Western
companies saw that the growth in wages
the growth in a market the growth in
access to this exploding Market was
unbelievably attractive and they had to
get in on it and so they rushed to the
Chinese and here's what was done
a deal was struck over and over again
same deal
we want to be able to bring production
to China we want to take advantage of
their very poor wages the low wages you
pay that's fantastic for us we can close
the factory in Cincinnati and open it in
Shanghai et cetera ETC number two we
want access to your Market why because
already by the 1990s and into this
Century the Chinese market was growing
faster than the American if you know
anything about capitalism it's not the
size of a market but the rate of growth
that is crucial to to planning for your
future so the American companies for
example came in and they asked for two
things
a cheap labor force and access and the
Chinese said fine we'll give you the
cheap labor and we'll give you the
access you've got to give us your
technology
and you've got to give us help in
getting access to your market so we can
sell this stuff which is in your
interest because you're producing in
China stuff you want to sell in the
United States too so we'll do that
together that's when the marriage
because that's really what it is between
China and Walmart
develops the two of them need each other
have for 35 years there would be no
Walmart of the sort we take for granted
without the Chinese and vice versa
because what Walmart did is give the
Chinese an instant distribution Network
Anything the Chinese could produce
Walmart would bring into every village
in town every Suburban Mall everywhere
fantastic deal but that's why when you
hear today the Chinese are stealing our
technology that is nonsense that pure
ideological bashing of China a deal was
struck they got the technology which
they demanded in exchange for the cheap
labor and the access and that was a deal
that nobody held a gun to anybody's head
the American company that didn't want to
share technology walks away but it
didn't want to because it was willing to
Parlay that technology and to claim now
oh they forced us is Israel really
it's a Croc and it's a silly kind of
Croc anyway so two okay finished finish
your story what the Chinese did is this
mixture of private and state Enterprise
uh controlled by the Communist party in
power and holding on to that power
deals to be made both by the state
Enterprises and by the private
Enterprises with Foreigners for Goodwill
for access to markets abroad for the
whole export Focus to work all of that
out
and at the same time have a a kind of
government control so for example wages
Rose I mean the Chinese already knew
long before Trump that to make an
economic development program as
dependent on exports as they had made it
was a wonderful way to industrialize
quickly that's why China is so powerful
but it's also very very dangerous
because if anything were to happen to
that export Market you're done you and
that's out of your control that depends
on what the Europeans will buy from
China what the Americans will buy their
first lesson their shock was the
collapse of 2008-9 when suddenly the
export Market collapsed for China
because the West Was going through a
crisis couldn't buy what it had bought
before and that was a real big wake-up
call and they made the decision again
this is before Trump to refocus their
economy away from exports and build up
their internal market right the only way
to do that is to raise wages which is
why the wages in China have gone up so
dramatically many times faster than what
happened to wages here in the United
States the comparison I mean there is no
comparison here the wages have basically
stagnated for 30 years
in China there are about four to five
times in real terms today what they were
30 years ago so it it's as different as
night and day and so this was successful
it's not a question of liking the
Chinese model or approving what they do
with civil liberty that's another matter
an important one but if you're going to
be talking about economics the Chinese
have developed their economy an economy
of one almost one and a half billion
people one of the poorest places on this
planet is now the second economic power
and within a decade will likely overtake
the United States in sheer output this
is an unbelievable achievement it is a
greater more rapid Economic Development
than any capitalist country has achieved
by a lot this year for example the the
the the the Western press crows Chinese
economic growth is only 6.2 percent in
the United States is two percent so and
that's been the ratio two to three to
one which is why the Gap is narrowing
and they're catching up because in a bad
year they grow two to three times faster
than we do in this country and they've
been doing that a long time and I think
the bottom line of all of what you're
seeing now is a kind of wake up anxiety
on the part of Mr Trump and those
sectors of the American economy he
represents or at least that to support
him who are realizing that this is now a
whole new game that they waited they may
have been able to smash China earlier if
they had you know followed up the Korean
war with an attack on China which some
wanted to do but by now they can't it's
too late and that the frustration and
rage and upset it's a little bit like
the British having to face that their
old little colonies the United States
out maneuvered them outrank them and now
it's the dog being wagged they still
can't deal with that too if you look at
their brexit fantasies that somehow
they're gonna muscle their way into some
global market dominance but
is there a way I mean okay
so there's certainly the fact that
obviously the Chinese model is
incredibly repressive and so on and
that's a terrible model for the future
just as our model is not a model we'd
want to export uh
well I'm wondering if you could thread
two things together though
could we introduce the concept of what
primitive accumulation is into this
story
and is it possible
to connect it with okay that's great
they've lifted definitely people have
been lift out of poverty the growth
rates are astonishing and I think
one of the subtexts Ralph Leonard who's
a brilliant writer pointed this out that
one of the broader subtexts of all of
the like and die and identity anxiety
Across the quote-unquote Western world
there's all of the xenophobian bigotry
towards migrants from Latin America in
the Middle East but the other subtext
that's going on is the fundamental
discomfort that the pattern of
globalization it's not just China that
Asia is reasserting a natural role in
terms of like
if the world is just sort of normally as
you'd expect it to be over long-term
Cycles
uh you know from China to India you're
going to talk about an unbelievable
amount of economic activity and power
and that is unsettling to a certain part
of the western Colonial psyche
but what about the ecological Dimension
to all this is what I'm trying to get to
okay so they're getting their cut
they're growing but how much longer is
the earth going to be in Pat you know
inhabitable and what is the Chinese
strategy for that
the Chinese have been pretty good in
taking care and recognizing that they
have a serious pollution problems
they've actually taken
you know enough no but they've taken it
seriously they've taken some steps
they've used some resources I think you
have a choice now which is very
dangerous for the world
the Chinese and by the way the Indians
are absolutely take the same position we
will be willing to tackle the ecological
crisis but we have to be given the
economic well-being that is the basis
for doing that that you already have
otherwise you're going to use the
ecological Save the Planet to keep us in
a second rank we're not that's not
acceptable you have to meet us so that
we have a chance to develop the standard
of living of our people within the
framework we'll do that but that you
have to me and that means you've got to
do more sacrifice than we do because
you're consuming more of the world's
resources than we are a lot more because
of your standard of living if you're
willing to do that then we will be
willing to slow our rate of growth
because it is damaging the okay the
Indians say but pretty much that the
Chinese say that it's been the west by
and large that doesn't want to play that
game I haven't played the game but is it
I mean is it specifically though with
China like
when South Africa says that or Kenya or
even India
or Brazil like yes China is getting to
the point where maybe they can't say
that anymore just in terms of their
objective power their objective the
trouble with the Chinese object yes on
the macro scale yes but the minute you
put in the denominator of the fraction
the number of people the per capita is
still way below what we have here right
and they again I don't think they're
demanding equivalence
I don't even think they say it but they
certainly don't they don't mean it but
they demand some working out and there
were the beginnings of some kind of
pressure on the Indians and the Chinese
coming from around the world
to compromise on this and it was making
some Headway the the decision of the
United States to withdraw from the Paris
agreement trumps one of his earliest
temperatures first big hits yeah uh that
really was a signal to the Chinese and
the Indians and the others oh
oh we got a different player here he's
not making any deals at all and that was
before the Tariff stuff and today in the
last few days the currency manipulation
arguments this is now a pretty much
developed
economic warfare that's going on and
people Comfort themselves by telling
themselves they will eventually come to
their senses and cut a deal and indeed
they might they might certainly is what
they ought to do and they're people on
both sides are pushing that on the other
hand you know the history of capitalism
is the history of these kinds of
economic warfares becoming military
warfares and it would be very naive to
imagine that there's something going on
now that precludes that or prevents that
or automatically rules that out I don't
think so I think you're building in the
direction of people making major
miscalculations because they're being
boxed in Mr Trump in my opinion is
boxing himself in I would never do that
he can't great job he can't you know
he's playing more and more desperate
economic games on the one hand we have a
great economy on the other hand he's
going to fire the head of the FED for
not dropping interest rates more because
the economy isn't great so he has to
talk out of both sides of it it isn't
great that's why you have to do these
things it is great you don't have to do
anything and he says the two at the same
time and even his people
who want to believe in him must be
finding an increasing number of others a
phrase that the that the kids use which
I think is often overused but uh lived
experience so that might be running up
against some of this guy's spin about
the economy
I want to get back down in a second but
can you define primitive accumulation I
do want one strong Marxist term
definition primitive accumulation well
the term owes its
um
owes its origin to Marx that's Karl Marx
it's in the first volume of capital
towards the end the Section 8 of that
book
um
and what Mark is that David Marx's point
take to take pointers uh Marx's point in
that uh section is to say there's the
accumulation of capital happens in two
different ways
one way is built into capitalism it's
the capitalist getting as much profit as
he can and plowing it back into the
business that's capitalist accumulation
but Capital also has to accumulate in a
sense before we have capitalism to kind
of get the ball rolling to get cat you
have to have on the one hand a bunch of
people who have some wealth in their
hands and another bunch of people who
have nothing because then a deal will be
struck Those Who Have Nothing are in
danger of dying because they have
nothing those who have a lot say to
themselves wait a minute I have a lot
but maybe I can get the one who's scared
to die to work for me producing a profit
for me that way he survives because I
pay him wages and my wealth goes up
which is what I want how did you get
things set up that way how did you have
a situation where a large number of
people were desperate
had nowhere to turn and a relatively
small number of people had a big pot of
money in their hands with which to hire
them the enclosure of the commons right
the process of that happening before
capitalism is called primitive
communication and the example Marx gives
is England in the 16th 17th 18th
centuries where you had
peasantry the the famous English Yeoman
president of self-employed little
peasants who survived partly out of
their little land and their animals but
partly out of the very crucial Commons
the ability of every peasant in an area
to graze his or her cattle on the common
Meadows to go into the common forest for
hunting for getting wood there were
these shared resources and at a certain
point the landlord class
took them took the Meadows took the
woods shut them fenced them literally
fenced them called the enclosure
movement because they wrapped they
literally enclosed the formerly common
areas denied the Pez The Peasants
couldn't survive because they needed
that land to graze they needed the wood
they needed the hunting so the peasants
then leave the countryside because
they're dying there they can't survive
and go into the cities when they arrive
in the cities they have nothing
and they meet people who have become
quite Wealthy by enclosing the commons
and producing stuff there so and then
the the New Deal is struck it isn't the
surf and the Lord because they in a
sense the serfs have run away it's now
the merchant in this city who has been
selling love lovely things to these
landlords that are in closing has
collected wealth in his hands and says
okay
I'm Gonna Give You Desperados that have
come off the land The Peasants a job
you're going to work for me and you're
going to produce more for me than I give
you to survive but you don't care
because you're going to survive I like
this because I'm going to get the profit
and that's capital accumulation in
capitalism is launched but it had to
have that primitive pre-capitalist
accumulation to get started so when we
talk I just want to link it you know
we've been talking about the First
Nations issues like David articulates
for us so well as an example or
a lot of ecological things I would like
to at least theoretically think we're
talking about Commons we haven't figured
out a way to bottle oxygen yet and sell
it to those who have uh you know
Bitcoins or whatever
um we're talking about Commons and
closures it's less dramatic obviously in
terms of human Stakes but this is a
major story in the internet if you look
at Someone Like Richard stallman from
the free software Foundation he'll say
that the architecture of the internet
the initial basis of it is a open
Commons right and everything from
Microsoft and so on to Apple is a
enclosure of hard and software of what
was initially supposed to be open
systems look the land was supposed to be
right open right
I mean almost everything even you take a
simple plebeian thing we need to be able
to send letters to one another we have
to write a letter send a bill send a
thank you send money we need a system
that moves things from wherever I am to
wherever you are we call that the post
office it is a shared resource everybody
makes use of until you permit it to be
privately enclosed when you have a FedEx
or a UPS they basically bite off the
profitable parts of this business
leaving the post office with what has to
be done but they still run off of the
infrastructure of the post office which
is the other great story and the
comments and then when you've taken away
the profitable part of the post office
and you say you do the numbers and see
the post office is not running out of
profit yeah that's no mystery you idiot
that's because the whole thing was done
that way we took away the you know UPS
does what's profitable FedEx and all the
other they do what's profitable they
don't touch what isn't profitable the
little post office in every village so
that we're tied together as a nation
that's the job of the post office the
FedEx doesn't have a pack a a store
there it doesn't have people on the
payroll so it's like it's like the
fakery with it with the railroads
another shared resource everybody needs
it so what do you do it's always sort of
this this wonderful mentality in order
for the railroads to make money to be
profitable which is what they tried to
do they jacked up the price that
destroyed the farmer who couldn't afford
to ship his wheat or his animals on this
high-priced thing so all the other
capitalists get together and say we
can't have this we're all being wiped
out we're all being stolen from by the
railroads because we have no other way
to move our stuff and they can charge
whatever they want so we don't want that
anymore we want to nationalize the real
right
okay so the whole logic is you're going
to help every other capitalist by
bringing down the price of railroad
transport which they do and then you
have the the right wing
I'm sorry but there's no nice way to say
this please idiot that is so who doesn't
know the history who says you see when
the government takes it over it's not
profitable
you you you know what are you
doing you don't understand anything I
mean it's not because the government
took it over that it's unprofitable it's
because the whole point of this exercise
was that the rest of the capitalist
wanted to become profitable by having
this subsidized train service and you
know you you you really you're you're
beyond words you created
the railroads put them under government
control to bring down the price which of
course would kill their profits and the
corresponding profit went up for
everybody who used the railroad but the
right winger wants to make an
ideological case and says see
the public Enterprise is running at a
loss in many cases in many countries
that's why there is a public Enterprise
because it has to run at a loss because
that loss subsidizes the profitability
of the private sector so it's not a
proof that private is profitable only
some you see the blindness of this is
just it's wild it is why well it's a
form I like the phrase cognitive capture
I read a book once on the advertising
industry and it was a good distillation
of China
it was actually sounded like an amazing
advertising campaign
and the ad starts
in you know the not too distant past and
it's being narrated
and it shows a man who is a peasant
running through some type of you know
rural situation with his kid on his
shoulders I think to get him a shot or
something but the point is is that he
needs to run miles with the kid on his
shoulders to get some basic medical
access for whatever the I I don't
remember what it was I think something
like pneumonia or something
and that and of course you know in China
there's a lot of emphasis on filial
piety or ophelial obligations and so on
and so the voiceovers this this very
touching Narrative of the of the father
sacrificing
and then it transitions to the present
day
and the father is happily in the back
seat of a beautiful luxury car and the
Sun and the Sun is returning the favor
like in a Mercedes or something and one
of the things that they did emphasize
though is that that is the Chinese Arc
that that is a father to son mother to
daughter time span we're talking about
in terms of growth that's why there are
such a solid political thing you know
Americans find it hard to understand but
you shouldn't if wages go up four times
five times in the last 25 years if China
is now peopled by modern cities with
skyscrapers and all the rest of it this
has happened in the lifetime of people
who are alive today for them this is
literally a miracle that they're living
through and they look to the Communist
Party whatever their criticisms and
hostilities and angers many of which are
Justified but you know most of the
people in the world live in very poor
conditions one of the most important
things for them is to go from being very
poor to being much better off China is
the best example in modern time of how
to accomplish this quickly You Can Dance
up and down and talk all you want but
that reality is playing itself out in
the world and very few people are
unaware
again unless you have this ideological
strangeness like you do with gee the
railroads are not making money
in China here's a good example
they know that at the rate they're
raising the wages of their people if it
continues and that's an if but if it
continues they're going to have an
enormous population that wants and
expects to have its own apartment right
oh
how's that going to be done so they made
a decision
that they're going to stimulate their
economy since they have to provide work
if the exports shrink say because a
tariffs say because of a crisis in
Western capitalism they've got to keep
their people working otherwise they have
an unemployment that could blow their
whole blow the whole thing Society
that's right so they built cities ahead
of the people's needs for them so you
have all over China huge
apartment blocks that are empty the
complete and we should know that the
some of those have certainly entailed
some primitive accumulation in the forms
of mowing out homeless people moving
population I mean absolutely totally
very abusive ruthless stuff but this is
not a sign of bad planning right right
that again is just this willful refusal
to ask the simple question why would
they do that to which there's a clear
answer this is a way to keep people
working producing and yet it will be
something that the mass of people can
look to as where they're going you may
not get it this year but you will get it
next year or your children will look at
us we are creating the new China very
powerful so the story here in the last
couple of minutes about this this this
because it isn't just Trump
no and and it's interesting to me
because I I get a lot of different I
mean sometimes I will get uh some
feedback from people who were you know I
actually really sincerely labor oriented
and their objection is not to China but
their objection is certainly to the U.S
corporate relationship to China and
they're actually much they're actually
interested in well I would like to
you know reign in corporations in China
and I'd also to the extent that's
possible start to build peer-to-peer
labor networks with my fellow Chinese
workers right this the type of thinking
that and organizing we would like to
encourage
but then there's the other fact and I
played a segment on this show a couple
of months ago because it was just so
striking to me that
Steve Bannon and Thomas Friedman
obviously they're both totally
contemptible figures but in the pop
culture imagination Thomas Friedman is
Mr globalization and Steve Bannon is Mr
populist
BS of course yes they're both on CNBC
talking about how they basically look in
the when you were talking about in the
beginning when China was making rugs and
and knocking off Rush Hour three that
was fine but now China is one of the
most powerful countries in the world
and they're going to dominate four LG
whatever the hell and they're better
than us and they're taking advantage of
the poor United States certainly not
like Google or the NSA whatever you know
be involved in any type of industrial or
technological Espionage and we need to
get tough Mr globalization and Mr
populous by the way they both said they
need to get tough to make way for
Western capitalism I don't really see
how that fits with the whole populist
piece another great stripping that the
populism from people like Bandon really
is just the the chauvinist racist
xenophobic kind in my opinion but
why is it that if these tariffs in this
economic war is so stupid
that it's bought into by such a broad
cross-section of the elite here
I don't think it is you don't think it
is no they get how dumb it is no I think
what they're
they've made a pact with the Devil
Mr Trump look at what he did he comes in
the office first thing he does is assure
the military that he will throw more
money at them than anybody else has so
there's no reason for them to look a
scance at him which they had done the
second thing he did was to give the
business Community the biggest tax cut
imaginable at the end of a 30-year
period when they didn't need it because
they had been doing so well for that an
Incredible Gift they don't want to look
if you pardon me this gift horse this
orange gift horse in the mouth
they don't they don't want to upset this
by the way that's the best Trump insult
I've heard all this Cheetos stuff
stopped but that's funny you know they
don't want they why stop this right this
is fantastic this is wonderful you know
when we came out of the Great Depression
in 1929 the reaction of the American
people in the 30s was we're getting
screwed here and we're pushing back we
have the CIO we have two socialist
parties and we have the Communist party
and they're all going to work together
and we're going to build a movement and
we're going to get lots of benefits that
have been done either Social Security
unemployment compensation the first
minimum wage and a public jobs program
costing billions of dollars that came
out of the hands of Rich corporations
and people with the taxes I mean it was
an amazing thing we undid the inequality
that had built up in the previous half
century and crunched it down uh we have
nothing like that this time we did such
a good job in the post-world War II
anti-red scares one after the other that
there is no socialist and Communist
party for all practical purposes
um the union movement has been on a
50-year decline there's nobody in a
position to do that so the inequality
that helped create the crash in 2008
keeps on getting worse even in the
recovery very different from what
happened before so I think you're seeing
a kind of grab it before it all
disappears and they're looking at Mr
Trump as the grab it number one
specialist and if he does weird
strange and even dangerous things
they're confident that in the end
they'll cut a deal with the Chinese and
in the end he'll posture for his people
that he's being tough on the immigrants
but he won't cut that off and he's being
tough on the Chinese and tough he's Mr
tough every that should be really
specific when you say immigration we
don't care that literally I mean we're
kidnapping children people are dying all
of the Just obscene grotesque policies
what do you mean though is that there'll
still be a supply of exploitable cheap
labor there'll still be people that we
can take into Silicon Valley that the
stuff they're interested in because of
course they don't care about the kids
dying in ice custody right right they
think that this will pass and even you
know if it doesn't even if Mr Trump
doesn't come around okay they will then
dump them you could see you can see the
beginnings of it by the way because
there are enough of them that are a
little nervous it's going a little too
far
um killing large numbers of people in
Walmarts is distressing the polarization
that keeps getting worse and worse
around these events is distressing it
isn't distressing enough for them to get
rid of Mr Trump yet right but if there
is trouble in the streets
if the people on the left hand of the
society begin to become active in the
way the folks on the right have then
there will be the blaming of Mr Trump
you're not supposed to cause us
difficulty you're supposed to be our
helper military fine give us a tax cut
fine posture all over and beat up on the
Chinese a little bit get a better deal
fine but don't interrupt the business
right don't make the business start to
lose and he's at that point where the
Chinese have shown him
we're not we're not folding here right
so now what is he going to do he's going
to keep
doing stuff and it's beginning to eat
even Americans that I talk to are
beginning to put it together let's see
he makes a war with China that screws
the American Farmer
he can't risk losing the American Farmer
that's 10 states right in the middle
that he needs so he's got to buy their
vote by giving them our tax money people
wait a minute uh what's happening here
you know that 16 billion is going to
give to to Farmers to hold on to them
while while their markets disappear the
farmers themselves are very unclear that
this is a good deal even with the 16 but
without the 16 he would have lost 10
states he's done it finished he knows
that so he's he's being pushed into all
of these Corners at a certain point
it ain't gonna work anymore right
but the oligarchs so if Joe Biden's the
nominee all the money will go there
they're that they're in totally safe
hands they have no problem they'll dump
Trump they'll get bited but if it's
Bernie Sanders that's different and they
show that they'll still break
in this clown fascist Direction because
they can't even deal with some little
minimal social democracy or am I wrong
no I think you're right I think you know
we're not going to see it because all
that stuff happens below the table but
you know the the high-tech companies
that are going to be really hurt by this
dealing with China the you know
China is so far along if you isolate
China they're going to be more
technologically advanced than we are
they already are Huawei was not a random
Choice that's a company that's already
ahead of the United States in a number
of areas so this is not going to stop
they have the engineers they have been
spending the last 25 years they have
been pouring money into their high-tech
engineering we have been cutting our
programs you know we have an austerity
that cuts back public higher education
they are doing exactly the opposite
these things are going to accumulate and
they're not going to work out well which
by the way is another great example too
from China that all of the horrific
packages and austerity budgets the World
Bank and the IMF have forced on all
these developing countries and then they
all say see capitalism look at China and
China defended its core Industries
invested in r d started to wait it
raised their wages have a massive role
of government and all of these horrific
austerity programs that they've
implemented in you know everywhere from
from Eastern Europe to Asia to Africa to
Latin America have only increased
inequality and and made it great for
foreign investment but it hasn't worked
they cite China as their great example
even though China doesn't follow any of
the strictures that they've imposed a
few weeks ago I did a town hall for Fox
News I spent an hour
at Fox News at their it's a live
audience so
it was me and a young woman from the DSA
who were sort of capitalism versus
socialism Fox organized this and on the
other side of the of ours
debate
they had
um
the fellow who was the executive from
Godfather Pizza oh man that's a big fan
of us and for president Herman Cain
Herman Cain Matt actually said that he
was he stayed in the left but when he
heard Herman Cain that almost yeah got
him out he almost I had never paid
attention to Hermann cakes
three inches from you ready for a little
Urban cane
please don't try to talk over me which
is what liberals do
that's her McCain uh can you say that to
you yeah pretty much yeah yeah at one
point he at one point made the in the
conversation he says anybody who wants
to get rich can anybody who wants to get
a job can do it America is a land of
opportunity so I I turned to him because
it was a little too much even for me and
I I try to keep my cool
I turned him I said you know
we currently have
depending on how you count eight to ten
million unemployed people you've just
insulted them right he didn't know what
to say so he turned and he was very
flustered and finally he swivels in his
seat stares right at me I'm I'm sitting
about three feet from him you've
insulted me
that was his man
so that was but the interesting thing
about Mr Kane and then the the the the
others they had Neil Cavuto they had
Jesus Christ
um Stuart Varney Stuart law and they had
the other guy
anyway
um and that's how they handle China you
can see the ideological problem
so why is China so successful why is
China becoming wealthy why is China
changing the whole world's poverty
numbers because it's lifting its people
through this strategy of building a
domestic Market their answer is very
simple
oh that's because they allow capitalism
in other words all the good things that
have happened in China are due to one
side and all the bad things are the you
know it's a kind of
it's so childish you don't know quite
what to do so you try to point out you
know the role of the state is very very
big there they own a lot of stuff they
control a lot of stuff you still want to
say that capital oh you see that's all
bad that's all holding things back if
only they were more capitalists than
they are they would be even I mean it's
you know you
it took my breath away I had never
imagined sort of adults in a room
having so patently self-serving a notion
of how the world works it's
extraordinary it's Fox business but also
MSNBC yeah and everything else
um so here's what we're gonna do
we're gonna go to the post game we're
gonna start off we have a very special
edition of bad a historical bad we'll
get we'll do some Jake Tapper but I
realize the first thing we're going to
start with is we picked out a clip
of Milton Friedman and oh God is this a
Milton Friedman clip and Professor wolf
is going to respond to it
so we're gonna
we're gonna throw some dirt on his grave
and this uh hey he advised Pinochet I
think some jokes are in order
um then Dominique Remy is going to join
us she's making an incredible
documentary film that everybody should
support on GoFundMe we're going to talk
about that then Ben Burgess is going to
join us for the debunk where I'll do a
debunk together and then we've got uh
Corbin NHS uh and a bunch of other
things to get to happy Jamaican
Independence Day by the way maybe we'll
touch on that briefly in the post game
um Michael Manley probably another
leader that didn't make the cut for you
Professor wolf right you're very hard at
these guys
Jenny jagan who was in British Kiana
that was a good leader can you tell us
about him
okay folks become a patron today it's
definitely time double check uh make
sure everything is up to date
patreon.com tmbs thank each and every
one of you thanks to everybody who makes
the show possible check out Professor
wolf at democracy at work go to his
patreon page become a member support
that vital work get all the content
subscribe if you haven't already to the
podcast and YouTube content you don't
want to miss a single thing we'll see in
the post game
foreign


## Keywords:
