---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Jc9piNdYSM
---

# Video
To Look and To Watch feat. Alex Nichols | Chapo Trap House
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Jc9piNdYSM)

## Transcript:
there was the uh big UFC event this
weekend and I wanted to ask you did you
see the uh Brazilian MMA fighter who won
his match and then instructed everyone
to read The Works of Austrian econom
Economist Ludwig von mes first of all I
love America I love the Constitution I
love the first amendment I can I want to
carry a nor gs I love private
property and let me tell something if
you care about your country I'll
read ludic VES and the six lessons of
the a economic School
Brazilian MMA fighters um this is kind
of normal for them at this point like
every Brazilian MMA fighter supported
bolsero except for one guy literally one
guy did they all up on Green's
husband it says I what that says uh uh
MMA star Renato mosciano knocked out
Jaylen Turner in their lightweight bout
at UFC 300 on Saturday picking up his
third consecutive Victory mosciano then
urged Americans to read a book from an
austrian-american
economist I love America I love the
Constitution I love the First Amendment
moano told the fans in Las Vegas I want
to carry a carry and own guns I
love private property and let me tell
you something if you care about your own
country Ludwig von mises in the
six lessons of the Austrian economic
School uh so Felix I guess
like my question here is is this the
least fascist Brazilian MMA star uh well
the least fascist would be the like one
guy the one guy who doesn't support of
course of course the one guy I'm talking
about is Damen Maya who he you know he's
one of my favorite Fighters he's really
cool he um he was a Jiu-Jitsu specialist
and he actually he does look like
someone who would work at The Intercept
like when you see him you're like this
guy looks like he would be writing
articles he's not out of shape or
anything but he he looks like an article
guy but he's a very I really liked his
fights but he he would he actually was a
journalist before he was a fighter and
so he was like I don't I don't think we
should kill all the college professors
and then take their gold teeth out to
give 35-year-old men cath implants so
they can join the Army and they were all
like shut up Damian I forgot to mention
this another time but did you know that
the guy who brought jiujitsu to America
was one of The Inspirations for Levi
Leviticus Cornwall yes I forget the
guy's name okay just making sure that
you knew that wait wait who is Leviticus
Cornwall know Leviticus Cornwall dude
the worst Robber Baron in American
history I don't the Hitler of the West
please inform me the worst guy ever uh
Dutch vanderland biggest enemy oh from
Red Dead Redemption 2 okay he made the
trains run on time but at what cost
yeah hey look I don't care what
government I have as long as I can fast
travel to any point on the map as long
as long as someone's keeping that order
then I love private property and owning
guns but yeah Felix have you
followed you're a fan of this Fighter
the lwig Von misus fighter and are you a
fan of the Austrian School of Economics
well I am a fan of the Austrian School
more than anything I could care less
about the fighter though no I don't I I
I never really followed this guy uh that
intently he's um I don't know uh to put
it
nicely the UFC needs to have a bunch of
guys who are like around this guy's
level of
skill uh or else they go out of business
they can't put up a
card uh he is most generously like a
sort of above replacement level quality
fighter personally in my opinion I don't
think anyone west of the rine no east of
the
should have an opinion on
capitalism why should I listen to you
why should I listen to or hobs or or
Adam Smith or any of our guys where this
stuff was invented why am I going over
to the the places where it was it was
all pagans until like 1600 yeah there
there is when he started lecturing us I
did get sort of annoyed because it's
like okay so you think America is doomed
unless we like I don't know start
getting really into gold right how about
focus on your own backyard for a second
aren't half half of your population is
killed every day by guys on
motorbikes I we're not the guys who have
that problem you are you guys have that
scary Spider-Man guy who is in that
video you guys have so many problems
that I've seen and you're out here
telling us that we need to do the
Austrian School or else we're doomed I
don't think so I think the Austrian
School is good for Austria but like I'd
prefer some American Economist please
for for for the Americas I'd like as you
said Alex I like economists who are from
the new world you know like not every
economic system is good for every every
country and but Brazil I mean yeah
private property cars count as private
property and and your and so so does
your body I suppose so yeah all all the
kidnappings and carjackings in Brazil I
could see why he likes private property
and guns also UFC uh adjacent uh we we
talked about a little uh a couple like
the other week but I did Katherine and I
did watch the new remake of Roadhouse
this weekend and I will say Conor
McGregor's performance in that movie is
probably the FV my favorite the movie
was but Connor McGregor's
performance as Conor McGregor a guy who
is hired by the incarcerated father of
the villain who's like a Florida
heel he's like a rich Florida guy who
wants to build a con you know wants to
build a luxury resort where the roadh
housee is and his father is like you're
things up son I got to send in
my fixer and he sends in Conor McGregor
who's a guy who's hired out to ruin bars
which I think is is a great that's
actually a great role for him yeah it's
it is perfect like the you you like you
first encounter his character uh fleeing
the house of an Italian man whose wife
he's despoiled completely nude and then
he gets a call and he's like hold on a
second I'm shopping for clothes and then
he just assaults a village of Italian
people and steals their clothing and
sets their Village on fire and then he
comes to Florida to cause trouble in in
a bar and he there's a scene where he
walks in he goes I knew it this
road house is mine and I like I'm I'm
barely doing his voice Justice because
it is um unintelligible and he has he
has the wildest set of veneers I've ever
seen it looks like he has the Kanye West
Grill in like he just has like a single
tooth on in the front of his face but
his performance was magnetic it was
magnetic because he had the same
expression on his face the entire movie
which is this sort of Frozen Rus grin
that I think comes with doing cocaine
all the time well yeah this is the role
he was born to play this is like his
this has really been his job ever since
he started like just getting injured and
getting knocked out all the time like
this is all he does like in Ireland like
he he he is one of the most sued people
internationally probably the most sued
man in the EU and if you like look at
the lawsuits they're all stuff like this
it's like you know we talk people hired
him to ruin a bar and it was just normal
in Ireland yeah oh there's a drunk Irish
guy causing a big
Ruckus oh there's a Conor McGregor
appearance at this bar in Ireland we're
making more money it's the
producers
thing he sucks he like uh he
beat up that old man who wouldn't drink
his whiskey for some reason he like uh
like beat up a 50-year-old woman and
threw her off a
boat that's not funny that's laughing at
that what she do what did she do I
presumably she didn't like drink his
whiskey I guess probably that seems to
be like a recurring problem but he's
like seems like she's drinking sea water
then should have made a better
choice this is yeah this is the role he
was born to play I was afraid uh you
know I didn't know any about this movie
I thought they were going to make it
like he was like Jake jilen Hall's
Mentor
like fighting or something no like when
I when I when I saw the trailers I
assumed that he was like a heavy that
was hired out who knew Jake Gyllenhaal
from like inside the octagon and they're
like oh your bouncer is a professional
MMA fighter well our anti- bouncer is
also a professional MMA fighter and no
he's a professional guy who up
bars he's the bar destroyer and I like
it would have been such a better movie
if it was only Conor McGregor yeah if it
was just about like the the The Life and
Times of this amazing man who ruins
every venue he goes to yeah yeah and and
it's like it's like a Thomas Crown
Affair thing it's like he he's
challenged to ruin like more like
greater and greater venues like his
ultimate task is ruining the Super
Bowl he fights all the football players
as he beat yeah someone ruined Madison
Square Garden yesterday did you see that
when Billy Joel was
and then they cut off and went to
commercials and that was so Alex Alex
Catherine and I were watching the Billy
Joel 100th medicine s got Garden concert
last night you know we're we're big we
we respect Billy Joel in this house in
fact we love Billy Joel in this house oh
I do too just not that one song The to
turn the lights back on was so funny cuz
I'd only heard the sharping fake version
of the song and the real version is
worse it's just an old man saying please
turn the lights on I'm scared I need to
go to the bathroom turn the somebody
turn the lights on but you know Billy
coming out there New York State of Mind
Only the Good D young it was great and
then like they just hard like he he was
like halfway through piano man and then
they just hard cut to like the local
news and it's like uh what Israel is
doing to respond to Iran and I was just
like could these Israelis
stop disrespecting our country for even
one day for even one day could they
could they take us seriously but no
they're pissing on Long Island's
greatest man ever Billy Joel William
Joel well if you want to be technical
about it if you're trying to uh convey
the aura of a bar in 1973 there probably
would be a TV there and there probably
would be some Israeli war crimes going
on and it might cut into the
song they they brought out Jerry
Seinfeld too uh Jory Seinfeld didn't
sting yeah we had fun until until they
cut it off I mean that's just yeah
that's for the further humiliation of
the United States by Israel and we're
going to talk about that in a second but
I want to talk about another music
event from this weekend Oh I came up
with a joke uh sting trying to teach
Jerry Seinfeld about the tantric sex and
Jerry's like no if it lasts that long
she's going to turn 18 before I'm
finished what's the point of
that that's the conversation that they
had um so yeah we had we had Billy Joel
uh at the Garden but over out out on the
West Coast Coachella is going down and
and Chris as as my the dedicated
Coachella attender and then then this
weekend the Coachella Observer I I did
want to ask you what the happened
with grimes's set at Coachella because
this is all I'm reading about this
morning is that it was some kind of
disaster so could you because you fill
me in about what happened with Grimes at
Coachella I mean as far as anybody can
tell it appears that she has never used
a DJ turntable before in her life and
just agreed to do a DJ set and showed up
with songs that she had never heard
before without having any idea how
anything worked and just tried to wing
it uh presumably she has djed before but
it was a failure on a basic technical
level that would put even a complete
amateur like me to shame uh and so uh
that appears to be the story there good
for her a a complete fumble that you
frankly love to see every now and now
and again on that big of a scale now I
also heard the crowd was uh rather rude
to a British Indie rockers blur were
people not feeling blur at Coachella
that seemed to be the uh the case the
crowds in general seem to be uh kind of
anemic by which apparently there were
only 880,000 people there instead of
120,000 people uh the supposition is
that there most people were just waiting
around for Tyler the Creator to go on
and had very little idea who blur was
despite uh probably all of those people
being hardcore gorillas fans uh but yeah
where are the Apes yeah show me the Apes
come on who's this guy in a suit where's
the where's the monkey mask why can't
you do both it should be like Parliament
Funkadelic yes yes it should be band and
you have the gorillas on stage and you
have the rest of blur and you have
everything I was so disappointed when I
found out he was the gorilla's guy it's
like I in my head I built up this entire
thing do you think they were real no I
didn't I thought they were real until I
was like 27 I I I was aware they were a
cartoon at least recently but like I I
was under the impression they were a
cartoon because it was like a a band of
like musically gifted burn victims or
something like that like it was a
Phantom of the Opera type situation
people in witness protection yeah that's
I thought it was something cool like
that like oh there's got to be a great
reason why they're a cartoon but no
they're just normal musicians and some
of them are even famous musicians but
they just they wanted to be a cartoon
would you complain if every British
celebrity was replaced with a
cartoon I yes no more no more Elizabeth
Hurley she has to she she's a tune now
well only the guys I guess okay all
right that's the compromise every man
has to be a cartoon do they get dipped
in the tune stuff the goo the like like
in Roger Rabbit I don't know how it
works yet well if if you dip if you dip
a tune in in the the Eraser ooze that
kills the DI it's just called the dip
it's the dip yeah but if you dip a human
in the dip then they turn into a cartoon
and yeah that's what we're going to do
with Tom Holland we're turning him into
a cartoon yeah no I I yeah as long as
it's only the guys yeah the birds they
can they can stay flying they can stay
they can they can retain their Humanity
but yeah the British British actors and
musicians yeah I think they should all
become cartoons but the blur thing
mostly just seemed as a wild
miscalculation of their relative
popularity to the crowd that might be
lining up for Tyler the Creator uh as my
friend holiday Kirk who runs the new
Metal Moments uh Twitter account pointed
out in in the United States every blur
album combined has sold less than what
limp biscuits chocolate starfish and the
hot dog flavored water sold in the first
seven days of sales so that gives you a
good sense of the uh of the relative
popularity of the band blur here even
though if it was glass D or something or
reading they would certainly be
headlining yeah they're not a headliner
in the US yeah which ismore at least
great songs we love blur Damon if you
want a headline you got to get the
gorillas out how do get gorill get out
for live do they get real gorillas and
then like uh you smok in effect facts to
make it look like they're rapping and
playing guitar I mean more or less it's
a lot of cartoons on the screen but yeah
the guys are still on the stage I yeah I
don't know if I like that you're you're
you're making people pay like concert
prices to watch a cartoon well speaking
of that another performer at this week's
uh or this year's Coachella is the um
the anime musician hatsun moiko uh who
is who exists only only as a cartoon uh
but apparently I mean I caught a little
bit of her set it was a little
disappointing because usually they have
an elaborate holographic prism that she
performs in that to make give the
appearance of a live cartoon on stage
but because of uh limitations of set
turnover times and some other things
they could only pull out a big LCD
screen so you're just watching a
character on the screen none of the uh
holographic uh visual effect uh and I
was disappointed and I know a lot of the
hardcore Hatsune heads were also
disappointed with that now is is Hatsune
is that is are the lyrics and voice uh
sort of computer gener it as well or is
this just like yes okay all the Vocaloid
program it comes with a bunch of
different people that you can buy and
they have names and stuff I've tried to
use it and it's very difficult
especially when it's Japanese and you're
trying to get the syllables in I do love
the way that stuff sounds I love those
artificial voices I'm obsessed with
these videos of uh of Vocaloids singing
Bach and singing old
opera it just adds this new dimension to
it that's uh it gives it new life even
though it's a dead cartoon
but the people who like who want to
her or whatever I'm not into that I
don't need to see her Pur in it for her
musical Talent yeah I just want to see a
Japanese cartoon sing ODed to Joy um in
a computery computer Al algorithmically
generated voice uh I will say speaking
of Opera I I my highlight was the Tyler
the Creator Set uh I think he did a
fantastic job he has a tremendous sense
of staging he was really living up to
his the Creator moniker uh great
performance and everything and I was uh
late Saturday night I was a little uh
altered let us say and I was just
basically sitting there mumbling to
myself this is this is modern Opera this
is what Nobles paid Mozart to do this is
the kind of a performance that is like
the best of cultural technology that a
society can produce talk about the
Austrian School yeah there you go um and
then I guess the last the last
performance of note that I saw coming
out of cachell was uh Will Smith doing
Men In Black with Jay Balvin uh did you
catch that talk about something that's
lost on the crowd
yeah who is that for 1998 it's for me uh
I actually I got some Insider info from
that that apparently a source placed
deep within the uh the Paramount
institution uh passed off to me that
that they they heard that Will Smith and
Martin Lawrence were on the lot earlier
this week practicing for a bit that they
were going to do at Coachella that will
perhaps be part of the new Bad Boy movie
like they were they were gonna film some
something at the performance which is
why Will Smith was there and why he
ended up doing
uh a Men in Black song with them so chat
roll out for bad what's the new one
called Bad Boys Bad Boys for Life bad
boys for Life they're do a song I think
that they're going to do a bit at
Coachella but while he was there he then
also did a song it would be genuinely
baffling and maybe in a classic Bay way
if Will Smith as his character in Bad
Boys performed the Will Smith song Men
In Black in the movie
unexpectedly you should do that why not
what bit would you do at Coachella
though is it a non musical bit that's
part of the movie like they drug dealer
through the grounds or something what do
they do in Bad Boys movies yeah it
sounds about right yeah I don't know
they pretend to be each other a lot
could be anywhere it could be at like a
film festival yeah they they love doing
that in the bad boys movies where
they're like oh you You Will Smith you
have to pretend to be Martin Lawrence
and vice versa with you know it really
when I saw those movies when I was a kid
it gave me an unrealistic expectation
about how much I would have to do that
as an adult I was it made me made me
pretty yeah it made me pretty nervous I
was like I've got to learn a lot of
things about my friends and Stat if I'm
going to pretend to be them you are Mike
Lowry you be him that's what you are
you're him you're him I don't want to
hear it you're him and you you you you
you be you but not in front of her
you're him you're you so that's a news
from the world of uh Sport and culture
this weekend but of course I'd be remiss
if we didn't talk about the other big
news event from this weekend
which is fellas Valerie berelli is
dating the horse
whisper did you guys know that is it The
Horse Whisperer is it is the character
Robert Redford is based on no it's The
Horse Whisperer from Twitter who's The
Horse Whisperer you don't know The Horse
Whisperer I don't know any of these
people the hor are you serious you
forgot the horse whisper from How Could
You Forget How Could You Forget he he
was the guy will who would like uh write
all those threads that were like um
there's a lot of Chum fuul ass hats who
are trying to you know say don't vote
for Democrats he would the the guy with
the horse ABY he uh oh he was some
type of lawyer I believe am I right
about that he had um my clearest memory
of him is when he he posted this long
Thread about how he was going to get his
son the greatest vacation of all time
and they were going to like get in their
car with no air conditioning and then go
to the Grand Canyon from like Ohio and
he posted the screenshot of a text with
him and his kid and it's like 20
messages from him and then his kid says
okay which is the opposite of how
texting your Dad should be it should be
you saying more and then he just says uh
sunglasses Emoji thumbs up
emoji but anyway that guy is dating
Valerie Burton Elli who is Eddie vanill
Ed vanen yeah yeah ex-wife yeah so if
you're Wolf Gang Van Halen your real dad
who died is Eddie Van Halen and then
your new stepdad is the horse
Whisperer from Twitter yeah so imagine
what that feels like imagine your him
that is so that is the most you're
not my real dad of all time how did
they H how did they meet I don't know I
hope it wasn't just on Twitter yeah on
Twitter but like where else would it be
like know it it couldn't be anywhere
else I can't imagine they like share
spaces uh I remember the horse whisper
being kind of like a fail adult you know
what I mean not anymore well not anymore
but like before he's about to get the
royalties from 1984 if he plays his
cards right I mean now he's he's got it
set but before he was definitely one of
those adults where you know you get into
their car and they still have like uh
the crank Windows oh yeah yeah he was
yeah it's like how is this still running
I'm so I'm so bewildered when I see a
car like that from like 1994 and it's
got all different color doors and the
hood is a different color and they have
the crank windows and it's like how is
how is this still running how can you
afford the engine but not this other
like how even a car from like 10
years ago it's like there's so much
that goes wrong all right I'm
I'm seeing I'm seeing coverage of this
on The Daily Caller and it says Valerie
Bertelli says she's dating Infamous
liberal Twitter Troll and shocking
reveal Valerie burtell have one day at a
time and Hot in Cleveland flame Fame
revealed she's dating Infamous liberal
Twitter troll The Horse Whisperer in a
Tuesday Instagram post according to
People magazine Bert nelli who's been
doing a press jum junket to promote her
new cookbook shared Mr horse's blog post
in which he raved about the book writing
I just can't with this man and tagging
him on Instagram in a post according to
people Horus had boast over 400,000
followers on Twitter and has been a
well-known agitator in online left-wing
spaces for some time now he drew the IR
of Bernie Bros in 2019 when he hijacked
a pro Sanders hashtag and mocked the
senator 2016 candidacy with a
tongue-and-cheek satire that accused
Sanders of torpedoing Hillary Clinton's
campaign
wow everything old is New Again well
good luck to them yeah good for that guy
yeah yeah that that is The Horse
Whisperer like um latching on to Van the
Van Halen royalties that late in his
life that is the greatest Hail Mary of
all time yeah was like like imagine
imagine he's in high school in 1986 and
the bullies in school are like are
listening to Panama and driving by him
like you homo and he's just like oh
oh and then he's he's making this plan
and he's like I every time you listen to
that song I'm G to get a check
yeah I'll show you you're not going to
win this yeah he like that is that is
incredible that is like his adulthood it
looked Grim it was going bad he was like
you said he was planning a road trip in
a broken car with no air conditioning
with his son who's like okay shut up Dad
like clearly I think it's a ploy to lose
your son
yeah clearly just waiting for him to get
out yeah driving through like death
valley with no air conditioning with
like all the doors missing it's like
well we got a 5,000 miles to go one mile
an hour it's uh I guess you better stay
in the car he he was so things were
going so bad he was trying to kill his
son via a hot car when the sun was like
26 that's how bad he was still in it and
they were running the car yeah but then
suddenly Valerie Burton is like uh hey I
like what you have to say about you know
Wednesday GLE Corp reboot your system
with coffee or what you know whatever
he's doing nowadays I don't know and
it's it really does inspire you to keep
going never give up yeah never give up
never stop posting uh you could be you
could be dating uh Eddie Van Hill's
ex-wife through the through magic of uh
social
media uh no the thing I the thing I
wanted to uh talk about the other big
news story from this weekend is of
course Iran uh they around and
they're about to find out they're about
to find out why we don't have Universal
healthc care in this country oh boy uh
so yeah Iran did a uh sort of
retaliatory strike for Israel uh bombing
their Consulate in Damascus I don't know
like uh do you have any observations on
this I mean it seemed to be like a very
telegraphed uh punch that like no one
died in and you know certainly wasn't
for a greater we don't I mean it is
weird how I've seen like nothing about
how uh I mean I've only heard that like
you most of the drones and missiles were
intercepted but I've not seen any
footage of like the damage that they
supposedly did to I yeah I don't I don't
know what's going on with that but it
seemed to be like is that why we don't
have universal healthcare is it just
that yeah well there a lot of reasons
but it's like six anti-aircraft
guns well at least they work I
guess I guess if her money's going to
something that successfully shot down a
a missile that wasn't going to kill
anybody I mean like I who knows I could
easily see it you know going you know
one way where it was so telegraphed that
yeah it didn't kill anyone or that like
maybe it did kill a few soldiers and
they'll just like never admit it or
admit it like 30 years from now like
they do with a lot of things is real
they'll say they died to food poisoning
yeah one one of the less embarrassing
ways that they die in the
IDF the fell into a the foot fungus yeah
that's fell into the fell into the Dead
Sea and got covered in the black dirt
and then someone thought he was black
and shot him friendly fire incident it
was probably something like that not the
missile I do have to say I was like um
you know I was one of the guys pulling
for whatever the attack would be because
we didn't know what it was until things
were in the air which was very fun I I
thought that was very fun it was it
added a um it added a lot of like
uncertainty to it and I thought like
everyone else thought oh they just threw
a bunch of slow drones at them like I
get why they did it but that's kind of
disappointing you know and then it
turned out that they uh they did a
junior version of the Russia strategy
where they send a bunch of like RC like
500,000 RC planes at you and you shoot
them down but then the supersonic
missiles come and I think like okay
short of you know blowing up the knesset
and uh you know killing Ben gav or
whatever short of that this is the best
it could have gone right because they
showed a capability to like really
Israel up if it comes to that but they
didn't do so much that like they need to
retaliate you know it's like it's one of
the best outcomes we could have gotten
and I would have not not predicted that
Iran would show show enough of a
deterrent potential without killing
anyone uh or maybe only killing like 12
people who knows maybe we'll never know
they're pretty rational for a crazy
Pariah State yeah yeah they have all
these all these chances to start World
War III and kill a bunch of Americans
and and they don't do it oh yeah
after uh what was the guy's name
that Trump killed suani sulamani yeah
they could have done they had a very
good reason to just fire everything they
had at Washington DC and they didn't no
it seems like they're the definition of
like proportional International
law-based military response I mean like
they told them what was happening I
think they were basically counting on
the fact that these drones would get
shot down and then they're like okay
we've responded but like we consider the
matter closed and at least over the
weekend and as I saw on the Sunday shows
the line from DC was that the United
States will not uh be backing Israel in
any offensive War launched against Iran
but then we are 100% committed to their
defense and like Netanyahu when was the
last time there was an offensive War
yeah when was the last time someone
claimed to have an offensive War like
1802 well I mean they're pretending that
that like the drones that were launched
were just came out of nowhere as well
they're like oh they just attacked us
because of how as you said Alex how
irrational they are but yeah uh it seems
like uh if Israel responds to this or
escalates as we know Netanyahu and his
government are want to do I mean that's
why they bom that Consulate in the first
place is there any doubt that the United
States is going to just say it like
or you know or is going to say hey fend
for yourself we're done with this
because I mean it seems like they
reached the limit of it this weekend by
just being like okay it's done every
everyone you know like go you know take
a time out but like do we trust that I
mean we're not at war with Iran yet but
like it seems Seems rather tenuous I I
mean like I don't doubt that there's a
lot of elements in the US Security State
who would definitely prefer that but at
the same time
just going by like whatever cynical
calculus uh you know the Joe Biden or
the people around him are are looking at
I don't like no matter what an actual
like region-wide conflict with Iran that
we are heavily involved with win or lose
or whatever would be outstandingly ugly
and almost guarantee he lose his
reelection yeah that would be the worst
war of all time yeah it would be so bad
like is that's so easy all that flat
land between the rivers you've got all
these cities in a row you've got bosra
on the coast imagine going up in those
mountains it be like Afghanistan but
worse they would yeah if we do that
they're going to be so many like estate
sales of Dodge Challengers it'll be
terrible it's Afghanistan with a real
military yeah yeah and and like I I
guess like that's what I make of the
Biden the Biden White House house and
state department response to this is
that they're like okay okay everyone
everyone back to your Corners let's have
a timeout let's just chill out and make
sure that all the fighting is contained
in this tiny corner of land by the
Mediterranean Sea where there are a
million people trapped who can't fight
back let's make sure the war is focused
on them and not for instance the Iranian
revolutionary guard at this point it's
kind of like the Republicans with the
abortion issue where they're like yeah
yeah we yes we agree but just stop stop
there's an election coming up stop just
take like a few months off please uh the
the Drone attack and by the way I love
that they th through media this weekend
I I kept I kept hearing them referred to
as suicide drones and I just love that
terminology like they're suicide bombers
or something like yeah these hundreds of
airplanes were just sent to their death
in a in a drone wave attack like there
were you know high school students in
the Iran Iraq war most drones end that
way yeah they go into a tree they go
into a power line they go into a
swimming pool the ocean probably 99 % of
them they just hit something and die
that's what they do but uh my my
favorite thing to come out from uh the
sort of uh the drama this weekend is
resulted from the uh the wave of drone
attacks is Felix I know I I just saw you
post about this before we started
recording but my favorite new character
is self-appointed civilian spokesman of
Israel Elon Levy this guy like got fired
from his government job and now he's
just holding fake press conferences
under the banner of Civilian
spokesperson for Israel it is
adorable like is that like a citizen
arrest yeah it's like a citizen spokes
citizen press conference yeah he's got
like a like uh he's got like his
own background and Podium and
everything and it's so clearly in like
his his laundry room with a green screen
it's so cute I wish it wasn't like you
know in service of a genocide because it
it really is like adorable it's like
when a little kid is like I'm writing a
Star Wars it gives you like a sheet of
paper with a bunch of stick figures with
lightsabers it's so it's so precious but
um yeah no he is I don't even know why
he's doing that like I don't think being
a spokesman is like um being an actor
where you do a self
tape like is he hoping like aeran seas
that and he like wow this kid's got some
initiative but like yeah no how did this
guy get fired from his job as like some
sort of semi-official spokesperson for
the Israeli government did he were were
his lies just not convincing enough
because it just it doesn't really seem
like there's a limit for the dumb
that you can say in defense of Israel
but like this guy was too much of a
loser even for them um if I'm
remembering right I could be getting him
mixed up with another similar guy but I
think he like up so bad that like
he had to apologize to some British
politician like a a Tory if if I
remember right like he I'd have to look
it up but like he he basically like
libeled someone they and they made him
apologize he said JK Rowling did the
Holocaust yeah yeah oh this guy is very
confused there's a Biblical ex exegesis
I don't know how to pronounce that I
should know how to pronounce that of the
Book of Esther exegesis of the Book of
Esther to be written about how haman's
plot to destroy the Jews was only
symbolic and performative and he
intended it to fail all along so I guess
Iran is the Persians in the Book of
Esther and they did that to help the
Jews so they're on our side is that what
he's saying because that was that was
the guy he was uh he was a
Jewish so he
said you got you you can't kill all the
Jews or my wife's going to get so mad at
me yeah you know you know Jewish wives
are like that's all your dick off if you
you know go at the uh the chosen people
yeah he learned the hard way yeah that
doesn't make any sense there's another
one for those who aren't following iron
shield operation Iron Dome missile
defense Iron swords war and Iron Wall
Doctrine are all different things well
that's really
stupid I'm supposed to remember that
like this is this is supposed to make
them look better that they named all
their the same thing it's like when
rean named something Star Wars there's
already a thing called that call it
anything else iron sharpen Iron Dome
sharpens iron steel we all know this
Alex it's an Iron Age
ideology it's an Iron Age book written
to retroactively justify why they should
live in Canaan even though they were the
ones who were there the F the whole time
they've been there the whole goddamn
time no one came that's they're all
indigenous to it everyone who's there uh
and then at least from the US side I did
love seeing um Lurch John fedman on the
Sunday shows and he said quote Iran had
to have some fireworks after Israel
smoked that Iranian General and I'm here
for that it just I I love giving
love o Hunty I'm I'm F to kill myself on
my son's
birthday like uh like Federman man he is
just like now Felix you you've been
you've been correct about Federman for
longer than everyone because like I I I
see like this and I'm like did they
did Israel just plant like a small bomb
in his brain when they fixed his stroke
but no he's always been like this yeah
but like he's basically the only
Democrat now like he's the only he has
to be making it worse right yeah but
like right now he's the only Democrat
the only responses I see to fedman now
are are Republicans saying the stroke
fixed the woke that's the only thing I
see like I don't see I don't see
Democrats really supporting him I don't
like it just seems like Republicans
being like well guess uh guess his head
being all up made him not stupid
anymore and that's just that's his
entire thing for like two years now like
what and it's it's making Israel look
bad it's making Zionist look bad so so I
guess it's good Alex is right the only
like positive feedback I see on its feed
are like its accounts called like Lion
of Judah being like I you I I used to
hate you but now I think you're based
and like you know regular like you know
Patriot Eagle I can't believe it but I
like this fetman guy and then everyone
else reminding him that he tried to ruin
his son's birthday party I just remember
like a before before October 7th fedman
was the guy being like any Democrat
criticizing Biden is helping Trump so uh
I mean I don't know it's it's it's fun
to see his career now where like he's
being he's being used as the example of
how Biden uh saying that we won't uh
back up Israel's response to this he's
being quoted as like both sides blast
Biden for you know capitulation to Iran
and the other side is just John fedman
is the only Democrat not backing Biden
on this yeah he's like like Menendez has
been significantly better on all of this
than fedman it's insane yeah he
knows not to get a headline every
day what's the what's the shitty town
that feder's from bradock Pennsylvania
yeah that I I I hated that when everyone
was like oh you need to check this guy
out he's awesome he's the mayor of a
town that sucks bradock is lying too sir
yeah and he cared about it so much that
he had to ruin his family's life to be a
senator that's how much he cared about
bradic that he immediately had to leave
and make his kids be on TV all the time
and be in those pictures uh where people
were comparing them to like Rond
desantis's family and being like look at
this stupid shitty 14-year-old
John fedman son what a loser look at him
in his hoodie and his shitty hair what a
and Ronda santis his kid
is awesome that's what he put his kids
through because he had to be a senator
and it's working out great for everybody
before before he was a Senator he was
always bad on Israel and people always
figured it was a calculation like it was
signaling to APAC and Democratic
majority for Israel like hey don't worry
you don't have to worry about me don't
get involved I'll be even if I I know I
look like a left challenger but I won't
like I won't anything up don't
worry but um when he was just mayor of
bradoock I didn't understand the
attraction because it's like all he did
was he he'd go on TV and be like we
don't we don't have Co zero yet in
bradic bradic has no co-al machines and
it's like okay well that is
it is complete
it is but it's like
you're never go there you're the mayor
why don't you try getting Discovery Zone
to come to bradock all you do is go on
TV and talk about how you guys have one
basketball hoop you're not you're not
like helping your town do you think that
uh Modi gets on TV and is's like India
sucks it's bad he might I can't
understand
him but I I guess like yeah like he's
he's always been like this on Israel but
like now he is like actively breaking
with the I I thought he was Mo mostly a
careerist who would just get in line
with whatever Biden or Pelosi but like
he's breaking with them on this issue
like in an election year and it just
that I don't know it's it's very I guess
it's like not it's not surprising to me
but it it just is funny that he's made
this the hill to die on or the the hill
to go to sleep on in his case does he
just know that the Republicans are going
to they're going to run a normal guy
next time like they're not going to take
a chance un seeding him but I don't
think he would win anyway yeah he's he's
obviously uh less capable than he was
when he ran the first time I mean who
knows he did have like you know the
people around him ran like a very
competent campaign last time are they
still there I that's what that's they
still on payroll I don't know that's a
good question and the other thing is of
course on the other hand well what is a
normal Republican because there there
really isn't there really isn't like a
generic Republican out there so like I
you know I don't I don't think that
there's I don't think that there's like
a um Scott Walker waiting in the wings
but who knows take a lot I think I don't
know I would it would be funny to see
him lose because you know he would not
take it well but uh you know if I had to
bet on it now knowing what I know now I
don't think he would what if a
republican runs against him on a
platform of
anti-Semitism
that's idea what it's Jackson Hinkle oh
okay now we're talking like that that's
a great idea think think about theual
how you run against him think about the
visual contrast between fedman and
Jackson Hinkle you know a guy who is
always in a hoodie and looks older than
he is and a guy who's always in a suit
and looks older than he
is that's I think that would be the
election of a lifetime that would be
that would be a really it would be the
posting election I love Jackson Hinkle
he's getting all this uh he's getting
all this press now because like his
Twitter following grew by like 10
million people during the uh this latest
uh Israel Gaza War but like I like him
because a like people are saying oh like
he's a con artist like he's full of
and fine but like the like look if you
are opposed to Putin uh you support the
US Military and you hate Bashar al-assad
that side has got plenty of 20year olds
who look like they're 40 who wear a suit
every day of their life and then
opine on current events how come we can
one guy who supports Assad can just he
can be a young kid who wears a suit and
looks 40 years old too I don't get I
don't get why everyone's so mad at
Jackson hle Jackson
Hy yeah I like him because he was like
he's tried like every everything he's
tried every political ideology yeah like
he was he was he was a Bernie bro back
in 2016 he wasn't just a Bernie bro he
was an environmentalist he wasn't just
that he wasn't just that he was like he
was trying to be like a tertiary
Parkland kid he was like oh I'm in the
Parkland affiliate system I'm in the
Parkland kid minor league system the
Parkland uh in the Parkland High School
Without Walls where you can audit
chemistry classes you live in California
I just I love someone like that like he
has everyone talks about him like he's
so Sinister but I think he's
awesome because he has like Jenna
maron's personality but for politics
maybe Israel shouldn't have made all
those
videos kids getting murdered yeah like I
don't want that guy to have a lot of
followers on Twitter so maybe we should
not make new videos of kids getting
obliterated and then he won't be able to
post him also I am not one to argue with
the wisdom of like sumali and Turkish
dads who compos his entire audience now
like he is I I will never say after I
found out that like you know all the
60-year-old fathers of the global South
love him I'm like look he can't be that
bad and he looks he you know he dress he
dresses he dresses in a suit all the
time I think that cannot that cannot be
underscored enough and look like you
know uh am I so hot for his magga
communism thing and like I don't know
it's just like the post 2020 it just
seemed to people like there wasn't any
more juice to squeeze from that so like
now I'm like oh I'm a communist but I
hate degenerate gay people and trans
people it like look am I thrilled about
that no but as I said before if someone
who we just there there needs to be one
person who stands with Bashar Al Assad
who looks 50 years older than he does
and we and carries a briefcase
everywhere and gets to be have millions
of Twitter followers and and just like
we need a diversity of viewpoints among
the sort of striving media influencer
set what is Assad up to what does he do
like dayto day I mean probably cleaning
I don't know he's picking up the dental
racket again no he's an eye doctor
doctor okay yeah yeah do you remember
when his iTunes leaked and it was all
like black eyed peas and stuff like that
was it really yeah yeah is it better
than Obama's playlist it it
was I'm surprised I'm surprised you
don't know this Alex yeah I don't know I
know Jeffrey Epstein's playlist I you
know Epstein not a what's on Epstein's
playlist that one song by Fun by our
friend we are
young he thought uh he thought it was
song from the perspective of a
kid his voice is high um je vacation is
his profile on Spotify and it's still up
and he's got like a a playlist called me
likey now which uh that one doesn't have
anything on it now I hope they didn't oh
no here we go public playlists he spells
everything everything wrong there's one
called classica instead of classical and
it's got the 1812 Overture it's got the
Imperial March from Star Wars my
classical music song classical music
it's got like the uh The Nutcracker
theme and Joy to the World so that's uh
that's the caliber of intellect that guy
was all right here in case you wanted in
case anyone believed that like he got
paid to do taxes for Leon black that's
what his job was here's here's what's
what was on Assad's iTunes Blake Shelton
singing God gave me
you um wow don't talk just kiss by Right
Said
Fred uh Bizarre Love Triangle New Order
that's a great song I mean hey that that
would my playlist yeah uh we can't go
wrong by The Cover Girls not familiar
with heard of it yeah hurt by Leona
Lewis is that a cover of the Nish nails
song no that's sort of like 2009 core
yeah I remember I don't remember that
one uh Look At Me Now by Chris Brown why
is he into that he's like isn't he
like 58 yeah yeah I mean I can't I I
really don't know I guess like every
time every time you go to like a
midlevel like a a a medium quality eye
doctor and you're in their waiting room
this is the sort of stuff they play
maybe it's just like an eye doctor thing
more than anything I think if I was a
baby boomer and I was president of a
country in the desert my favorite song
would be Cashmere by Leed Zeppelin I
would listen to that and be like this is
about where I live this is so
sick this is my kind of classic rock if
you could yeah if you could listen to
that and you can like you can like get
your military guys to like uh you know
you you force them to like take you on a
cool ride to the desert where while
you're blasting it but no he's you know
he's listening to Blake Shelton uh Al
all that and none of those guys
would be man enough to actually come
over there I don't think anyone would do
it l Turkmenistan if you go over there
and you do a paid party for their
president everybody gets mad at you and
you have to be like how the am I
supposed to know what goes on in
Turkmenistan and Beyonce that's not my
the people at the state
department don't know where tur Menan
is people over there don't know the name
of their own president why would I know
that
it's like yeah yeah they do a concert at
the presidential Palace then you have to
find out a week later oh like he boils
people to death and it's just like yeah
I'm I'm sorry I I didn't get the memo
they paid me a billion dollars I'm sorry
it's not as good as us boiling prisoners
in air by not giving them air
conditioning in Louisiana yeah seems
like a lot of his songs are like sort of
daddy daughter for like sort of like
dances at weddings you know like the
father daughter dance he's a romantic
heart yeah well I mean but I do like the
inclusion of new or he's a British guy
basically he's yeah he's a British guy
he made a bunch of overtures to America
before and like I just just going by his
iTunes you can kind of see they were
authentic over chirs like unlike
Obama and his like highly curated end of
year lists which are just oh that is the
phoniest on I I can't stand
that yeah no yeah uh only one of
those guys was born in America
to move on uh we did okay we talked
about bradic Pennsylvania but there's
another town in Pennsylvania that I
would like to get to as long as we're
talking about you know potential normal
Republicans I got we I gotta we got to
listen to the Trump speech about
Gettysburg because honestly I think this
puts the Gettysburg Address to shame
this is my favorite thing any American
politician has ever said about
Gettysburg including Abraham Lincoln so
if just get if we get some of trump at
Gettysburg where our Union was saved by
The Immortal Heroes at Gettysburg
Gettysburg what an
unbelievable battle that was the Battle
of Gettysburg what an unbelievable I
mean it was so much and so interesting
and so vicious and horrible and so
beautiful so many different ways it it
represented such a big can't be portion
of this country Gettysburg W I go to
Gettysburg Pennsyvania you to look and
to watch and uh the statement of Roberty
Lee who's no longer in favor did you
ever notice that no longer in favor
never fight uphill me boys never fight
uphill they were fighting uphill he said
wow that was a big mistake he lost
his and uh they were fighting let me
fight up pill me boys but it was too
late I like the generals who don't
surrender
man I love how he said he's out of favor
like it happened the last few weeks lost
lost cause historiography is coming
back General Robert Lee has fallen out
of favor no longer hot I was thinking
about what what uh proportion of people
in that audience have any British
ancestry or any ancestors who fought in
the Civil War on either side and I would
guess it's like 10% and the rest is
Polish and German there's just the
there's so many things about the the way
he just inadvertently creates just like
beautiful beautiful poetry almost the
phrase I go to Gettysburg and I love to
look and watch I love I go to Gettysburg
to look and watch oh I know that feeling
yeah it's a great Battlefield we went
there actually went there on two
different field trips I went there in
eighth grade on a field trip and then I
switched schools and in nth grade we
went back on a field trip and it's fine
it's like it's not amazing but it's a
cool field and you can climb up the
thing and look around and I love to look
and watch yeah it's it's not a field
that I would use like today for all my
field desires there are better Fields
we've uh you know we we've advanced in
our agricultural ability we can
cultivate larger land masses but if you
were in 1864 or something that was
probably one of the better Fields you
could you could have and as far as a war
field awesome it must have been so sick
if a battle happen if you were a farmer
and you're like I'm so sick of this I'm
so sick of this year 23 of hay just
harvesting the hay putting it in hails I
hate this life and then a bunch
and then 500,000 people die on your
Battlefield and they have to the
government has to buy it out from under
you and turn into a historical monument
you're like this is the best day of my
life oh my God that was the equivalent
of like slipping at the library back
then was just hoping hoping that like a
war happened at your farm before that it
was like I hope this Farm is like the
beach head of the British reinvasion
it's like when Robert E Lee got his uh
his Plantation confiscated to make the
the cemetery there and he was like yes I
don't have to see black people for any
reason I don't have to see them at all
yeah when what did Robert E Lee do
immediately after that he became an
academic he became he fell out of favor
immediately yeah say okay the other the
other side it's it says Gettysburg is
what do you say it's so indicative of
our great success in this country and
then it's something about looking and
watching like yeah if you were that
farmer in
1864 yeah you you'd have something
amazing to watch you'd get to see 30,000
people die in like a minute but today
you got to get what are you watching
there just grass you I mean you can look
at it your
in Instagram
yeah uh but I I I did want to share
there's a there's this uh a Newsweek
article about this and the headline is
uh Donald Trump's Gettysburg remarks
Trashed by Civil War historian quote
shut up what did he say that was wrong
what did he say and that was a great
battle and he loves to look at it yeah
you don't love to look at it you're a
historian you don't love to look at it
says here yeah uh writing on X uh TJ
Styles said the former president's take
on the Battle of Gettysburg which was
fought between July 1st and 3rd in 1863
okay I was off by a year and killed that
estimated 51,000 people was inarticulate
and reductive I mean no it was off
the cuff he was just saying Gettysburg
how about it an amazing event we're
expecting presidents to be articulate oh
my God you're telling me that Donald
Trump didn't give like a a 4-Hour
seminar on the tactics used at
Gettysburg no way no way I want my money
back it was so interesting and so
vicious and horrible and so beautiful in
many different ways I and isn't this
what like Civil War historians like
they've been selling this line of
forever I mean like Ken Burns
eat your heart out I would like this was
a thousand times more interesting than
his civil war Civil War
blathering yeah seeing 50,000 people die
is vicious interesting and in some
Sometimes some ways beautiful and
indicative of our success indicative of
our great success as a country yeah we
we had 50,000 people we could just you
know let go
like see
you uh and I guess like uh I mean yeah
his comments on Gettysburg like I said
uh the Gettysburg adress you is now
number two in the greatest remarks ever
said by get about Gettysburg by an
American politician but I did want to
talk because Donald Trump was in court
today uh just last thing I want to talk
about uh his trial for the Stormy
Daniels uh hush money case has begun
jury selection how is that still going I
mean it's going to be going on here like
and I don't know if you guys saw this
but like uh Maggie Haberman and the sort
of Court Watchers today the big thing
everyone talked about is that he was
nodding off in court with his mouth a
gape drool coming out of his mouth and
had to be sort of nled awake by one of
his lawyers who passed that's it's sad
to hear that he relapsed on heroin yeah
that's what I was thinking he's just
he's just out a tweet I found earlier
from from Liberal Lisa in Oklahoma she
says when Trump finally does get
escorted off to prison and handcuffs the
cold harsh reality of Aderall
withdrawals is going to his world
delirium tremors are not a joke delirium
tremors yeah the are you talking
about yeah because the one thing that's
unheard of is being able to get drugs in
prison maybe not adal but I me he he can
stay up if he needs to but I feel like
you said how long has this been going on
well here's the amazing thing about it
it says here the trial will will begin
with perhaps the most scrutinized jury
selection since the trial of OJ Simpson
three decades ago and it will confine Mr
Trump to New York City for as many as 4
days a week for about eight weeks and
possibly more that would be roughly one
one quarter of the calendar until the
November election that's the punishment
doesn't matter what happens no yeah I I
it's just like I thought they did the
stormy Daniel stuff already she signed a
statement saying it didn't happen how
did she do that for money for the money
that he paid her is that how is she the
best person to to do this trial over he
hasn't done that I maybe he's too old to
do it to women now that's why they have
to find the old ones if this was the 90s
you could have just waited two days and
he would have just he would have grabbed
a woman's on the street but going
on here says uh Mr Trump has told
advisers he wants as much media coverage
of his court appearances as possible and
many supporters defending him on
television as the gravitational center
of the campaign shifts away from
Battleground states to a courtroom in
lower Manhattan uh he is expected to
hold events around New York City in
parts of the Burrows outside Manhattan
that are more politically hospitable to
him on days when he is not in court so
to translate that just means Staten
Island that's it he can go to stat you
can hop on the ferry after his trial and
hold a rally in Staten Island because
that's that that's gonna be the best
place to get a turnout in New York City
for Donald Trump has he ever been on a
boat oh
absolutely absolutely he's been on a
boat he told the story about being on a
boat to the boy s remember can he swim
though I don't know um I mean he's
definitely not I'm seeing pictures of
him on a boat I'm not his seeing the
Trump boat parades when he was talking
to the Boy Scouts in like 2018 this is
the thing that made Rex Tillerson resign
that he like told he told the Boy Scouts
some like some like horny story about
being on right yeah I remember that I
found a picture from 1998 of him on a
super but is is it is it is it mored
like like a like a key or an arena or
sorry Marina or is he actually like okay
yeah so that does that really count as
being on a boat unless I think he likes
boat I don't think he's a boat guy that
still counts as being on a boat I like
it's still on the water this is
reminding me the Trump New York stuff is
reminding me of one of uh like a a now
from like eight years ago a really funny
stupid post um it was after Trump won
and they were posting like election maps
and I forgot who did this but they they
posted a map of Brooklyn and there were
like all look at all these racist
hipsters that secretly support Trump and
she he was showing like all of South
Williams the South
williamsburger dress yeah not not H why
do they have their hair in that stupid
way I hate hipsters with they're the
curly little things and the the tiny hat
they got strings hanging out of their
pants pull pull them
up hear about those hipster
tunnels hipsters were tunneling between
uh gastro pubs it's so it's so annoying
how hipster stuff is always closed on
Saturdays it's so I can't you it's weird
hipsters make up like 2% of the
population but they're like a quarter of
all Supreme Court Justices and half of
all Federal Reserve chairman did you
guys have that thing happen where a
hipster cut off the end of your penis
when you were a
kid no I
didn't hipsters I don't guys know this
but in my neighborhood on Friday
evenings the hipsters set off an air
raid siren because there's a damn two
for one deal on PBR in a shot can you
believe that every weekend uh
one more thing from the uh the Trump uh
the trial it says jury selection is
scheduled to begin on Monday with
questionnaires probing the prospective
juror opinions of Mr Trump including
what podcasts they listen to and what
news outlets they consume as he sits in
the courtroom watching and I got to say
I don't think this should be allowed I
don't think you should be able to to to
query people's podcast listening habits
to get on a jury because like hey if if
you're if you're I I've been imp panal
for a jury once and this was years
before podcasts even exists if you show
any indication that you have a point of
view about anything they will strike you
from the jury pool and listening to
podcasts of any kind marks you as
someone who has an opinion about
something so therefore you can never be
allowed to serve on a jury what if you
what if you listen to a podcast that's
like the Lex free podcast though I would
say that actually that actually shows
the opposite I think you should be
struck from the jury because you would
be under
stimulated your intellect would be you
would probably get bored and
underchallenged in a class like that
wait wait if you listen to The Lex
Freedman podcast you'd be the you'd be
perfect for a jury because what is a
jury other than sitting in a room and
listening to boring for hours on
end so you've been well acclimated to
that if listening to his 4-Hour
interviews with people who Rogan didn't
want to book yeah no I I think I think
it would Mark you as like the most
impartial person uh I think it should
Mark you as a felon and I think you
should be taken out of the jury pool and
put into the the you know s on a bus to
Rikers for listening to that
but uh yeah God imagine being impanel
for that jury geez imagine being having
to serve on that jury what a Fu that's
God it's not even a Cool Crime it's not
even a Cool Crime like OJ or some
like that or Charles Manson
it's just some guy like he had sex with
a poor pornstar in 2003 and then said it
didn't happen and she said it happened
and then she said it didn't happen and
he said it happened and then he said it
didn't happen and he owes her money yeah
that's not fun I would space out for
like months at a time during that trial
and come to and be like wait are we
still do this still the stormmy Daniels
thing it's so it sucks like the only
kind of funny thing about it was um when
he stole from Michael con when like he
like gave Michael con he told Michael
con to pay her off and then didn't pay
him back that was funny but like
everything else it's just like okay let
it go who who are Trump's current
attorneys because like his track record
with attorneys is so funny I I just I
would love to I would love to like a
sort of a peak inside the mind of his
his defense team because they're like oh
boy I can't wait for the big pay off
from this it's like good luck is
Rudy
there hopefully he'll be he'll be called
as a witness maybe he's just sitting in
the courtroom because he has nothing
else to do he's just drunk in a
courtroom at 7:00 a.m. he's like I got
nothing else to do that's how you get
picked to be a
lawyer lawyer
selection show up first thing in the
morning your
briefcase if you can lean you can clean
this Courthouse clean the streets yeah
that's about uh that's that's about it
for me


## Keywords:
