---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ht7fXcw3lH8
---

# Video
Type I and Type II Errors
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ht7fXcw3lH8)

## Transcript:
okay in this video I'm going over type 1
and type 2 errors and how you can build
them into social welfare functions and
the two examples I'm going to do in this
video have to do with the FDA deciding
what it what should be the burden of
proof for new drugs that want to go to
the market in the United States and
second I'm going to look at the
disability benefit system and again the
burden of proof that people need to
apply for to be accepted under the
disability program in the United States
so let's look at it from those two
perspectives
you
okay so here we have the situation with
type 1 and type 2 errors basically in
both cases we're looking at a hypothesis
on null hypothesis and we're making some
judgment about whether it's true or
false and our judgment could be good or
bad so we can have a true null and let's
start with the example of the FDA so the
FDA's hypothesis their null hypothesis
is going to be that the drug is harmful
and that's a fairly reasonable prior to
have if you have any random new drug
coming into the system chances are it
will be harmful in which case the burden
of proof is on the drug companies to
show that it's not harmful so so they
want to reject this null hypothesis and
the FDA of course is responsible both
for deciding whether or not the drug
goes to market in the US and there are
two cases one is the null is true
actually the drug is harmful in which
case this is something we don't know
it's hard to know but the FDA has to
make a decision and if they say actually
we accept the null we think the drug is
harmful it's not going to go to market
and we have a good true situation and
good decision but if we reject that
hypothesis then we have a situation
where we've rejected the hypothesis if
the drug is harmful we've decided it's
safe enough to go on to markets in which
case that's a type one hypothesis or a
false negative decision about this null
hypothesis so the situation here is
so the situation is one where we make it
take one high type one error and we
approve unsafe drugs to go to market now
if that null hypothesis is false meaning
the drug is actually beneficial and good
and not really harmful to people then we
can either accept that it's accept the
null hypothesis and say actually we
still think the drug is harmful I'm in
which case we're making it false sorry
we're making a type 2 error that's a
false positive in this case it's going
to be an approving or failing to approve
an unsafe drug
sorry that's failing to approve a safe
drug so a drug really should be going to
market but the FDA is accepting the null
hypothesis that it's harmful and not
putting it on the market and of course
if we're over here where it's a false
hypothesis the drug is truly is not
harmful this is false but we are
rejecting this hypothesis that means
we're putting the drug on the market and
this is of course a good situation so if
we're trying to think about this from a
social welfare perspective we're going
to imagine the FDA is making a decision
where the choice variable is going to be
the burden of proof for a drug to reject
this null hypothesis so it's going to
look like this
okay so in which case um this would be a
very simple Social Welfare function and
the reason I'm calling this a social
welfare function is it is from the
government perspective where the
government is trying to maximize the
utility of the population and a very
simple version of this I mean I could
have even just let this be type 1 and
type 2 errors where we're trying to
minimize the type 1 and type 2 errors
and we can have some weight between them
so some actually I won't use beta
because I already used B in here but we
have some weight that all of the Alpha
it's an importance weight we're placing
on type 1 versus type 2 errors so here
we have our approve unsafe drugs this is
our type 1 error
so we're minimizing type 1 errors the
approval of unsafe drugs as a function
of the burden of proof to reject this
hypothesis plus the type 2 errors the
failure to prove safe drugs as a
function of the burden of proof now this
is a very simple Social Welfare function
and of course if we want you to expound
on these we could experiment what's the
problem when we have a type 1 and type 2
error so oh let me let me color code
this
so let's just write out what are the
societal issues when we have a type 1
error or approval of unsafe drugs
so of course the biggest problem with
the type 1 error is that there's harm
done the people who are put on that drug
and if we're thinking about the
magnitude of that harm we might want to
think about what are the number of
people who would be on the drug and
what's the duration of their harm before
we figure out that this drug causes harm
so you might imagine if we have a system
after putting drugs on the market of
continual oversight of the drug and
continual collection of data about how
the drug affects people we might be able
to reduce the duration of that harm in
which case that would reduce the
magnitude of the impact of type 1 errors
on the population so we could rewrite
this social welfare function with this
instead of the classic type 1 error now
let's think about the type 2 error and
what kind of harm that causes
now of course the type 2 errors can
cause harm to patients who could have
received the drug but are not being
allowed to have the drug and if you have
a lot of type 2 errors a lot of failing
to approve drugs that are truly safe and
truly effective that could reduce
innovation because innovators are going
to have to come up with more and more
drugs just to get one drug through the
FDA approval process so this is just an
overview of how type 1 and type 2 errors
can be used in the Social Welfare
function and there's lots of situations
where this might apply now um the
federal disability I'm actually grew up
actually going to let you think about
how how type 1 and type 2 errors come up
when thinking about the federal
disability program basically the
government has to decide when someone
applies to have disability in the
meaning they get a check every month and
access to Medicare for the rest of their
lives the government decides yes we put
them on disability or no dude we not
allowed them to be on disability and you
can think about the type 1 and type 2
errors involved


## Keywords:
