---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yb5HphLtncs
---

# Video
Universal Basic Income - Rutger Bregman and Hilmar Schneider
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yb5HphLtncs)

## Transcript:
ladies and gentlemen welcome to room for
discussion today during this first
interview of 2018 we are discussing
universal basic income ubi in short it's
the idea that a government would give
its entire population and high enough
monthly grant to lift everyone out of
poverty is this the solution to our
economic problems or is it simply an
empty dream of paradise today we are
joined by mr. gazzman he is the author
of utopia for realists and writer at the
core school dance he has been a
predominant player in putting ubi in the
spotlight on the world stage we are also
joined by Hilmar Schneider CEO of ISA
and Institute for labor economics he has
publicly criticized ubi
from a labor economics perspective
throughout this interview you the
audience will have the opportunity to
ask questions Leonard right there is
standing with a mic and he will rush
your way
once the opportunity presents itself
with these two ubi experts on the bench
today we expect expect a clear target
start of the new year so please welcome
give a warm welcome to Hilmar Schneider
and a good carbonyl
where are we supposed to where you
desire welcome both of you
thanks mr. Blackman in April last year
you gave a TED talk on you bi you
devoted an entire book on this subject
and also do you write about it
intensively in the course from them what
was the moment that you really started
to believe UB is such a great idea well
you know I first wrote about basic
income in October 2013 so that's now
four years ago I'm back then it was a
completely forgotten idea I explained
the idea to my colleagues and many
people far like basic income bothers
income in Dutch many people thought that
I was talking about the the basic income
of the banker on top of it you receive
all their bonuses you know that was also
the main way that the concept was used
and in the newspapers and now just four
years later the ideas everywhere you
know it has become quite mainstream so
that has been a pretty crazy experience
yeah I can imagine you mr. Schneider are
a very strong opponent of universal
basic income what made you so interested
in this topic that you devoted part of
your research work to it well our
Institute is committed to do policy
relevant research this is only natural
that we are confronted with this kind of
topics frequently in Germany where our
Institute is located it was actually the
case that in I think it was in 2007 or
2008 when one of the prime minister of
one of the lender made a proposal to
introduce ubi in Germany and that gave a
big debate in Germany at the time and we
are we have at our Institute a
simulation model that allows us to
assess what would be the potential
outcome of an introduction of such a
concept and so we were commanded to
to do a study on this and this is where
it started for myself and from then on
that has been a continuous kind of
request yeah by the way also the Council
of Economic Advisors in Germany also
wrote something on this in that period
of time 2008 or 2009 and how close would
you then say that Germany at your
residence country at this moment is to
implementing a universal basic income
you seen migrant in common for example
yes my encanta income is an interesting
website if you know this if you have the
chance to get across it mine cont
uncommon dot Da is basically a lottery
and it's very popular so you can just go
to the website and you can just register
and chances are that you will be
selected for receiving a ubi for a
limited period of time although that
this is I think twelve months ok
thousand euros for 12 months the
interesting thing about it is that you
need to find someone who is willing to
provide the funding for it
and what they do is they use
crowdfunding sounds very good so some
people are willing to donate money in
order to make that lottery to keep that
going and so I think they managed to
award some 30 to 40 people per year to
providing and and the organizer is doing
very well because he's keeping 10% money
for himself so he's just collecting
money giving it out to others and keeps
10% for himself that's why as little to
do with the general concept of a ubi so
as this shows you VI is advocated in a
lot of different forms right so we think
as the start of the debate I think it
might be a good idea to quickly discuss
the definition of ubi so how would you
define Universal basically income for
everyone well I think we should start
with the concept of a basic income
guarantee that's the the umbrella
concept and uvr is just one way to
implement a basic income guarantee you
know if you want to completely eradicate
poverty provide a floor in the income
distribution you can do that by just
giving everyone you know a thousand
euros each month but you can also just
stop of the incomes of all of all the
poor in your society an efficient name
one ubi that you mainly address in your
work what what defines you BR well
they're usually for ubi you know the
universal basic income which is a
version of the basic income guarantee
now people say usually that it has three
components so it's individual its
universal so everyone gets it and it's
unconditional and you can experiment
with all three of these components
personally I'm most interested in what
happens if you give people money
unconditionally there are other people
who say well no the universal part is
most important other people say no the
individual part is most important so in
essence I think the whole basic income
debate is about a direction of thought
you know there's not one single idea
there may be a thousand ideas around it
okay so when when we would implement
this in a government where we then give
up our current welfare system so we lose
child support or social housing well
there are some libertarians especially
in the u.s. who say you know let's just
get rid of the whole welfare state which
is a disaster anyway and just just
implement one basic income now let me be
clear I think that will be an absolute
disaster you know also from a European
perspective we know that public health
care is quite a great thing right we
know that public education works very
well so I see the basic income guarantee
as a supplement as the crowning
achievement of social democracy but
there are other opinions here as well
okay it's just matter how would you
define universal basic income shortly
well its minimum income guarantee for
everybody
unconditional of your needs and that's
basically it
okay so to start off this discussion
given that you do have different views
on on UVI itself we think it might be a
good idea to do the first part of the
interview we give you a few statements
you agree or disagree with them after
each statement we have a small
discussion and then we move on to the
next one we think this would be a great
way to get a spectacular debate going
about the main arguments concerning ubi
so the first statement would be we need
ubi to shelter low-skilled workers from
the dangers of automation
mr. Behrman yes or no I would disagree
no from mr. Beckman this is interesting
I would disagree as well okay
mr. Schneider you disagree but at the
Center for European Economic Research
they predicted that in 2030 we would
have a 26 percent job loss for the
poorest quarter of our society why do
you think that automation is not a
imminent threat these are two questions
now I mean what you're referring to is a
study which is addressing cross effects
does not at all mean that those people
that you are talking about would lose
their material existence it's just about
losing the jobs that they currently have
that doesn't mean that there would not
be other jobs that they could have so
where would the jobs go that lose our
last place that's that's something
that's going on since human mankind
exists and there's no reason to assume
why structural change would change
directions in the future I mean it has
always been the case that existing
occupations existing ways of how to to
make your living get destroyed by
machines by organization and get
replaced by something else so if if it
were true that technical progress is
destroying our existence we would not be
able to live anymore because that has
been started long ago
and this is not the argument for
justifying something and on top of it
if a universal basic income would be
introduced it would of course be most
beneficial for the poorest that's for
sure and the problem for them would then
be that if if they would still try to to
make some some money on top of it by
working it would be very difficult for
them to find jobs because they it the
universal basic income makes especially
cheap labor very expensive yeah we will
come later to that in the disruptions in
the labor market but just to go back to
the discussion because let's say jobs
don't disappear on the aggregate level
we still see a very downward pressure on
wages since the 1970s so and which is
partly caused by machine later but by
machine competition for labor of course
so don't you in that case say that we do
need a supplement for these low earnings
in the future well the question then is
why do we have to shoot with heavy
artillery on a problem which is very
let's say narrow the I mean they met
there are poor people for whatever
reasons it's not only low skilled
workers it could also be low on mothers
and all kinds of things that there are
many causes that may put you in a
situation where you're not able to feed
yourself and your children but why
wouldn't it be sufficient to have a
basic income guarantee for those in need
why do you have to extend this income
guarantee to the whole population just
in order to protect those who are really
in need ok very clear mr. Griffin in
your column of 2016 you said that
automation is the worst argument in
favour for you bi why would you say that
well if you just look at the historical
perspective I completely agree I mean
workers have been worrying about losing
their jobs to machines for 200 years and
economists have set for 200 year
well don't worry there will be new jobs
now there's just one one other thing
going on is that nowadays if we look at
developed countries there's a big
portion of the labor force that things
his or her job is actually completely
useless the first poll about this
phenomenon it's called the the
scientific term is jobs and the
first poll about this phenomenon was
done in in in Belgium and they found out
that 30% of Flemish workers think that
their job is useless so I thought whoa
30% but then you might say well that's
Belgium and that I father saw the first
poll from the Netherlands and it was 40
percent here so and and there's a pool
done in the UK as well 37% I'm not
talking about teachers I'm not talking
about care workers or nurses or whatever
these are obviously very useful jobs and
if they these people would go on strike
it's a disaster but since the 1970s
we've seen a huge rise of very high
skilled jobs you know people who went to
great universities like this studied I
don't know Human Resource Business
Administration but what they're doing
all day is sending emails to people they
don't like or browsing Facebook or
writing reports no one's ever going to
read and that's that's what economists
are not talking about it's a complete
taboo subject so what my argument is
that yes there will always be new jobs
but we should never underestimate
capitalism's extraordinary ability to
come up with new jobs so most
of these new jobs are not necessary at
all and therefore we should think about
something like a basic income because
that will give the people the freedom to
do something that's actually valuable
okay so automation won't necessarily get
rid of other jobs people just create for
a very long time I mean now it's 30% it
could be 50% in the future it could be
100% in it theoretically we could live
in a society where everyone is just
pretending to work well reality we're
just browsing Facebook that is very
clear so let's move on to the next
statement
ubi will lift people out of poverty
mr. Blair's mom to start
the people who focus people to start the
conversation let's focus on how people
are currently kept in poverty you once
said it is time for a radical overhaul
of our current welfare system what is so
wrong with our current welfare schemes
well let me first emphasize that it's
better than nothing so if you just you
know compare Europe in the u.s. it's
obvious that the welfare state is a
great historical achievement but in many
ways it keeps people at the bottom now
all economists know that there's
something called a poverty trap you are
on welfare you start working more and
you actually lose money because you're
the wage is lower than the the benefits
you received initially now you could
solve this problem with a basic income
guarantee that's one reason the other
reason is the humiliation of the system
so if you if you apply for benefits in a
country like the Netherlands you know
you have to fill in thousands of forms
lots of interviews it's absolutely not
unconditional there are lots of
conditionalities and you know if you
have to prove time and time again that
you're sick enough that you're ugly
enough that you're a really a hopeless
case that you're depressed enough at
some point you're gonna start feeling
depressed
you know the system creates those kind
of people and that's that that's keeps
people at the bottom mr. Schneider myth
mon argues that there's a poverty trap
now in our current welfare system do you
think any way this poverty trap can be
overcome or do you think its inherent to
its system no it's not the key problem
with the poverty trap is that the way
how welfare systems are designed in many
countries makes it difficult for people
to benefit from from taking initiative
and working the problem is it's very
difficult to explain this in words if I
would be able to picked it would be very
easy but I'll try my best so if let's
say the the welfare level is such that
you earn a certain amount of
and you get it without doing anything
except for having to apply and go
through all those procedures that are
indeed not always in line with human
dignity I fully agree with that but now
assume you could have a job that puts
you let's say 100 euros above the
welfare level in order to achieve a
hundred euros on top what you already
have by having to exert 40 hours not
always enjoyable work for a week is a
very bad deal it you have to do you have
to provide 40 hours heavy work in order
to get a hundred euros if you turn that
into marginal hourly wage is a very bad
relationship so that's discouraging and
so the only benefit you may have is that
if you earn sufficiently enough money
above the welfare level then it starts
paying off and because many people who
are caught in that situation are not
able to achieve higher wages typically
they also are lacking of qualification
and so on they are caught in a trap
because they could work the jobs would
exist but it's not attractive for them
to take them this is the poverty trap
and to overcome this you could include
or introduce a work requirement that
comes with the level of welfare so that
means no matter whether you are in need
or not you have to work for the money
that you receive that would change the
rationale totally okay because then any
job where you can earn more would simply
mean you can have more money by working
the same amount as before
that makes any job attractive which is
generating an income that is higher than
the welfare level then that's that's the
way how you can do it
I know that this is heaviest
very controversial but from an economic
perspective it's the simplest way to do
it you don't seem to agree I think mr.
Buffone from the economic perspective
you could solve this problem by just
letting people to work what kind of jobs
you then meeting mr. Schneider
maybe pavements cleaning the streets or
what jobs that have to be done exactly
okay well you know I believe in
individual freedom so I think it's
important to provide people the means to
decide for themselves you know how they
want to contribute to our society and
you know that connects with maybe you
have simply got a different vision of
human nature that most people have you
know we often tend to think that people
are selfish they just want to be lazy
and do nothing but you know whatever
what I've experienced you know giving
lectures when you ask an audience what
would you do with a basic income 99% of
people respond you know I've got great
ideas got great ambitions it's only when
you ask what would other people do with
the basic income that they say oh other
people yes you know other people were
probably wasted and to add on your idea
of individualism you also say that the
poor know much better what to do with a
thousand year of benefit than the
government does you use the experiment
done in London where a basic income is
given to the homeless and people were
predicted before they would spend their
money on alcohol on booze or on alcohol
or on drugs but they didn't in the end
if a ubi will be implemented in the
Netherlands what do you think the poor
will spend their money on with that ubi
oh it's a great question I mean in the
end of a obviously have no idea I am
optimistic about it well III have a
there's a newsletter from give directly
it's an NGO that just directly gives
money to the extreme poor in Kenya and
Uganda and in the newsletter they
sometimes tell with the recipients it
with the money and you know you couldn't
come up with it yourself okay so a
couple of months ago they told about a
guy who bought a chainsaw with with the
money he received like you know to cut
trees now have you ever heard of an NGO
that hands out and
chainsaws to to the poor in Kenya
obviously no you know you couldn't come
up with it I mean we have no idea where
people can come up with the only thing
that I believe is that they have a
better idea than I do and we've got an
extraordinary amount of evidence that
these kinds transfers are not being
wasted on tobacco or alcohol or drugs or
whatever do you expect people to invest
in their own education more so that
college university participations rates
will spike up or maybe something like
that but I think that we often
overestimate the importance of education
so and my book I give the exact the
example of a big study into the
effectiveness of financial literacy
training and it turns out that this
often has no effect at all or sometimes
it even makes people you know make worse
financial decisions and the reason is
very simple you know if you have if you
are poor you have a lot of things on
your mind and then if you are suddenly
obliged to listen to some person who
thinks he knows better you know what's
what's best for you and it's going to
make you financially literate you know
yes so often these courses often
education is not the answer we need to
start with getting people out of poverty
yeah mr. Snedden when talking about
education you once said that because of
a ubi the poor will become less
interested to invest in their own skills
do you then think that given a basic
income is provided that the poor don't
care too much about better job prospects
it's a fact that education still pays
off I mean you are saying it's
overestimated I don't think so I mean
it's I think education is even the
driver of rising inequality nowadays I
mean their wages between those who are
well-educated and those who are low
educated diverting like hell in the last
20 years so education does pay off but
for I mean unfortunately it's not like
that anybody can achieve any educational
degree that you want there is still some
kind of
depending on a distribution of abilities
that you did is hard to overcome you can
you can let's say optimize within the
scope that is given to you and by
achieving a certain degree of education
but in the situation where you basically
cut down the potential payoff of
education then of course it doesn't
become beneficial anymore to invest into
education for those people who would
receive a generous level of basic income
and who cannot increase their their
income much more above this level why
should they why should they invest in
education anymore that and that may
become a problem for a society because
if our societies are heavily depending
on well-educated people our welfare is
generated to a large extent by service
sector activities we are not producing
welfare based on material grounds we are
producing 70 to 80 percent of our GDP
based on services this is mostly taking
place in our brains and what we are
producing our brains has a market value
and if and if you do not invest into
this then it has as a consequence that
the wealth fair although the wealth of a
nation is going down I don't think that
this is a good idea because if you want
to afford a ubi you also need to make
sure that there is money generated in
order to to pay out the necessary
funding okay to look at an another
conversation about how you be I could
leave people out of poverty you people
often say that low income households
will profit the most from implementing
UV UVI but aren't these expectations has
much much too high since they will also
lose most of their welfare benefits well
I mean it all depends on the kind of
basic income that you
introduced obviously thousands there are
many many ways to finance it you know
there are some would say you know let's
finance it with a consumption tax well
that's probably not a very good idea
because it's a highly regressive tax you
know lower and middle income pay more
into that others say no let's let the
rich pay for it you know inheritance tax
you know taxes on property whatever it's
probably a better way to do it so if
people if someone says I'm in favor of
basic income you know the conversation
has just started you know there's many
many versions of let's look at your
thousand euro your 960 euro benefit you
will grant to every citizen don't you
believe then that people lose a lot of
welfare programs so that it in the end
cancels out and people expect too much
to profit from ubi well it depends I
mean many people you know would be a
huge benefit for them especially because
it would be unconditional large part
maybe they lose child support social
housing or all those kind of programs
right so that may be no or if you're
disabled for example so again I'm not
arguing that we should get rid of the
whole welfare state and just supplement
it with a simple basic income grant I'm
not one of those then everything will be
solved but I do believe in the power of
end conditionality I do believe it's
often way better to give people cash
than vouchers or teddy bears or whatever
and I do believe in individual freedom
that most people know best for
themselves what to make of their lives
and that is all part of basic income so
I see it really as a directional thought
that we can experiment with all these
things and learn along the way okay
thank you for the end note let's head
over to the audience and see if there
are questions on the topics that we just
discussed so automation and how will you
be I lift people out of poverty see our
next question here
the microphone will just be coming thank
you this is such an interesting topic
but rather than discussing how we should
redistribute wealth we're talking about
what poor people would do as if they are
this object that is elsewhere in the
room and they cannot talk why not talk
about how to actually build a bridge
between the top 1% of the world who owns
all this money
relating also to thomas piketty's book
that wealth accumulation happens yeah in
ownership so why not why hand out cash
to people well actually we should be
thinking about why we give tens or
hundreds of thousands of dollars to
people at the top with nobody looking at
that do you direct the audience question
to mr. Bregman yeah I would be
interested in both
mr. Schneider and Brickman's opinions
well what's interesting is that you know
the the main objection that people often
have against basic income is that it is
a right that you don't have to do
anything for it that it's unconditional
aid you just receive it that you don't
have to earn it right you know you have
to work for your money we live in a
world where especially the top 1% you
know many many people just receive a
huge amount of income from doing nothing
we we are living more and more in a
renter economy now the only proposal
that from from people who are advocating
basic income is to say alright we are
richer than ever we've made tremendous
progress in the past 200 years
you know because our forefathers worked
so hard we've got all these great
institutions all these great
technologies etc etc let's just pay out
a dividend to everyone a dividend of
progress an example of this is what
they're doing in Alaska where they fund
a small basic income out of the the oil
money because they say well this is just
the wealth of the earth let's give it to
everyone so yeah you could connect these
two subjects although I think we have to
emphasize that basic income is not a
solution to inequality
you know you can fund it in many ways
you could fund it in a way that it will
increase inequality even what do you
agree with mr. gressman that ubi is a
human basic right if I understand you
good basic right it can't be a basic
right because then we would be an open
conflict with our Constitution yes but
in any case I think we should be honest
with the topic what comes along as a
universal basic income is basically a
huge machine for a redistribution that's
what it really is about and I and I I
asked for your imagination think I mean
if you are in favor of a UVI what
prevents anybody of you to join together
with other people who have the same
conviction and just practice it among
yourself yeah you could do that no one
will prevent you from that it's not
forbidden it's absolutely legal you can
do that why don't people do that because
it's obvious that among peers who are
earning the same amount of money
basically well it doesn't make sense
because I give money and I receive money
why should I do that the only way it
works is you must find somebody who
earns more than you do yeah and you need
to make that person or those
institutions willing to hand that money
out to those who are earning less and
here's where the the mess starts because
the amount of money that you would need
for it is huge and you need to be sure
that those whom you require to pay for
it are willing to to join the team and
my guess is they will seek for ways to
escape from it and that will make the
whole thing very difficult because if
you are running out of those who are
able to provide the money I mean capital
is a very shy animal and it's it's it's
it's also very
mobile so I think you need to think
about it don't be naive it's when we are
talking about the UVI it's about the
biggest machine of redistribution that
mankind has ever seen sounds great no
but that you cannot put all those
billionaires into jail in order to
prevent them from escaping the country
and this is the this is the problems you
have to deal with you know I see your
point
let's move over to the third statement
which concerns the biggest argument
against CBI and that is that a
thousand-euro benefit will
disincentivize people to work what do
you think well what I try to do my book
yes or no and yes yes I will come to you
in a second
mr. Schneider do you believe this is the
case that people will work less it's
likely to be so because the okay so then
I maybe start with an experiment because
you say yes it will leave people less
incentivized in the end in a experiment
than done in Canada where a basic income
was experimented in the end households
only reduced their workloads by 13%
don't you believe that this experiment
then is proof that people won't work
less well you are supposing that what
you introduced was a ubi in fact it's
not all those experiments that exist are
limited in time and that changes your
rationale totally I mean if you it's the
same with Banco de Conde you receive a
certain amount of money for 12 months
you know that there's a life afterwards
you may think that for during those 12
months you can let's say leave your job
and enjoy your life but you also have to
anticipate that afterwards it may be
difficult to find back into your job
again so people have no reason to be
naive because you know in three years I
might be unemployed exactly and
and you may even provoke unemployment in
the future by stepping out of the labor
force now and this is the same trap that
happens to mothers for example they
experiencing this very hard when they
step out of the workforce during the
period when they give birth to a child
it's very it's very difficult for them
to step into their career afterwards and
typically they experience lower wages
over lifetime and this kind of thing so
why would you expect that people who
receive ubi for a limited period of time
to be in a different situation they are
able to anticipate this and for me that
fully explains why they behave as they
behave it would be different if you
would know that now and forever I
receive a ubi and that's the only thing
that would deliver valuable insights
about what people do if they are
receiving a ubi and unfortunately I
guess this kind of experiment it's
difficult to implement so are all the
experiments for ubi useless are they a
waste of money basically yes I mean the
other thing the other thing that is that
is missing is all those experiments
totally abstract from generation of the
money they are fed from outside the
money is coming from somewhere and in
order to make ubi sustainable you need
to have a system that is is able to
distribute the ubi and to generate it at
the same time that has never been
implemented in any experiment that I'm
aware of
mr. fearful you say that people will
continue working and you actually use
these experiments often as an argument
but the team in a limited time span
doesn't this completely break down the
validity of this oh I completely agree
that these are important reservations
but I disagree that we can't learn
anything from these experiments we know
for example from the dolphin experience
that you mentioned in Canada that health
care costs went down by 8 9 percent well
that's a pretty significant effect we
know from the us experiments that kids
perform much better
cool domestic violence went down you
know mental health improved these are
all great and important effects yeah and
the other thing is that if you know four
years ago if I would just describe an
experiment like that you know to an
audience like this what would happen if
for four years you would give out a
basic income to a thousand families what
would happen you know most people would
have predicted well there will be a huge
drop in work hours well it didn't happen
so I agree that if you want to know what
basically we do you would have to do it
for a longer period this is where
they're doing in Kenya right now by the
way where basic income experience will
last for 10-12 years but I disagree that
we can't learn anything now one more
thing we have done a sort of basic
income experiment in the Netherlands
with artists so there used to be a
regulation for four artists that they
would receive a basic income which was
almost in conditional the early you know
had to prove that they were producing
some piece of art now and then we don't
have that law anymore and the problem
was is that these artists did not become
lazy or anything but they produced way
too much art so municipalities are still
debating what to do with the tens of
thousands of pieces of art all the
sculptures or the paintings they have
absolutely no idea what to do with it
and that's why they abolish the law it
was just an explosion of creativity okay
but who is cleaning the toilets then
when you do something like that well
this is maybe the most important effect
of a basic income is why I like the idea
that most if you would introduce a basic
income guarantee it will give much more
bargaining power to people who are
cleaning the toilets who are and the
garbage collectors the teachers the care
workers because they can always say you
know I can stop doing my job I agree so
what will happen is that their wages
will go up because I think if we
introduced a basic income guarantee and
the wages will much better reflect the
social value of different jobs yeah you
know if you are if you one of those jobs
that you're just writing reports no
one's ever gonna read no one cares if
you go on strike so you won't get any
additional bargaining power this is the
most important effect of a basic income
and you won't see it in any of the
experiments because it's you know it's a
we agree it would happen but the fallacy
is it would also increase consumer
prices and this is just eating up the
game that you have by the nominal amount
of money that you receive all of a
sudden you will see that all those
things that you are consuming now at
decent prices will become unaffordable
and then what's the use of a basic
minimum income then anymore yeah but if
we talk about the incentives again if
real wages increase people again want to
do the jobs because they get paid better
doesn't did this market force the real
wage increase make people more
incentivized so that yeah employment
becomes goes back to normal levels well
there are also people who are now
consuming those things and for them it
would at least become very difficult
because most of what you are used to
receive it and prices would become
unaffordable and you have to you would
have to do it yourself cleaning your
house cooking and all this kind of thing
you would have to do by yourself
and you would not generate or create
jobs for those whose prices now increase
it would just at the same time lead to a
decline of demand for those services I'm
not sure whether that would pay off for
anybody at the end we don't know do we
don't have to do those jobs ourselves do
you think or exactly that's what happens
that's the great thing right now there's
thirty forty percent of the workforce
doing useless work and with the
introduction of basic income we can't
pay for those the toilet anymore we
suddenly have to cook ourselves oh wow
now we have to do something that's
actually useful I think that's the whole
point of a basic ok but I cannot
substitute a work that a plumber does
for example right do some jobs that are
low paid are actually very useful and
yeah this is why people who are highly
educated are often afraid of basic
income because what could happen is that
suddenly the cleaner start earning more
than the professors that's that's what
they scare but then we not lose our all
society based on specialization yeah
well it's
question is specialization into what
right we often assume that if something
is really difficult than that it's also
very valuable but just imagine if I
would have you know this this glass of
water and I put it on my head and it
would start jumping around in this room
you know that's quite difficult but that
doesn't mean that's basically the whole
financial sector it's really difficult
it doesn't mean it's useful right and
this is what I love about the whole
basic basic income debate it forces us
to rethink very fundamental questions
what is wealth what is progress what is
work what is value who you know who do
we really depend on and economists are
often uncomfortable with this because
they use a concept of productivity or
work that doesn't have any connection
with the real world but wouldn't you
agree that the path that we are entering
is a very risky one I mean there are so
many things that are likely to happen
that are all unpredictable then I think
we should carefully design the path to
enter into that I mean I'm sympathetic
with giving more autonomy to workers
giving them more bargaining power
there's nothing speaking against it but
if you think of all the unexpected and
unprecedented side-effects I think we
should be a bit careful we don't know
very much about what is also think that
we should gradually experiment on a
national level with these kind of ideas
I'm not saying let's abolish the whole
welfare state implemented in one stroke
with one basic income by ending this
debate I think it's a good idea to head
over to the audience one more time now
on the topics that we just discussed so
later we will discuss if it's
financially realistic
I see now this question over there it's
a very interesting conversation I'm
really enjoying this how can you be I be
beneficial or be framed as beneficial in
a convincing way to members of more
affluent more powerful communities I
think that's my question what I always
try to do actually is to use right-wing
language to defend progressive ideas so
what the left often does is say oh we
should do something about poverty
because we it's just immoral and we
should help these poor people you know
they leave use the language of
paternalism but the thing is everyone
hates the Good Samaritan they will think
he's an arrogant prick so what I what I
try to do is just to make the case that
poverty is incredibly expensive that we
can't afford it if you look at a country
like the US we know from a recent study
that just the cost of child poverty in
terms of higher health care cost higher
crime rates etc etc is about five
hundred billion dollars each year now
what's the cost of a negative income tax
which is a basic income guarantee it's
about three three hundred and fifty
billion dollars each year so it's
cheaper to eradicate poverty and to
combat the symptoms of poverty
would you agree there is no benefit as
well no well I mean this is always a
unilateral point of view and you have to
think in in terms of the system the
system will react to it and all the nice
calculations that you are doing will
collapse because the conditions that you
assume being constant will not be
constant it's there's a there's a level
of ingenuity involved which is very very
hard to tackle and this is what Albert
Hirschman called the rhetoric of
reaction so this is the perversity tease
is you're trying to change something
about society and then they respond no
no there will always be side effects
that will just undermine what you're
able we are at least able to anticipate
what kind of side effects it will be and
those side effects are as
once they are they are not some kind of
little eg canta canta technically genre
and I think I mean at least to the
extent that we are able to tackle it
for example by using our simulation
models which are quite sophisticated
it's already something that tells us the
bill will not balance out at the end and
there may be deficiencies of the models
that do not perfectly mimic what is
going to happen in reality but at least
this is something that we need to take
serious and then you need to convince me
that there is a way how all this will
pay off I know that the welfare system
that we currently have is cheaper than
the amount of money that we would need
in order to afford a ubi
everybody so are you the negative income
tax is a little bit different the
negative income tax tax on top of it all
is generating this kind of poverty trap
thing that I described at the beginning
we have the same problem yeah exactly
because the negative income tax means
that there's a there's a minimum level
of income that you receive anyway no
matter whether you work or not and that
generates this disincentive problem for
the low-skilled workers so and that has
that brings the danger that you are even
by the sense of this intensive
disincentivizing work that you will lose
tax money that you would need for a
redistribute you could design it what I
said but then it's no longer a negative
income tax then it's some kind that we
would call a work workfare type of basic
security what you propose right yeah
which is I think a form of basic income
but that's if you go back to ubi you mr.
Snyder said that you be I will raise
government expenditures in to
astronomical spheres
and that the people who do support you
me I think that money is like
electricity and it comes out of the wall
exactly in what way do you think that
ubi for the increasing taxes make ubi a
self-defeating system you know I'm
always fascinated why so many people get
excited about the UVI and I like to use
an analogy with a lottery if you ask
people what would you do with the money
if you receive it
everybody starts imagining what what to
do people feel very happy about it and
they think it's a good idea to do it and
the only reason why you can think that
this is scalable to a whole society
that's by abstracting from the need to
provide the funding for it so it's like
a lottery with a hundred percent
guarantee of winning for everybody and
we know that humans are have some
deficiencies in in their brains that's
why for example people fall for Ponzi
schemes you know this I mean maybe aware
of that almost the whole of Albania
collapsed because they there were some
criminals who were able to convince a
lot of people to sell the houses to sell
whatever they had to provide money
because there were this kind of Jain
games where people had the illusions
that everybody could be rich this is
some kind of deficiency in our brains
that probably is responsible for the
sympathy for this remember sorry for I
have to say this but I think it has
something to do with the shortcomings in
our brains if we were always the best
argument in nowadays luckily your brain
functions perfectly now we know nowadays
we know a lot about deficiencies in our
brains and the marketing experts are
making use of it like hell
I mean this is we cannot ignore it and I
mean I try to be as rational as possible
and you can convince me of the ubi at
the moment when when you convincingly
demonstrate that the money that you
would need for paying it out and the
money that that you need for whether the
money that you need for paying it out is
there and it has no endogenous
consequences that would destroy the
basis of the whole concept and in short
if you convince me that it's sustainable
I'm with you and then I will be I will
turn immediately into the hottest
propagator of the ubi that you can think
of so you try to be as rational as
possible but in your article empty
dreams of paradise you actually predict
that after implementing ubi we would
change our optimal working hours from 40
to 5 hours per week that's and that's
and the this seems very extreme yeah but
that was just an example I wanted to
show how economists try to analyze this
and it's it's the come on the what you
said before then the minimum marginal
they don't know no no they can't a part
of work for work fair you know basic
security no I will stop the negative
income tax sorry yeah
when you introduce it in the way of a
negative income tax that would have this
extreme effect because then you cannot
benefit from extending your work in the
end the low income sector and that's
that's the problem I think I mean if you
look at the graphs this is totally
consistent with economic thinking and
you may criticize economic thinking but
at least what I can say is this is
empirically validated and from that
point of view should take it serious
but it seems to be on the assumption
based on the assumption that people
always lose utility when they stop
working so isn't there something wrong
with those we have to deal with the
trade-off between income
leisure that's that's one of the
elementary stuff that you learn in the
first a second semester when when you
start studying economics it's this
trade-off between leisure and
consumption that is driving peoples
behavior and if you if you come up with
a model that is better explaining what
people do fine I will follow you but
that's just a that's a question of
empirical observation mr. Biffen you
actually introduced past November that
you support a negative income tax but
early you mentioned that a negative that
a policy you sorry one more time you
quote Richert it mister yes that a
policy for the poor is poor policy as
you think a negative income tax is a
policy for the poor well this is
obviously one of the strongest arguments
in favor of making it a universal basic
income just as we have the universal
health care or universal access to
quality public education the idea is
that if you give it to everyone then it
will have you know bigger legitimacy for
everyone and everyone's willing to pay
into it and there's quite some research
that shows that welfare states that are
more universal are more sustainable in
the long run and are more effective even
at reducing poverty even though they use
heavy artillery to shoot at a relatively
small problem now the thing I believe
with universal basic income and the
negative income tax is that there is
just there are some practical problems
and the professor Basia cops convinced
me that the practical problems with the
universal Baker basic income are
especially in the short run too big
because you'd you'd have to increase
marginal tax rates too much so I'm not
saying average tax rates with marginal
tax rates but this incentivize work now
this is a different effect than making
the basic income unconditional it's a
different effect but still an important
effect and I think it's also important
to emphasize here that financially you
know if you look at the net cost of a
negative income tax versus a universal
basic income they're equivalent
it's the same it's the same amount of
redistribution that's going on with the
universal basic expenses
spending hundreds of billions of euros
or dollars to give everyone a basic
income but many people will receive a
basic income and pay the same amount in
additional taxes so that's a very
misleading way to portray the cost and
that's happening all the time in the
newspapers people say oh it's too
expensive is because this this and that
many billions as all we can't pay for it
but if you look at the net cost that's
that's often way that so this is also
why I believe that politically it's
easier to defend a negative income tax
even though it's very very similar to
happen people said to me oh you changed
your mind you're replicating a very
different idea now I think it's pretty
much the same but you know if people now
say oh Rutger changed his mind and now
he sounds very reasonable then that's
alright but but the biggest difference
is that because of a negative income tax
taxes wouldn't have to increase by a
large amount and by you bi it would have
been the case so it's yes that's a big
difference I think that it's mean test
means-tested yes but it phases it phases
out so what you tried to do is to design
it in a way that work will always pay
that's that's the idea and that also
says that people won't work less because
if people work less because of higher
marginal taxes the system becomes
self-defeating doesn't it because no one
can pay for it anymore because there'll
be a lot less production in the economy
exactly even though I must emphasize
that I initially became interested in
basic income because I was looking for a
way to get people to work less because
working less is the solution to pretty
much everything you know what do you
think about stress or climate change or
inequality is there's so many social
problems that we would solve it's just
working a little bit less I was really
disappointed initially when I saw these
results from these experiments and stuff
like people don't work this should
we all work less mr. Sneijder not a good
idea well as long as you can make sure
that it will not affect our wealth then
I'm fine with it I have doubts I mean if
you work less you will produce less and
if you produce less you know
this is this is an interesting point you
are labeling it but this is a
very
objective perception I mean who are you
Who am I to judge whether but something
somebody is doing as or not if
people feel that they have a job that
they don't like that doesn't necessarily
mean it's a useless or a job
it's just a job that they don't like
they have other things in mind that they
would prefer to do isn't this a very
paternalistic position I mean if you
would say to an employee who thinks is
very own work is absolutely useless and
that as an economist you're saying well
maybe you believe that these reports or
maybe you believe there's some mystical
way everyone this person is employed
because it makes sense in some respect
maybe not for the person himself or
herself but this person has a job
because obviously what is produced in
that job makes sense in a in a larger
context it's it's about producing
something that has a market value and
that generates a revenue for the company
that is doing this exactly that's often
called rent seeking I mean but there
there's a huge thousands of accountants
here in Amsterdam there's there's hardly
a dictator around the world that doesn't
have his fiscal headquarters here in the
Netherlands so these these people are
obviously producing wealth for all these
dictators but are they heading towards
the well for society obviously not so
again this is what I love about the
whole basic income debate it forces us
to rethink very basic questions what
economics should be about you know first
first clause in economics should be
about philosophy what as well very
revealing what you're saying because
what you have in mind obviously is a
world that is run by people who know
better than anybody else what is good
for the people what I'm just saying
let's believe people when they when they
say my job is meaningless let's believe
them is that such a radical thing to say
no but that doesn't mean that imposing
less work hours for them would would
solve the problem it's
I mean they are usually they may feel
useless about what they are doing for
themselves and that may have a lot of
reasons but as long as what they are
doing is generating a market value and
the revenue and don't forget the revenue
is also going to themselves also as long
as it is like this
it's everything that is is running here
is generated by market mechanisms and
this is by far the most efficient way to
allocate resources and and income and
anything else that whenever people in
history have tried to replace market
mechanisms by some kind of higher
motivated intentions it dramatically
failed sure but this isn't this is a
position that no one's arguing for okay
so on that note maybe an audience
questions now my first question is what
do you think the if you lower the
average hours of the working week not
from 40 36 but like we all debated in
the 80s in 228 or maximum 32 in order to
redefine the available work between men
and women and in holidays still EU is
still a very poor reader vision because
men have most of the job still and women
work very much part-time if the work a
week as such would be defined at an
average of 28 hours a week then you
could read divide the work that is
necessary amongst all people if they
would receive basic universal basic
income and the second question is what
you're just talking about a lot of jobs
of quite a lot of people is to control
other people and to push other people in
order to accept productive work if these
the social welfare institutions have to
control the people our own welfare
and if you would if they would have a
basic income you could read you could
really find the jobs of the people that
work in the social welfare in in in by
making them do what they originally
wanted to do to workers to assess these
people to find jobs instead of to
control them could you bring it to a
small if everybody received a universal
basic income then you would need Nestle
s civil servants that control other
people who are out of labour in order to
find to push them to jobs they would be
they could rather help people to find
jobs it would be nested of control and
that would make the work for the social
worker more positively productive the
negative is controlling I understand we
have the time to for one guess to answer
the question so to whom do you direct
the question has the opportunity to the
first question about the reduction of
need for civil servants that's of course
the argument that was already used it
ubi would increase the bargaining power
of workers and therefore they would not
have to to do what they are forced to do
they would have freedom to take jobs
that are better paid in all this kind of
thing so that's that's for sure but I
doubt that the reduction of need for
let's say public authorities would pay
off the cost of the ubi so it still I
mean the mechanism would would work but
it would not lead to a sustainable
situation maybe maybe working hours I
mean can I make a very short remark here
yeah I gave a few lectures to people who
are working in the Netherlands for you
evey you know
were trying to you know seduce or force
people into paid employment and what I
said I I thought you know I want to say
something controversial so what I said
is we should pay your wages and just
give it to to the people who really need
it and I thought you know they would
probably be a little bit angry at me for
saying that but most of them started
clapping so it's especially at these
places in government where were on the
local level where people realize that
this whole industry of forcing people
into work all this bureaucracy is
completely useless maybe a nice end note
for this interview and this maybe if you
could answer in one sentence both do you
need to be an economist to make
predictions on universal basic income
what do you think is just a no I hope
not you hope not mr. wickham well you
know I I think we should all become
economist and economists justice Kane
said every good economist should be a
philosopher estates men and and
everything else we should combine all
these disciplines and then we can maybe
say a little bit about what would happen
in a society that has a basic income so
that's a very positive end note for this
debate I first want to thank our
audience who again today came in such
great numbers and there's good news for
you by the way there are some Flyers
distributed in this Hall on which there
is a code and you can use that for a
free month trial for the correspondent
of course want to ask ompletely and
condition exactly we want to thank our
two guests who provided this very
interesting debate and a very
interesting topic so please
a very warm round of applause for
professor Snyder



## Keywords:
