---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pwuatE-3Q5c
---

# Video
Vijay Prashad, "Lenin and the Route to Anti-Imperialism"
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pwuatE-3Q5c)

## Transcript:
imperialism and we have no better guide
today to the question of Lenin and
anti-colonialism anti-imperialism than
VJ Pasad I think everybody knows his
work and appreciates his both public
commentary his scholarly writings his
interventions in the public scene I
would give a shout out to at least two
of what I consider to be some of his uh
best essays although it's hard to rank
them one is the internationalist Lenin
self-determination and anti-colonialism
it's a real classic one that I regularly
teach and also a hundred years since we
lost comrade Lenin both of these can be
easily found online but with no further
Ado I'd like to turn it over to VJ who's
going to share his thoughts on lenon and
anti-colonialism
thanks a lot thanks a lot Gabriel uh yes
uh I very much hope that there'll be a
statue in Central Park but the statue
must not just be a statue it must be the
advance of the class struggle in the
United States which is advancing quite
rapidly I saw in preparation that
there's a new Union of the United Auto
Workers in the US South I saw that the
students in New York City have escalated
their encampments against the genocidal
war in Gaza and so on um seems to be a
lot of activity taking place um in in
the United States itself the most
wretched of all imperialist centers but
I'll come back to that in a
minute Lenin is beloved to us um I was
so horrified when I had a birthday and I
discovered about four years ago that I'm
now older than Lenin was when he died um
Extraordinary People Lenin for instance
in the 50 some years of his life um
produced not only an incredible body of
work uh most intellectuals would be um
would be completely chuffed with
themselves if they had half that body of
work the kind of theoretical
interventions um but of course he also
led a revolution and then tried his very
best to build a a socialist State one of
the most difficult projects of the
modern era to build socialism uh within
the context of imperialism and of course
capitalism uh lenon an extraordinary
person in that short time having done
all those things you know not one not
the other but all of them a range of
them um the reason I said that that last
task of Lenin building the state how
difficult that was um that's a reason
why when I edited selected Lenin more
than half this book is in fact of Lenin
post Revolution um post Revolution
because that's the most important period
in a way uh you know whereas on the
question of liberalism Lenin settled
accounts with um you know one step
forward two steps back and so on he
settled accounts with liberalism he
closed the debate for himself on the
question of colonialism and capitalism
he closed that debate with development
of capitalism in Russia he made it very
clear that under Colonial and semic
Colonial conditions capitalism was not
going to be able to advance so which
reason socialists had to fight on a
double front um one to immediately fight
for National Liberation and secondly to
advance to socialism you couldn't wait
for capitalism to develop in the
colonies but he settled that in
development of capitalism in Russia one
of his early texts early main text he
closed that debate in what is to be done
which leftwood published with a great
introduction by prakash karat um in what
is to be done he settled the question of
um you know the nature of of the party
what should a party be like the
importance of centralization the
importance of internal democracy and
then the importance of discipline I've
spoken a lot about how discipline in
Lenin is misunderstood Lenin didn't mean
discipline as obedience Lenin meant
discipline as a trained political Carter
where the Carter would be politically
educated sufficiently that they would be
able to um be in a sense replaceable
each Carter as conscious say the other
of the path to build a revolution and so
on let me close that debate and
discussion um the one debate and
discussion which he didn't close was the
issue of building um the Socialist
project afterwards his struggles were
incomplete he died um you know only um
in fact six years after the victory of
the Soviet Republic and in the USSR
which is why his last several texts on
operatives um his last text better fewer
but better and so on are so essential
because Lenin is trying to start
theorizing it's only a beginning start
theorizing about the limitations of
building socialism um it wasn't the
culmination of a period he was in the
middle of of theorizing it's very
interesting to go back and read Lenin
I'm you know I'm constantly taking out
volume 33 to have a read again of those
texts I'm going to be editing three of
the most important last writings of
Lenin to think about this incomplete
nature of his um his critique of the
process of building a socialist state
project um you know incomplete for Lenin
the one
text which is treated as complete which
I think is a great error in our
tradition is his short pamphlet on
imperialism which is why I'm going to
spend
about 20 minutes on that and then we can
have a discussion I'm sorry I caught a
cold while I was in running around in
the Pacific
region uh trying to do a story on US
military bases I caught a terrible
cold I tell you one thing it's not Co
although um colds and covid till now are
not spread through Zoom so that's a good
thing uh but who knows who knows what
technology they've devised to get us all
sick
anyway Lenin's text on imperialism it
wasn't a theoretical summation of what
imperialism is the text is very
important it's a key text for Lenin and
for the leninist tradition but it's not
a summation of the theory of imperialism
the text
imperialism is a conjunctural text it's
written for a moment and so I want to
pick that up today there are in one
sense I'm saying two incomplete projects
from lenon one is the project of the
critique of the Socialist construction
project Lenin was undertaking that the
experiences they were accumulating what
they were learning in the process of
building socialism how Lenin was
learning about the cultural deficiencies
um that you know it's not it's not
enough to just dismiss the argument that
people are not greedy you know when a
capitalist or bua Economist says that
human personality is founded on Greed
and therefore the um the utility
calculations are based on Greed you know
what's the best I can get out of
interaction the demand and supply curve
and so on that rooted in a psychosocial
perspective of greed it's not possible
just to dismiss that and say well people
are more complicated than
greed the cultures of capitalism exist
within us how are you going to build
socialism through that culture that's
the kind of stuff Lenin was thinking
about um in his last years so as I said
that's an incomplete project but equally
incomplete in a different way is the
question of imperialism that's
incomplete in a different way because
Lenin didn't attempt to write a general
theory of imperialism that's not what he
was writing gen there's no tendency in
Lennon's work whether it's the 1916 text
which was eventually published or work
before and after there is no um
expectation in Lenin's letters or
writing that he was writing a general
theory of imperialism he was writing a
conjunctural text about imperialism and
so I'm going to go into what that
conjuncture was that he was interested
in and why he wrote that text number one
secondly I'm going to periodize
imperialism because I believe that since
Lenin's writings there have been four
periods and then I'm going to spend a
little time on the last let's not call
it a period but it's the stage of what
we in our Institute are calling hyper
imperialism I'm going to try to explain
that there's nothing heretical about
saying there are periods precisely
because Lenin didn't propose the general
theory of imperialism okay so that's
what I'm going to do for the next 20 odd
minutes number
one Lenin was interested sitting in
Switzerland in why World War I or what
was then the Great War why World War I
transpired and why did the Social
Democratic forces the forces that had
taken to Marxism such as the German
Social Democratic party uh people like
you know um the great uh deput lities of
that party in the German Reich star why
did the forces of social democracy
influenced by
Marxism certainly interpreted by K
Kowski why did that political force why
did those forces then support that Great
War what was the reason for the Great
War that was the compelling question
that was sitting on Lenin's head while
he was in Switzerland in the period of
the war he was greatly unhappy
with the fact of the war in fact that's
the reason why he called the few handful
of people his allies to zimal for the
famous conversation about the state of
the Socialist movement and that's the
reason why Rosa Luxemburg so
compellingly said that workers of the
World Unite during peace
time during war they slit each other's
throats very beautiful line to explain
the kind of inter workingclass
fratricide that was taking place in that
Great War it was to explain that war
that Lenin went to Hobson went to all
the other 180 some texts that he read on
imperialism to understand why that war
in other words the answer to the
question why that war is the pamphlet on
imperialism the pamphlet on imperialism
was not written to answer the question
what is imperialism Eternal what is
imperialism in in in concept that was
not why he went to that text he went to
that text to answer the question why
this war why are the workers slitting
each other's throats and what he then
understood is is important he understood
that there was s several centers of
imperialist
ambition to go and colonize various
parts of the
world within the nature of capitalism
there was a tendency to monopolies these
monopolies were not satisfied with the
territory of their
country needed more markets more raw
materials more
space there was a aspect to this they
needed to go out then conquer the world
these companies did and they required
the help of their
governments and so they became a kind of
complex between company and government
and this is the reason why as companies
as an inter capitalist global
conflict inter erupted that inter
capitalist global conflict had an
inter-imperialist character and the war
was a reflection of that character in
fact the war starts in 1914 and doesn't
end till 1945 there's a slight in
interum there really isn't World War I
and World War II it's the same War they
are fighting over the same kind of
dilemma faced by the centers of
imperialist ambition that is their
dilemma how to how for their companies
as they began to become near monopolies
how that Monopoly tendency was clashing
against companies in other territories
that inter imperialist crisis becomes an
inter sorry inter capitalist crisis
becomes an inter imperialist war that is
what Lenin writes about in his text on
imperialism it's about the conjuncture
it's a conjunctural
analysis of the moment of that phase of
imperialism you see you can go back if
you read Giovani Ari's work you can go
back and you can make the argument that
there were earlier
times and arigi makes an interesting but
little functional argument that the
Italian city states had a smaller
territory of Imperial
Conquest but they lasted a long time and
then as they move from productive
Investments whether merant or even to
some extent Proto industrial to
finance then Capital moves to the low
countries to Amsterdam where the Dutch
have a slightly larger territory than
the it Italians that they conquer in the
world but then there's still lots of
room for other centers of ambition to
emerge but they last for a smaller
amount of time and then Finance leaps to
London that's what Jovani arigi argues
English have a much larger territory of
Conquest but again not the whole
planet and then they last slightly
shorter than the Dutch Imperial Center
and eventually pance leaps to Wall
Street which has a ambition of
Conquering the whole world and so on you
can take Ari's historical argument and
map it to Lenin's conjuncture it fits
perfectly okay there's no real
disagreement but I want to insist that
what Lenin is
doing is not developing a general theory
of imperialism that's a misreading of
that text lenon is attempting to analyze
why this long war starts 1914
ends long after his death
1945 why this war why does inter why
does the tendency to
Monopoly of firms in capitalism lead to
inter
capitalist conflict across borders which
then transmutes becomes inter
imperialist conflict that's Lenin's text
that's one
phase of modern imperialism in a
conjunctural sense I'm using the word
phase okay in a sense of the conjuncture
the conjuncture
changes with the defeat of the fascist
in 1945 or at least if I can pretend to
be theoretical the sublation of the
fascist in 1945 because they were not
really defeated the sublation of the
fascists in
1945 then a new phase
opens the new conjuncture in the history
of modern imperialism
this phase runs from 1945 to about 1990
91 what is this phase the world is
divided into three major units a
capitalist block let's call it what it
called itself the West the block of
quote unquote capitalism and
freedom that was one block within that
block United States played a key
role in attempting to subordinate Europe
the instruments of subordination
principally was NATO North Atlantic
Treaty Organization founded
1949 the military bases in Germany and
Italy the attempt by the French to have
an independent foreign policy was cut
back by the United
States inter imperialist conflict within
the region of the West was muted and it
has been set to mute for a very long
time there was some inter capital
problems of course but they didn't raise
to an inter imperialist conflict okay I
mean it is really quite remarkable that
from 1945 till now
2024 Germany and France haven't gone to
war it's the longest period in the
entire premodern to modern era that
Germany and France haven't been at War
it it is incredible if you just go back
from 1945 backwards
150 years Germany and France are almost
always at War whether it's you know the
Napoleonic Wars bismar and so on the the
Germans coming in crushing the Paris
commune 1871 and so
on longest period no war between France
and
Germany almost the inter capitalist
conflict almost not allowed to become an
inter imperialist conflict the Imperial
Ambitions of different places brought to
heal for maybe United reasons we'll come
back to that
later so the second phase is when the
West confronts something called the East
the Socialist project and confronts
something called the third world and its
primary ambition is to unite itself
against these two
adversaries uh the East was not an
imperialist block it had no amb ambition
to conquer the world it had an ambition
to create World socialism that's
different than World Conquest the West
continued to Harbor ambition of world
Conquest but it was held back by the two
blocks on the one side the Soviet Le
socialist block and the second the third
world block so this is the second phase
in the history of modern imperialism a
phase which was in a sense
where the West and East held each other
off and to some extent there were proxy
battles in the third world but the third
world was not just a
battlefield it itself was a project
which attempted to push
against the West certainly but also the
east in a different way that's the
second phase of modern imperialism again
in a conjunctural
sense the third phase in a conjunctural
sense was from
1991 roughly till the third grade
depression that was 2008 onwards this
phase is interesting this phase is when
the United States having seen the Soviet
Union self-destruct in fact commit
suicide led by Renegades yelen Gorbachev
Renegade people who in fact didn't need
to shut the Soviet Union down but made a
political decision

the Soviet Union didn't collapse um in
and of itself it was politically
assassinated um it was closed down in
1991 um from that period onward the
United States attempted in a way the
ambition of controlling the whole world
first among equals blah blah blah prus
inter parz attempted I say because it
didn't succeed it wasn't able to succeed
even even in that period there were
always what it called Rogue States the
dprk on the Korean Peninsula Iran Syria
Etc countries that just were not willing
to submit to the United States Rogue
States Cuba you know then the emergence
in South America of the bolivarian
project Venezuela the nicaraguans are
strengthened unwilling to submit and so
on but this third period of what
sometimes is called us
unipolarity is a period of great
Imperial overreach this is a term from
bua writers Imperial overreach not from
us but it's correct United States for
instance starts escalating military
spending and basically cuts down its tax
system so that it doesn't in fact
produce a system where it's able to use
wealth use its considerable wealth
wealth to build a strategic domination
of the world in fact the domination of
the world becomes mostly military and
not So Much by building projects to
assist even the Bazi in the global South
partly because it's said to its own
Elites you don't need to pay taxes you
can offshore your money and whatever
remains of its resources put into the
military in order to Vanquish those
Rogue States
those
holdouts enormous military spending to
tackle them to
prevent new Rivals from emerging and so
on all of that jettison capitalism into
the third grade depression why the third
grade depression the first Great
Depression Global depression late 19th
century the spur of all three
depressions is in the United States it's
interesting it's a railway
bust in the late 19th century Second
Great Depression the Wall Street stre
collapse 1929 That Wall Street that
depression goes from 29 till about
1945 you know through it's through
military spending that the United States
recovers its immense economic growth in
the so-called golden
age but the third Great Depression takes
place due to the housing market collapse
in the US from which capitalist
economies have not recovered um stud
latest study from the IM F shows that in
fact they talk about this non-stop
austerity program that the only reason
money remains sound is because of
austerity living standards have declined
one way or the other um it's not just
the covid pandemic or it's not just the
war in Ukraine it's a long-term problem
that goes back to the second start of
the second decade of this Century so
from the third grade depression onward
we've entered a new phase
what is this new phase of imperialism
you see I want to stop for a second say
is it
heretical is it heretical to say that
there are four conjunctural moments is
it anti- leninist to say there are four
conjunctural moments I don't think so I
think in fact from Lenin's
perspective these conjunctural
analysis of each of the moments is
precisely the method of Marxism lism is
precisely the method Lenin was a
great
contributor to the importance of the
conjunctural
analysis you see that in a lot of his
writings so what is the nature of the
conjuncture from the third grade
depressions inauguration
onwards it's interesting to look at that
because it's from around that
period that you see Russia and China
emerg as major Powers but not alone
India's economy starts to grow Indonesia
Nigeria um you know right now the IMF
has said Nigeria slipped to the fourth
largest economy in Africa that's only
because of currency devaluation in fact
Nigeria's economy remains quite big that
doesn't mean they've dealt with
inequality in any of these countries but
the economies are growing which is
unlike the situation in the west the
epicenter of the third grade depression
so from this period on
onward the global North has come to
understand that it is losing that
control that it's had for hundreds of
years and therefore it is putting more
eggs into the basket of the military
than less it is militarizing all of
diplomacy unable to build Bridges it
wants to blow them up or threaten to
blow them up that's a key point in this
text hyper imperialism we demonstrate
that world military spending today cpri
Stockholm Institute released their
report they say oh World military
spending up to 2 trillion they have been
under pressure to up their numbers
because it's hugely deflated we show
looking at the numbers closely that US
military spending by itself is not 900
billion as cpri says but 1.53 trillion
because we've added in nuclear spending
the United States the NATO countries and
the near NATO allies Korea and Japan you
put them all together they account for
75% of global military spending this is
at a scale that is much larger than
anything in the previous
phases of modern imperialism this is
nothing like what it was in
1916 would not be recognizable to lenid
75%
the West controlling a lot of
communications Channel argues China is a
threat China's share of global military
spending is
10% 75% over here 10% over here it's
it's a ridiculous Divergence there are
actual so-called leftists around the
world who talk about comp inter
imperialist conflict between Russia
China United States they have lost their
mind they don't understand the actual
facts of the situation in fact in our
argument in this text China and Russia
are defensive Powers these are not
aggressive Powers there is only one
aggressive core in this period and that
is the United States Lead Core it is
hyper imperialism because there's a
kinetic character to it it's kinetic
there is a understanding that the whole
world is nails and you have the biggest
hammer there is no attempt to go out
there and do development projects the
United States doesn't have the funds for
it rather than contest the Chinese for
instance in countries in Africa on
Commercial terms they make threats about
how China is you know a national
security threat to Zambia or to Ghana or
whatever you know United States has a
plethora of military bases on the
African continent but they will say that
China is the military threat but it has
no military posture merely commercial if
you want to contest them commercially
contest them but they don't have the
means they only have the means to
militarize the conflict so in that sense
it's hyper imperialist there's a kinetic
character every conflict or every every
sense
of political Retreat that the United
States faces it militarizes it
and in fact this has become the case
globally inclusive in Europe inclusive
in Europe the war in Ukraine yes of
course the Russians cross the line into
Ukraine but this is not a Russian war
this is a war that the United States
through NATO provoked going back to the
maidan going back to United States
unilateral withdrawal from the mid-range
nuclear missile treaty unilateral
withdrawal
the danger of placing missiles in Taiwan
or placing missiles in Ukraine inflames
the borders of Russia and
China inflames those B this is a hyper
imperialist conflict imposed on
countries like Russia and China there is
no inter imperialist
crisis so to take Lenin's conjunctional
analysis an analysis born out of a
conjuncture make a general theory out of
it and then take the general theory and
blon it onto our period is decisively
anti- leninist you are not honoring
Lenin by doing the exact opposite
methodologically that Lenin did in 1916
when he put out his
pamphlet he was trying to analyze the
conjuncture you cannot make a general
theory out of a conjunctural analysis
without
mediation you have to take a
conjunctural an analysis and build a
theory and see if it applies to other
conjunctures not take an analysis of a
conjuncture and pretend that it's a
general theory and I'm surprised to see
Marxist of great intelligence missing
the very simple
point that Lenin's text is a text of a
conjuncture and therefore we are under
an obligation to honor the great Lenin
we are under an obligation not to merely
repeat Lenin's conjuncture without a
detailed
analysis of the concrete conditions
because without a detailed analysis of
the concrete conditions we will not be
building Theory from the facts and if
you don't build Theory from the facts
you will make important strategic and
tactical errors and that is precisely
what sectarian sections of the
international left have been doing
not building Theory from the facts and
therefore making significant strategic
programmatic strategic and tactical
errors we honor Lenin by honoring
Lenin not by treating Lenin like a
religious God Lenin was our
comrade Lenin was our
comrade he is a human
being he is with us still in his work
but he's not a God he is not the 11th of
he is a human being we must build from
Lenin not stay at Lenin thanks a
lot thank you so much VJ that was
excellent and I have one comment and
question to get things started the first
comment has to do with the powerful
appeal that you make to a dialectical
form of History that's rooted in
conjunctural analysis and I really
appreciated the way in which you
distinguish between these four different
phases that you began by saying there
were periods but ultimately I take it
that the way that you understand them is
that a phase has its own temporality to
it so it doesn't function like a bgea
history textbook in which all of a
sudden from day one to day two you
change an epic overnight these are
complex processes that are dialectically
intertwined and they also vary depending
on space and social stratification right
and that allows us then to do a level of
conjunctural analysis that pushes back
against what I take to be a kind of
critique of idealist history idealist
history you assume that there are these
fixed epochs or you do a cut and paste
job where you say well lennin said this
then we'll just cut and paste this and
use the same ideal framework to apply to
different material context and so I
really appreciate the way in which
you're encouraging us to engage with
Lenin as someone who was a
methodological Marxist right he wasn't
putting forth Dogma he wasn't simply
repeating what marks and Lennon said I'm
sorry what marks and angle said my bad
he uh was also very clearly in the text
on imperialism saying I disagree with
marks and Engles because on the Polish
question for instance because they were
writing at a different time and at our
time we need a different form of
analysis so in relationship to your
encouragement to think dialectically and
conjunctural and to approach leninism as
a methodology not as something like a
sacran Dogma I'm curious if you could
relate particularly your later comments
about hyper imperialism and obviously
you're drawing on the a text that I'd
encourage everyone to read published by
tricontinental on precisely that topic
is that Lenin said quote that
imperialism as the highest or latest
stage in the development of capitalism
creates the objective conditions for the
achievement of socialism right and
towards the end of your text you begin
to allude to this
but given everything you've just mapped
out for us about the kind of dwindling
unipolar world the Reliance on
militarism the attempt on the part of
the US Empire to revive itself and rev
the engine of Neo Imperialism just as
it's kind of running out of gas do you
see hyper imperialism and this moment
creating the objective conditions for
the achievement of socialism like Lenin
saw that in an earlier phase that was
very very different so I'm curious your
thoughts on this
yeah it's a great question well
formulated question I mean the first
thing is I think the objective
conditions for socialism have been with
us for a while um you know in terms of a
couple of things one is the massive
generation of wealth has been with us
for a while you know we we generate on
the
planet massive amount of goods and
services that could cover the needs of
people double fold you know I mean um
incredible productive capacity generated
by capitalism in our time um that's one
form the second is that our scientific
and technological prowess has increased
incredibly um you know like the fact
that we can hold this meeting in this
form um unimaginable in my own Lifetime
and I'm only 56 years old uh to even
have imagined as a 20 something year old
that I could be looking at a there were
no laptop computer there were no desktop
computers when I was in in college you
know there was no personal computer uh
when I was in college and look at the
technological changes that enabled Us in
this pandemic for instance uh to
maintain contact to maintain contact for
long periods of time without um seeing
other people and so on you know um in
the early pandemics people had to write
letters and and whatnot even then in
places the um the post was closed uh
people were genuinely isolated I mean
the technological developments are
immense um you know I once talked to a
computer engineer who told me that the
um the technolog the the the the the
calculating capacity in a smartphone is
greater than some of the computers in
the Soviet Union U that they were using
to develop um better understanding of
the way goods and services were being
distributed I mean imagine what
companies like Amazon and so on are able
to do with Logistics the advances in
logistics that could enable planning um
so remarkable you know so the objective
conditions to build a socialist society
they have I think long been achieved um
it's the subjective side where we have a
great problem just as the objective
conditions were achieved and in a sense
precisely because of the way the
objective conditions were achieved in
other words the breakdown of trade
unionism the disarticulation of
factories all of that enabled production
to go to a scale unimaginable you know
the the the ruthless um exploitation of
Labor allowed objective conditions to be
achieved but that very possibility of
achieving the objective conditions made
the subjective side much harder that
it's hard to achieve trade unionism
across a sector across continents and so
on with even with this technology it's
very difficult you know the cars are
built in eight countries how you going
to have eight factories 10 15 factories
go on strike at the same time to hit
that automaker you know uh their
vulnerabilities have been their risk has
been distributed much more you know
cleverly so the subjective side is much
weaker now our confidence in the
subjective transformation is much
lessened so in the short period ahead I
doubt that we'll have major socialist
breakthroughs I doubt it I think what
you're going to have in the short period
ahead is the return of forms of social
democracy um you know Center left kind
of politics we have entered the era
where I feel the center left is going to
have some sort of return because the far
right and the the neoliberal right don't
have the capacity to deal with real
compelling problems in the world and
it's very hard to build the left I think
we're going to have to go through
another period of the forces of you know
um kind of Humane nationalism emerging
again um new governments coming in in in
on the African continent already signal
that you know the governments in the
sahil region ibraim TR he's not a
socialist but these are Humane people
who want to help their people and we are
going to enter a period of this and it
is precisely as enter of this that the
left has to be absolutely Vigilant
building Theory from the
facts out there driving both a left
agenda but not being sectarian towards
these Humane forces you know whatever
you want to call them we can't be
sectarian against them which is why in
our text we talk about Rings we try to
we say there are you know uh there are
uh some countries that are you know
strongly um we have these funny little
Rings here you know we we we divide the
world up into rings we do an assessment
where is Algeria Today where is this
country where is that country because I
think there is a great need to
understand in a way um the different
ways in which new Humane forces will
make an appearance and as these Humane
forces make an appearance what should be
the attitude of the left toward them you
know if in Indonesia for you're not
going to have a big socialist project in
Indonesia but if some form of of Humane
nationalism comes which is not from the
right either far rightwing
nationalism or neoliberal forms of
politics how do we assess that that's
going to be the tendency that we're
going to see in many countries already
already seeing them you know I mean in
in South Asia for instance in a way the
most recent incarnation of Imran Khan
was that a sort of you know nationalism
which suggested got to take care of
people's needs um for which reason he
said I can't cut with Russia
and then he had to be removed you know
uh what does the left do with that form
of of then there are strongly Sovereign
seeking countries like Iran what should
be the left's relationship with strongly
Sovereign seeking countries like Iran
it's not a socialist country it's a it's
a theocracy self declared theocracy what
should be the relation that is the
analysis we have to be in now not
looking for Pure socialism never comes
in a pure form never
yeah yeah that's that's great you know
it does make me think and I'd like to
hear you on this but it's not my primary
question is that there is a lot of
debate about the global rise of fascism
and the way in which the heavily
militarized us leader of global Empire
has been supporting that around the
world if it be using Ukraine as an
international hub for fascists if it be
Israel if it be uh mle in Argentina Modi
in India this is obviously a very big
debate and so be curious to hear you a
little bit more on the kind of
sharpening of the contradictions of
hyper imperialism but actually my
principal question goes to the final uh
thing that you said and that is how we
understand the emergence of these
projects of national self-determination
that clearly aren't socialist but
they're
Anti-Imperialist and it strikes me that
there's an interesting parallel with
Lenin and in particular some of your
writings on Lenin where you bring this
out because Lenin theorized a
dialectical relationship between
projects of AAL self-determination on
the one hand and the internationalist
Socialist project on the other and
encourage us to go in neither of those
directions right in the sense that if we
just support all nationalisms we're
going to fall into social chauvinism Etc
if we just support internationalism now
then we fall into a kind of ultr leftism
that is unored from Material reality if
we take that not as a framework that we
would cut and Pac and apply to
contemporary reality but it's a method
of analysis do you think that in the
Contemporary world that many will
describe as
multipolar that a LEF disposition that
is coherent would consist in saying that
well we should tactically support
National struggles for Liberation from
imperialism even if they're not
socialist because they break certain
chains of imperialism well nonetheless
wanting to connect them as much as
possible to an international socialist
project so in the case of a place like
Iran or Russia we might have Tactical
support but not strategic support
because at the end of the day we don't
want a multipolar world we want a
socialist so I'm curious to hear your
thoughts on these debates both on
fascism and then the Contemporary
standing of the kind of multi-polar
world and how we should situate
ourselves both tactically and
strategically in relationship to
it yeah you know the first thing is that
um I I generally don't accept the use of
the term populist you know and I noticed
you didn't really use that term either
um to Define like a melee or a trump or
people like that I mean they're not
populists um in fact there's a lot that
unites mle U to you know other just
run-of the-mill neoliberals in places
like um like Argentina McRee for
instance run of Mill neoliberal um you
know or Trump and Biden there's a lot
that unites them they have a difference
of attitude and in some are a difference
in the attitude towards Society they're
harsher towards society and so on but in
terms of policy it's pretty much along
the same grain you know um you know
where's the difference between Trump and
Biden on economic policy Biden is as um
in a sense you know insular with
economic policy um you know he also
wanted to attempt what was bomic attempt
to onshore production bring you know
chip production to the United States is
very similar to
Trump um the question of why it goes to
F this Neo fascist kind of Tendencies is
because in many countries um
particularly in the global North just to
re leave it there for for now in many
countries in the global
North in a electoral democracy it's very
difficult to motivate people into a
right-wing project unless you motivate
them emotionally somehow you can't go
out there and say look um vote for me
I'm going to make significant Cuts but
if you say vote for me I like you hate
immigrants I like you hate XY Z I like
you motivated by all these emotional
things and by the way I'm going to close
down all these Ministries you've built a
mass base for yourself you know if you
just say I'm going to close down all
these Ministries might not have a mass
base
so the nature of this Neo fascism is
often to continue to pursue neoliberal
policy agenda but to build a mass base
for it at a time when it's almost
impossible to build that you know the
earlier era when Clinton could come out
there and build a mass base for
neoliberalism doesn't exist now now you
have to build a mass base for
neoliberalism on a different foundation
and an emotional Foundation against
immigrants or whatever you know where
between the um the far right and the
center right there's very little
difference on that except of tone and so
on you know tone is a big thing it's not
a nothing um and and and so on in terms
of the strongly seeking countries
seeking National um some sovereignty
State sovereignty Iran is a great
example to continue with um you know I
mean look it's very clear that all
socialists must be against uh
imperialist war against Iran I think
there there should be unanimity of
opinion um you know when when people of
the left say Hey listen Saddam Hussein
is a fascist we should support the US
bombing of Iraq that's an un that's a
position without conscience um that that
is not a left position you know left
position must always stand against an
imperialist War um the United States
doesn't want to bomb Iran to get rid of
the theocracy per se it wants to get rid
of Iran because Iran is a strongly
seeking sovereignty country that's its
problem what unites the Rogue States
okay so-called Rogue States the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and Iran dprk is not Theocratic Iran is
Theocratic and yet the United States has
the same attitude toward them what
brings them together is they both seek
strong sovereignty they don't want to
allow their sovereignty to be
compromised that's what the US is after
and the Anti-Imperialist fores should
always defend a country's right to
sovereignty now having defended its
right to sovereignty it doesn't stop
there you have to build and make
alliances and and you know attempt to
move those strongly seeking Sovereign
countries in a in a direction which is
Progressive you know um but there's also
a time for that you know you don't have
to do everything at the same time see
one problem Gabriel that has taken place
amongst prominent people of the left um
you know and there are quite a few of
them is that they always want to appear
to be personally above reproach and
correct on everything so they always
want to say everything uh that is not a
socialist attitude a socialist takes
their time they bite their time I don't
feel the need to at all times say
everything I believe in order for people
to like me personally that is not
relevant that is egotistical that is a
leftist individualism and egotism there
are things I believe I'm not going to
talk about because there is always a
moment in time if you want to open a
certain debate there's a time to open
the debate right now is not the time for
instance to open a debate about Iran's
theocracy this is not the time this is
the time to defend its right to be a
strongly sovereign country but there is
a kind of left intellectual arrogance
individualistic arrogance which says I
should say everything I should launch
all attacks because I want to be
personally thought of as a as a correct
person on all counts and that is given
the name of Integrity this is very very
bad practice for left intellectuals this
idea that you know somehow it is it is
integrity to attack everybody uh no this
is politically foolish and also it's
egotistical it's not in Integrity
Integrity is to subordinate yourself
into the real historical process and to
allow yourself to be in that process
trying to build a better world not to
stand away from the process and be like
old profits from a mountain declaring
everybody to be wrong and you alone to
be right that is arrogance that's
egotism so that that I would come to the
Iran question on that this is not the
moment to launch a fullscale attack on
the Iranian government whatever your
reservations about
it thank you VJ I think we'll turn it
over to sandip for the who's going to
moderate some of the other questions
coming in from the chat yeah thanks a
lot thanks a lot both of you wonderful
lecture as always uh so uh before going
uh moving over to the question and
answer section we have with us Dr chiros
Dash gupo from jnu uh we are going to
ask her uh for her comments
uh uh if she could I am chosi I am
unmuting you
uh hello can you hear me yes
yes okay okay thank you
Vijay uh I am just amazed that how you
could speak with such energy despite
that cold but then I've seen you you
speak in very difficult circumstances
before and I know how uh you manage that
and with the L uh I was thinking of a
couple of points uh not very elaborate
as there is there are other questions
that you have to
answer the first one was that uh there
was if we uh go by this question of
conjunctural analysis but based on what
would be a leninist method uh which I
don't do not think is a wrong
formulation if uh I may put
forward in that there are certain things
that uh were part of that conjunctural
analysis that made up the text of
imperialism the high stage of capitalism
and one was a very detailed the first
was from a history hisorical materialist
perspective of very detailed account of
the relationship
between uh corporations across countries
within countries and the relationship
with the respective nation
states now uh does the conjunctural
analysis that you are offering for the
rest of these period since
1945 uh uh throw light on this aspect of
uh what would I would insist would be a
part of a leninist method uh the second
is about the I'm intrigued why you
consider 1991 to
2008 as a particular
phase because uh why wouldn't 19 1973
for
example and the this lodging of the uh
the sort of the uh and what started in
Chile be the moment from which we would
consider uh the this second phase
because the rise of
neoliberalism as an ideology
driving uh material transformations in
various sociey is either through
imposition or through like uh different
kind of one section of the uh Bui really
wanting to align with uh uh
imperialism
uh both of these processes start much
before the collapse of the Soviet Union
so I am not sure why 1991 the kind of
formal collapse of the Soviet Union
would be the
uh po departure as a historian like I
would
really um need like demand from you a
more uh
uh argued uh uh demarcation of the
period but and the last one is that uh
if it is that U uh Neo fascism is
just a sort of uh a tactic more than a
like like a phase in
uh in the history of
imperialism because unlike fascism of
the uh 20th century uh or the mid early
to mid 20th centuries which were largely
located in uh Europe and in the
capitalist in the heart of the uh the
Imperial North uh Neo fascism seem to
have uh uh sort of you know proliferated
much beyond that uh uh core so what is
it that then like are these NE fascism
then simply a tactic as you seem to
suggest uh in uh implementing
neoliberalism or is there something more
structur C Al in terms of the
relationship between social conflict and
neoliberalism which creates the both the
objective and the subjective conditions
for the rise of neop fascism thank
you what completely Rich um things to
think about um in
fact I'm going to just put it into two
buckets because I think the first two
points are related on corporate State
and the periodization and then the
second on Neo
fascism um you
know when we studied fascism we were
always taught that fascism was a
response by the Basi to the rise of the
left and as the left forces and I don't
just mean the Communist I mean Trade
union movements peasant movements and so
on um you know musolini was a reaction
to the tyan strikes or um or that
Hitler's uh rise and the support from
from the Bazi to uh the German Nazis was
because of the rise of the Communist and
the rise of the Trade union movement in
Germany so the strength of the workers
movement after the Russian Revolution um
the threat of of the Soviet Union the
rise of the workers movement in a way
moves the Bazi to say let's get rid of
the face of of liberalism and go
straight into this kind of Iron Fist and
that's how we were taught the history of
fascism that fascism emerges politically
to defend the buasi against the rise of
the left whether internationally with
the Soviet Union or with the workers
movement but in a sense I remember
having
a so many hours of conversation with aaz
Ahmed about this because
um the emergence of NE fascism let's say
you know with forces like um we we also
have to actually be very precise about
this because the situation in Eastern
Europe is different from you know the
the countries like the United States or
or France and Italy and so on um and
then it's certainly different from what
happens in India and turkey and other
countries you know Argentina in a way
they each have their own particularities
National then there are the
particularities of north and south and
then there are the particularities of
east and west and I think you know
sometimes we just sort of generalize
without thinking through these
particularities like for instance a lot
of Eastern European neof fascism is a
response to the humiliation of what
happened to them post collapse of the
Soviet Union um you know many of these
forces um Orban is is an example um you
know these were many of these people
were leaders of the movements against
the the the the state Communist
governments um and they in initially
Champion liberal democracy and so on and
they see that in fact what happened to
them was a kind of
colonization most dramatically in East
Germany they were colonized by the west
and then their kind of social quote un
quot social conservatism is a kind of
nationalist assertion inclusive in
Russia where you know Putin's parties
the names of the parties united Russia
and so on are all deeply nationalistic
um there's something about the
humiliation of 91 that they are trying
to recover from that's different from
let's say the trumps and the leens and
others um who have a different problem
um so anyway one is that that I don't
think we sufficiently um analyze the
different moments of this you know
modi's story is different from Trump to
put them together uh I think misses a
lot and they are also both different
from Netanyahu so there's that National
then there's some Regional differences
and then there's the differences of also
timing and so on but something does
unite them all um and one of the things
that unites them all on the social
social level is a critique of of being
the detritus of neoliberalism you know
all of them in different ways are being
able to pick up people who feel left out
um who and they have been able to create
a politics of Abandonment much more than
the left inclusive of Modi you know the
attack on the congress party is an
attack on the idea that the Congress has
abandoned large sections of the Indian
public and they understand understand
that abandonment communally um and so in
the United States they understand the
abandonment racially Trump will talk
about the abandoned populations and so
on this Neo fascism emerges in a way as
the double of neoliberalism it's both
produced by it and it's its great
defender um but it's not a critique of
it it doesn't come to defend the Bazi
you know because the Bazi doesn't need a
defense um which is why it doesn't need
to overthrow constitutions you don't
have the march on Rome you don't have um
you know the burning of the Reich star
you don't need that you can win
elections um so this Neo fascism
politically has a very different
character um it is the double of
neoliberalism you know it emerges by
picking up the victims of neoliberalism
and reinterpreting their victimhood not
as as the vi they treating them not as
victims of neoliberalism but as victims
of the political forces that champion
neoliberalism so they therefore protect
neoliberalism from critique the problem
isn't liberalization it's the Congress
the problem isn't um you know the
Clinton reforms it's Clinton um and so
on and they build their politics in this
doubled form so that in that sense in my
opinion new fascism um is to some extent
a tactic it's not a it's not the same as
you know um let's say the fascism
classical fascism it doesn't require
that kind of analysis it requires a
different kind of analysis in my opinion
but again I'm willing to concede that
it's more than a tactic I I just feel
that it's a tactic it will require a lot
more assessment about whether the double
of neoliberalism um is more than merely
a tactical way to continue the
neoliberal project when it has actually
exhausted itself politically yeah that's
the point that I'm trying to make about
that that neoliberalism exhausted itself
but it it is continuing and it's
continuing through its double which is
the Neo fascist um I think your points
about corporate State relation and 7391
are excellent points and it it actually
um carries within it the limitations
always of my own analysis which is often
leaning more towards the political than
the economic um and that is a a a
limitation I generally have and I think
you have identified it very clearly and
correctly now it's not enough to say
that and then walk away let me reflect
on what you
said in a way periods are developed you
know to help must understand a
conjuncture and it's quite possible and
perhaps I'm going to learn from this
point you've made particularly the
second point about 73 that maybe there
are two Beginnings for that period uh
maybe that period has two Beginnings
there is a beginning in the
1970s um you know that is a beginning
that inaugurates the kind of neoliberal
policy agenda um but not yet with the
political
confidence that comes after 91 because
in a way the coup in Chile required a
coup to inforce neoliberalism but after
1991 they created the World Trade
Organization which they had failed to
created in 1948 and in 1994 countries
willingly walked into the World Trade
Organization in fact they wanted to join
with great enthusiasm you needn't have
had a coup in 94 to do that except
amongst the Rogue States so-called Rogue
States their coup datas or attempted CPS
continue but by and large there was no
need so I'm going to take from what
you've said about 73 and I think I'm
going to use it to enrich some of this
argumentation I think it's very valuable
what you said but I would still say that
there can be two different starting
points for a period um maybe we can be
dialectical about that that in the that
early starting point um they still had
to utilize great force to force
countries into the force of Bazi into uh
ad you know into entering a kind of
different understanding of State
corporate relations whereas by the 90s
the Bazi was enthusiastic about that and
that had to do with the political
Dynamic having changed collapse of the
USSR and so on um I think it's also
correct that we need more um analysis
and chirri who made the comments own
book on India and the corporates is a
very valuable contribution to this I
think we need much more analysis of the
move from nation-based firms in the
modern era to multinational corporations
and the relationship between um this
form of business Enterprise not only in
terms of operating in different
countries which has of course got a much
longer longer history um but having
productive units be in many countries um
I think this changes uh the underlying
basis of the conjunctures U and it's
interesting that it's in this um you
know this conjuncture which starts in 73
and 91 um that you have the both the
beginning of the center for
transnational corporations in the UN to
monitor transnational corporations and
it's closure in 1992 by the with immense
pressure from the US government why did
the US government put so much pressure
to shut down Center for transnational
corporations is it didn't want any
scrutiny or regulation of these
multi-sited production oriented um you
know multinational corporations not just
you know where they have different
headquarters maybe commercial interest
sales interest service thing but where
productive units having been
disarticulated made these companies
Global corporations um not just
multinational corporations but Global
corporations and I think underneath the
analysis of the conjuncture different
conjunctural moments it could be useful
to have a layer of conversation about
the uh changing shape of these large
corporations that move from nation-based
multi-sited mertil type companies to the
global Corporation I think it actually
doesn't provide any contradiction in my
mind already I can see how it would fit
well with this conjunctural analysis so
thanks a lot for for that first point I
think it's so
important thank you thank you vij uh I
think like we would love to go through
the question answer session we have a
few questions but uh I think we are
running out of time uh as we have spoken
earlier due to time constraint uh I
don't think we will be able to take
questions right now but if uh Gabriel
and VI you agrees then we will send you
the questions email you the questions
and we will send the you know repes to
those who have asked those questions uh
if I have your permission uh then I will
proceed okay uh uh Gabriel you have any
uh comments uh like end comments uh
about the
session well I think it's it was a very
rich session uh brought up a lot of food
for thought and I think that my main
takeaway and I think what is so
important for everybody on the call is
using leninism as a methodology for an
analysis of specific
conjunctures and what I really
appreciated as well was was the
actuality of lenon right we're here to
celebrate his birth date and Lennon
continues to kind of be reborn in the
ongoing pursuit of the method of
leninism as a very specific dialectical
and conjunctural modality of analysis
that ultimately is geared not to us
simply being theoretically right about
the world the reason to elucidate and be
right about the world is so that you can
maximize your agency in that world and
intervening in it and so I thank VJ very
much for his uh contributions and for
the others involved in organizing this
and I look forward to uh continuing to
celebrate the lives of lennin and his
actuality uh okay uh before moving
forward I will take a moment and
acknowledge the that uh this event we
are going we are basically uh co-hosting
this event with uh critical theory
Workshop uh and I would like to thank uh
Professor Gabriel rockel and the
critical theory workshop for uh you know
doing this jointly with us so uh I would
like to ask Professor suet chadhi the
director of the maxian study center
for the confuting
comments uh thank you ship for
moderating this and I would like to
thank VI for this insightful lecture
though you were obviously so ill you
could still you know continue in your
usual energetic spirit and help us to
understand many many pressing issues of
the day in the light of a leninist
perspective uh I would also like to
thank Gabriel for the time he has given
us and for co-hosting this with us I
hope there will be more of these
sessions in future and finally I would
also like to thank uh the friend of our
Center uh chiros Dash GTO for her
remarks and the questions that she asked
so uh I would uh I would like to
apologize to the audience because we are
running out of time many of you
especially young people you have been so
eager to hear VI speak and you have so
many questions but unfortunately we have
to uh close this session now so what we
will do is what ship has said has
suggested please send us your questions
and we will forward them to both VI and
uh Gabriel and when we receive answers
from them uh and I'm sure there will be
new an reply they will reply in a Nuance
way uh we will forward their replies to
you so please do that uh and please uh
join us again in the future because we
will be organizing more talks in future
and I hope there will be it will be
possible for us to accommodate your
questions uh sort of in a more direct
way in the future sessions that we
organize I will now hand over the mic to
suip thank you Shadi thank you Vijay
thank you Gabriel uh it's a it's an
honor to have both of you uh and this
wonderful talk about this great
revolutionary uh the world has ever seen
I would say uh and uh thank you chiros
as well for your questions and comments
and thank you all for joining us today
we will continue this online lecture
series further uh throughout the year
and we will let you know uh about our
future plans and everything and we we
will keep collaborating with uh critical
theory Workshop uh Vijay we are going to
so we recorded this session we are going
to publish this session in different
platforms I hope you don't mind
like okay wonderful thanks a lot thank
you thanks everyone uh we will see you
later uh good morning good night good
afternoon uh again thank you bye bye
everyone by by
bye


## Keywords:
