---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JaVvn5k4Wns
---

# Video
WaPo Writer Wants CIA & Boots Riley To Help Save Neoliberalism (TMBS 54)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JaVvn5k4Wns)

## Transcript:

all right we're gonna do a little bit of
a reading now and and then we're gonna
do it a little bit of a reading then
we're gonna do a little bit of a sort of
before we get on vacation all week we're
just gonna individually Chuck somebody
in the gulag and then we'll take a few
more calls and some discs were questions
and then we'll be a do have you guys
read this piece by sunny bunch and that
is actually literally his knee I had to
miss it when I really saw the title I I
was I clicked I almost quit for a second
I think I just can't let this like live
in my brain for the next 48 hours you
were looking at Garth Brooks campaign
contributions
look you know Garth even gave money the
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
yeehaw mr. Garth Brooks do you support
peace in prisons right that was very I
like that I mean I thought it's funny
but I like the dick move of lack we're
like you know let's get a little
cash and Nelson on this show they think
they're great and he's just like you
want country music this
like we're in the highest-grossing use
of Michael Jackson of country music yeah
I was gonna do Alan Jackson no no that
was a Garth Brooks as the Michael
Jackson of country music that was a
money tick money take money tick okay
the CIA funded culture the CIA funded a
culture war against communism and it
should do so again by Sonny bunch in the
Washington Post August 22nd honey
bunches of oats is what I like to call
sunny bunches you've been on it today
Matt yes you have and sunny bunches of
we are winning even more than I thought
we were when I saw this lunatic
column earlier this month we're gonna
just take a couple graphs of this kind
of do a breakdown
earlier this month sorry to bother you
director boots Riley tweeted art for
art's sake is never for art's sake
it's for the sake of the status quo this
is why the CIA funded Jackson Pollock
set aside the vaguely totalitarian
suggestion that art must by its nature
exist either in support of or opposition
to the political establishment okay
my first brief editorial is not that it
needs to it's that it does it's that
it's helpful when it's apolitical for
the status quo this is definition which
is why that which is why they funded
checks at Pollock because his artwork
was so abstract that people had a
difficult time building political
content out of it it does look really
cool though I will say today I'd like to
focus on the CIA's involvement in the
Cold War's
culture war and I and think back to a
better time when ideas were taken
seriously and art was considered
transformative and keep in mind ways in
which the agency could help artists
struggling to break through overseas
today hey guys initial reaction is very
promising piece of writing by sunny
bunches of oats this is just like the
perfect culmination of the way that the
wall should approach going for quite the
past would be with the elegant and
notable and brilliant exception of our
friend Liz Elizabeth breunig yes of
course of course right but I'd be to
pine for the days with the when the u.s.
funded shitty Oracle I know that that
reminds me that there was a piece
several years ago in the New Republic
where he's less relevant now but there
was a guy named Brendan I think was John
Rendon and he was one of the major PR
firms behind doing propaganda for the
bush war on terrorism and invasion of
Iraq and the New Republic wrote like
this whole kind of like it was a
fascinating piece but the editorial line
was essentially like this guy really
sucks and we need to get back to like
the serious days when we didn't
outsource important work like war when
the CIA did its own justification for
coos and murdering civilians globally we
didn't hand it off to some hack PR firm
yeah well one of the reasons I sort of
glad that I started literary hangover
back in the 1600s is because assessing
fiction and literature post-cold-war
becomes so fraught with this sort of
pollution so many of these publications
you needed to be a square like
in order to be published in these places
exactly because of the CIA like funding
Iowa Writers Workshop or the Paris
Review and all this sort of so like
that we want to bring that we bring that
back like his ring that I know we need
to bury that forever well
not just that not even bury it we need
to exhume the body show it off to
everybody to see what happened and then
we can maybe move like culturally
forward without that sort of poisonous
influence are we being totalitarian
enough for you Sonny you think that's
still telling ya oh yeah you wait for
totalitarian be soggy yeah even got to
the gulag yet those
interested in the CIA's covert cultural
wars should check out who paid the price
the piper by Francis stoner Sanders
Saunders
check this out does business and as
that's real names that are going well no
this isn't well right I've actually read
this is a good piece a well check this
out granted it's an unrelenting li-
portrayal of the efforts by Michael
Jocelyn Nicholas Nabokov and others to
funnel money from the CIA into the hands
of artists and intellectual journalists
that highlighted the Western world's
commitment to individual freedom what's
it like literally at a time when you're
you know murdering Patrice Lumumba
you're highlighting your complete
commitment to individual freedom okay
but if you can set aside the author's
bias you'll discover a fascinatingly
Byzantine effort to turn the world to
the American Way of thinking via the pen
rather than munitions and murder okay
guys I'm gonna get back to you but I
just would like to say a historical
assessment of CIA behavior from Asia
Latin America and Africa and the Cold
War I would say let's let's be
diplomatic here and say the pen was
supplementing the munitions of murder
whenever Nixon talks about Ivy Leaguers
on his tapes it the common sort of
interpretation has been that sort of
anti-semitism or the sort of anti wasp
whatever I read that is he's upset with
the type of people who basically have a
relationship official or not with
intelligence in America like and the
next line actually says that what does
it say the CIA that's founded was
largely run by Ivy Leaguers would be
highbrows intellectual that a sentence
after he says the effort to turn the
world to the American Way of thinking so
the American Way of thinking basically
decided by Ivy Leaguers right in the mid
century exactly oh I mean yeah well I
mean I can't believe this claim I have
to wonder when I'm when I'm reading this
whether or not the CIA is sitting there
shaking their heads saying we should not
be outsourcing our jobs - I think honey
bunches of oats is the kind of stand
that I don't even think gets contracts
he's a guy he's like no I'll just do it
for free I'll literally propagandize on
behalf of one of the most ruthless
dangerous intelligence organizations
whose very existence is frankly a
contradiction for a transparent
democracy I don't know why he's document
Jordan yeah it just feels right
because Jordan Peterson is the same sort
of anti-communist that you know I don't
know I was sighs if he gets funding from
certain quasi government Iowa nomination
fries any of both the same kind of
credulous that could write a
column literally saying we should
restart intelligence propaganda programs
in the same column that's like because
you know democracy is some threat
basically says subsidize guys like me
right I would totally like more funding
why does that block me I get to make
movies what about me
the CIA at its funding and its funding
well yeah it was largely funded by the
Ivy Leaguers would be highbrows and
intellectuals it makes sense that they'd
have been attracted to the ideas of men
like Melvin Lansky the consummate cold
warrior who pushed for the founding of
magazines of a magazine
designed to bridge the gap between the
west and the rest according to a
post-war memo by Lasky submitted the US
Army journalists like D Ramona wood as
they serve as quo
a demonstration that behind the official
representation of democracy American
democracy lies a great and progressive
culture with a richness of achievement
in the arts literature philosophy in all
aspects of culture which unite
the free traditions of Europe and
America all right this goes on and is as
credulous and insane as you could
imagine and again I love that he is
literally basing a lot of this
information off of a book that is
actually a historical critique of this
self-evidently dangerous program but now
this is where it is where it gets really
juicy and where I think here guys
careerist instincts or maybe just honey
bunches of off every met conceivable
really start to kick in which brings me
back to Riley and sorry to bother you
the director in recent weeks has
complained of not being able to obtain
foreign distribution for his
entertaining new picture this understand
this is understandable Indies often have
trouble but unfortunate the movies
message would resonate in China the
world's second-largest market after all
sorry to bother you sorry to bother use
worry free corporation which feeds and
houses workers and factories to increase
productivity seems a dead ringer for
Foxconn the quote-unquote Forbidden City
were Chinese manufacturers a
manufacturer where Chinese workers
manufacture Apple devices the movies
message might appeal to people in a
nation where poets and artists and
activists have been imprisoned for
bucking the leadership's dictates now
that's all true hundred percent China is
a very repressive country and as you
just said bunches of oats they have
abusive sweatshop conditions which make
all of the consumer electronic goods of
us-based corporations you dumb mother
take it away guys it's also no
doubt that a boost rally movie which is
incredible by the way is very as you
know is becoming and it's been getting
such positive reviews in the United
States because it speaks a lot to the
conditions here
right I mean it's the right
by the way notley's that translates like
literally right down to Scott Walker is
working his ass off to get a Foxconn in
Wisconsin yeah I didn't I didn't leave
sorry to bother you thinking that'll
show China yeah actually yeah worry free
that's our huh god damn rapper he just
made a goddamn polemic against trying
this hey the CIA on a fondness what do
you think about chairman chey actually
let's take it one step further it's Sam
sorry to bother you might have universal
appeal across the world that is
dominated by capitalism the form of wage
labor of exploitation it's almost like a
movie that endure that that illustrates
the universal abuses of the capitalist
class and the definitionally exploited
state of labor in a capitalist economy
it's almost like that movie does that I
mean this I mean this is obviously it's
just such this guy's such a hack and
this is such a you know an absolute
embarrassment but you know and this is
something this is the history of the CIA
involvement in the movement and
something that's even embarrassing to
like fairly centrist liberals right they
look at this is like a dark period in
our history right and it's incredible
today that you know folks think that
this is anything under and I don't know
if this is necessarily something that
only like tomoow are like wild fringy
right to imagine for a second that like
I mean who knows what kind of art forms
that this guy's talking about you know
recreating what's actually think that
that's going to have something it's like
it's going to rip hell well here it is
here's what he's no man okay I didn't
want to do how much longer we all do
this if the CIA were looking to have
some fun in the cultural space I love
now that were literally merging the
worst now he's using like the speak of a
brand planner and it's some agency in
lower Manhattan now if the CIA was
looking for a way to have some fun in
the cultural space they could do worse
then distribute Reilly's opus
commissioned a top-shelf translation for
subtitles bang out a samizdat DVDs I
don't know what that is and upload the
movie to a salmon stop basically like
they're distributed unofficially okay
gotcha
Sam is that DVDs and
the movie to as many filings sharing and
streaming services as possible how
better to demonstrate the unfettered
freedom American artists have in America
to criticize the systems now we're
flipping now it's that'll show China you
get to make a movie that criticizes
capitalism in America which to which
everybody would say yes I'm glad that we
have more freedom of expression than
China okay and this is gonna prove what
exactly well I think you know I mean
that I mean that hope that point it's
just it's just obnoxious but to go back
to his so you might even spur I'm sorry
it was just last point it might even
spur Chinese citizens to take action if
the Communist Party back to businesses
that dominating commerce in the state no
it might spur them as they already are
trying to do under the conditions of
abuse by their own government and all
Western multinationals that operate
there to form an independent labor
movement so they aren't ruthlessly
exploited just as they are here at a
more rapid rate every day because all of
America's most American politicians in
the pocket of that same corporate sector
want America to have the same utterly
destroyed free trade free union movement
as they do in a place like China witness
the Janice decision
you stupid dumb a historical
economically illiterate embarrassing
what a way to show American
values than to have state industry get
involved in the production of cultural
products yeah no that's exotic real
American values remark yeah who actually
in a way it is very American rights to
just have the federal government float
money to a bunch of ignorant fat sons of
who make way too much
money and all the work of people
absolutely hate than to just fund
obnoxious CIA cultural projects uh but
it was funny but I will say this if the
CIA would like to take him up on this
idea I'm totally game for more and more
people watching sorry to bother you so I
hope that the mid-level brains and the
intelligence apparatus are reading the
mid-level brains of the Washington Post
editorial page


## Keywords:
