---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SV3FYndP_i4
---

# Video
Weekends with Ana Kasparian and Michael Brooks: May 9, 2020 (featuring Glenn Greenwald)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SV3FYndP_i4)

## Transcript:

what's up everyone welcome to weekend
with Anna and Michael joining you is Ana
Kasparian and Michael Brooks Michael how
are you doing I'm doing as well as can
be expected Anna how you doing I'm doing
okay you got to be honest with the
audience at all times
certainly burnt out with the new cycle
feeling woke up feeling uninspired I got
you know it's just I feel like the same
nonsense gets recycled in the news every
single day the same honestly unimportant
controversies the same Talking Heads in
the media making the stories about them
I can't stand it it's just the most
frustrating time in America for a number
of different reasons but you know the
way that this crisis has been handled
both by the government and the way it's
been covered by so-called journalists in
you know US media has been devastating
and it just kind of shows you all of the
different ways in which society is
broken and isn't working for the average
American
yeah I mean there's no doubt about that
I was reading about the CDC report that
the Trump administration suppressed
we've got this rush to reopen which is
gonna jeopardize obviously a lot of
people's lives and it's also not gonna
work economically because it's not
factoring in people's behavioral changes
people are not sitting at home
unbelievably excited to go to a
restaurant where they could contract
this thing and then of course on the
other hands you know you have Andrew
Cuomo basically using this as a
basically a lab New York for his own
version of the kind of authoritarian
neoliberalism and outsourcing schools
even more so to technology and
everything so yeah it's it's really
disheartening and it's really it's
depressing and I don't think social
media helps although I had something
that happened to me this week that far
outweighs any of that it's way more
upsetting do you want to hear it yeah
was that
happen some guy I was on blogging heads
with Robert Wright Robert writes very
good dude talking about my new book
against the web Cosmopolitan answer to
the new write order it today at read
Emma's it's a very good book and many
many many people are saying so this guy
right that I have the same IQ level as
Dave Rubin and I gotta say even though
I'm not like I don't I I have criticisms
of the IQ as a test I'm certainly not
one of these IQ twerps running around
that stung me that was a lot yeah you
were compared to maybe the dumbest
person in media in the country like
that's a lot I mean obviously he's wrong
I mean how could anyone look Michael
sometimes I listen to your show like T
mb/s I love t mb/s I'm obsessed with it
sometimes you get into these like
lengthy I guess monologues whatever you
want to call it when you're interviewing
someone and you start to like because
it's more of a conversation not you just
like throwing questions at someone and
then not really engaging but anyway like
you get into like all this philosophical
theory and like the dialectic and I'm
like what the what the is he
talking about right and like the fact
that anyone would think that you have
the same IQ as dave rubin who doesn't
seem to know how the post office works
like blows my mind like that person has
the same IQ as dave rubin actually
pretty funny because i think it was like
very earnestly written like i don't
think it was like you're a idiot
i think it was just like the funny thing
is is that he and Dave probably score
similarly but who does I mean I don't
know I was never a great I probably yeah
I probably wouldn't be a great test
taker
hence my skepticism of tests but uh yeah
I was taker you know
standardized tests are trash because
it's just a way of seeing how well you
can take a test like the SAT for
instance is specifically crafted in a
way to like ask trick questions and see
if you know the way like the test
writers have phrased certain things in a
certain way to direct you toward the
right answer like if you are you know a
child coming from an immigrant family or
a working-class family and you don't
have the means to buy these insanely
expensive like test prep classes then
you're screwed like I totally felt that
when I was in high school like prepping
for the SAT was madness because you know
you have the well-to-do students who can
like totally pay for those expensive
classes and it wasn't about seeing how
much you know it was more about hey is
this person savvy enough to know how to
take this very specific test right hash
trick questions in it it's just so
stupid totally and it also right and and
then like how what your attitude was
about college was also like it took me I
understood that it was probably that it
was advantageous because even though I
didn't come from a background of private
colleges or anything like that at all
and I definitely didn't have any money I
grew up in Massachusetts and everybody
is up there is a culture in parts of
Massachusetts that are definitely
obsessed with Ivy League colleges and
private liberal arts college like it
that is a a real touchstone for a lot of
people and so I sort of made it my
business to figure out how to you know
get into what I thought was a decent
school and and what you realized though
when you get there is like if you you
know and then there's obviously so many
extreme differences around this but like
people who got there from like
working-class backgrounds or people of
color who had working-class background
or did basically like if you didn't come
from like a prep school there was this
like very earnest like oh I gotta
like figure out grades I gotta do all
this and then you really realize that if
you're actually at these places - like
advance your career
this is just purely the social
networking opportunity and the brand and
of course you shouldn't like screw up
your grades and of course you should
cultivate relationships with professors
but like this isn't you know your path
to Wall Street or whatever else is not a
v' necessarily unless you're you know
unless you have some kind of truly
exceptional quant ability by like
hitting the books you've got to like hit
the social circuit and that's like and
that's another thing that that people
who you know don't aren't they either
don't have the the money or like the
social training I don't understand how
this stuff works
so yeah yeah so the point is I am
smarter than Dave Rubin and you
(Laughter)
legit it was really funny I've laughed
at something like that elope in a while
so thank you
yeah and it's especially funny when like
you have one person Dave Rubin like
running away from any type of
substantive debate on any substantive
issue right I feel like you'd be
comfortable debating anyone about any
issue so anyway why don't we talk about
the show a little bit what the audience
can look forward to later in the program
we're going to interview Glenn Greenwald
on maintaining civil liberties in the
age of corona we've seen some of those
civil liberties certainly rolled back in
various countries it's been pretty
devastating in Kenya for instance and
the same could happen to us if we're not
cognizant of how crises and tragedies in
this country have been used by bad
actors in order to roll back our rights
so we'll talk to Glenn Greenwald about
striking the right balance because it is
important to make sure that we protect
people
while this pandemic continues and later
in the show we will talk about Donald
Trump's relentless caca thon which is
basically targeting Republican
politicians who refuse to be loyal to
him it's just it's incredible to watch
the only thing he's good at right
it's true all right well I'm gonna go
ahead and start with my commentary today
and it's just it's something that I'm
thinking about more and more as we see
the change in the Democratic Party post
Trump so I've come to realize that no
amount of electoral maneuvering is going
to create a Democratic Party that's
really gonna carry out the best
interests of workers in this country and
nothing made that more abundantly clear
for me then what happened to the party
post 2016 when Trump got elected
conventional wisdom among some
Democratic voters was that the
Democratic Party would learn some
incredibly important lessons that maybe
they would consider the fact that Donald
Trump paraded around as someone who is
gonna look out for the best interests of
blue collar workers now of course he was
disingenuous he doesn't really care
about creating a more equitable system
for Americans all he thinks about is
really using the office of the
presidency to enrich himself and his
friends but do Democrats understand how
appealing that message is the message
that he pretended to have which is to
look out for workers to create an
equitable system and the truth is they
didn't learn a lesson because they made
a very specific political calculation
post Trump the Democratic leadership has
calculated that it makes more sense to
side with a small sliver of the
Republican Party that finds Donald Trump
gross that that finds Donald Trump a
threat to our democratic process these
are people like David from Bill Kristol
Megan McCain these are people who do not
have our best interests in mind do not
care about incredibly important issues
like income inequality or maybe a better
approach when it comes to foreign policy
these are just people who don't like
Trump and so they made an appeal to
Democratic leadership and unfortunately
their influence during the primaries is
is obvious it's evident and it was also
highlighted in I can't believe I'm about
to say this a pretty good piece in
5:38 so I'm gonna give you a few
excerpts from that piece and then I'm
gonna tell you guys what I think
probably makes the most sense in this
new era of a Democratic Party that has
somehow moved even further to the right
so Perry bacon jr. at 5:38 writes never
Trump errs are increasingly involved in
the Democratic Party and have gradually
shifted their tactics in that direction
effectively becoming a never Trump and
never Bernie Sanders coalition and they
appear to be having more success shaping
their new party than the one that many
of them had been associated with for
much of their lives so keep in mind that
this is actually a pretty small group of
people especially when you compare the
percentage of these never Trump
Republicans to a much larger group of
progressive Democrats who want
progressive policy proposals so for
instance conservatives who really hate
Trump probably no longer identify as
Republicans and that's about 11% of
Republicans who switched their party
affiliation between December of 2015 and
March of 2017 according to Pew data
suggests at most 10% of American voters
overall are anti Trump but generally
lean Republican but these people as we
notice during the Democratic primary
have an outsized influence over our
discourse okay and certainly in the
media they are over represented in the
media all of a sudden we're getting like
strategic advice from the fill crystals
and David from zuv the world what's
right so you see them all over MSNBC you
see them all over you know various cable
news channels MSNBC for instance has
programs fronted by two anti Trump hosts
who closely aligned with the GOP
establishment
so that's ex representative Joe
Scarborough and Nicole Wallace who was a
former communications director for
President George W Bush and then also
among the 53 Washington Post opinion
writers highlighted on their papers
website seven are people who identified
as conservatives and or a Republican
Party in the past but regularly attacked
Trump so
like those people are over-represented
obviously it's incredibly rare to see
pro Bernie commentary or columns in some
of these like legacy outlets I'm always
fascinated by the way the you know the
establishment has responded to someone
like Liz breunig for instance who
certainly does identify as a supporter
of Bernie Sanders she happens to be a
columnist at the New York Times and I
remember when she announced that I
thought to myself how the hell did this
happen because people like her are not
welcomed in some of these legacy outlets
and they've been pretty vicious toward
her I mean look at the commentary and
the reaction to her on Twitter for
instance but there's no problem inviting
people who have made insanely poor
decisions previously people like David
Fromm and Bill Kristol who dragged us
into a war with Iraq for some reason
their opinion is more valued in legacy
media and also among Democratic
leadership than the opinion of
progressive Democrats and so it's it's
not wrong to be disillusioned by
electoral politics I think it is wrong
to think that maybe moving toward a
third party would work I don't think
that that's a strategically viable
honestly if we want to accomplish
progressive proposals but I just want to
give you guys just a little taste of the
kind of commentary we heard from these
never Trump errs during the primaries
take a look this is a moment of
tremendous danger and it calls on all of
us to make sacrifices of some of our
preferences it wasn't easy for me to
vote for Hillary Clinton in 2016 for the
common good I think one of the places I
start with thinking about this just
remember if you ask Americans the
question how are you feeling about your
finances how are you feeling about your
health care you get in 2020 the most
positive responses of any year since
1998 while Bernie Sanders speaks to the
disaffected the the people who are
content with the status quo are stronger
than they have been at any time since
the late 1990s Donald Trump will be a
tough president to beat and flipping the
Senate and imposing some costs on the
Republicans there for protecting Donald
Trump that's going to be even more
difficult if almost anybody else
incumbent President of the United States
right now Scott Walker Jeb Bush Hillary
Clinton that person would be cruising to
an easy re-election so in the face of
the extraordinary difficulty of
defeating a dangerous president at a
time of prosperity you have to choose
very wisely and Bernie Sanders appealing
as he is to people listen to this
program for example has never fought a
hard race okay so I show you that clip
and to be fair democracy now they had
bhaskar on there as well to debate David
Fromm which is important to do but at
the same time like that was the message
that we heard over and over again in the
media in regard to Bernie Sanders he's
not electable we know that you like his
policy proposals we know that it pulls
really well we know that single-payer
pulls really well we know that you know
a more equitable system polls really
well but no no he's not electable he's
not electable you should be afraid of
Trump he's not electable and and they
propped up Joe Biden who I would argue
is much less electable especially now
with the Tara Reid allegations against
him but nonetheless again the Democratic
Party made their calculation they align
themselves with Republicans in order to
beat Donald Trump in their mind beat
Donald Trump and so they have this
candidate now Joe Biden who is not only
where he is today because of this you
know unlikely coalition working together
like this unlikely coalition forming and
and propping him up this is also gonna
lead to a candidate who a was already
pretty conservative but be is gonna be
influenced by the very people who helped
him get the nomination so for instance
recently Joe Biden was talking about how
he's thinking about naming Republicans
in his in his campaign or I should say
cabinet so he's okay with Republicans in
his cabinet that should blow everyone's
mind except when you really look at it
no it shouldn't because some Republicans
the never Trump errs helped him get to
where he is today this is a long way of
saying that the electoral politics has a
lot of people
feeling down and disillusioned but this
is also a learning experience it's a
teachable moment to really focus on
where we do have the power and it's
something that you talk about a lot
Michael you talk about how really the
power is with labor and if we want to
get things accomplished the way we do it
isn't by hoping that we can somehow
elect the right people to help us out
because even if we do elect the right
people there are still structural issues
in our system of government that hold
them back from accomplishing the
progressive policy proposals that we
need there's still a great deal of
corruption
in our politics and that money that
politicians need in order to run their
elections it's incredibly influential
and goes against what we need policy
wise so I'm looking at some of the
strikes that have taken place in this
country
you know historically and how those
worker LED strikes have actually
accomplished the things that workers
desperately need I want to give you just
a few examples for instance there was
the Wheeling Pittsburgh steel
corporation strike that was a 10-month
strike involving steel workers at eight
plants in three states
it ended in August of 1997 the union
said that through that strike they were
able to secure boosted pension benefits
for the company steel workers and
provided for that provided for their
retirements obviously it also allowed
the wheeling company to reduce the
workforce by 20% so unfortunately there
were some concessions that the workers
had to make but what they wanted was to
protect their pension they wanted to be
able to retire early and through their
strike they were able to accomplish that
there's the US postal strike of 1970 at
that point you had more than 200,000
employees in 30 cities participating in
this US postal strike and activists
halted mail service in major parts of
the country including New York Detroit
Philadelphia at that point President
Richard Nixon declared a state of
emergency and despite the military's
efforts to quell the strikes a deal was
eventually struck resulting in higher
pay and better
labor conditions under the postal
recognition Act of 1970 now this is not
to say that all strikes work as we've
seen with the GM workers striking there
are it's a risky thing to do and it's
likely that they'll lose incredibly
important protections or things like
their health care right
but maybe rather than focusing on
funding politicians or donating to
politicians and we saw how much money
someone like Bernie Sanders was able to
raise through small dollar donors
maybe we create some sort of worker
solidarity fund that helps workers pay
their bills and support themselves if
they choose to organize mobilize and
strike that way there's some sort of
social safety net that progressives
create in order to help workers out if
they choose to stand up to their
employers and fight for something better
that's just a suggestion but I'm curious
to hear what you think Mike no I think
that that's awesome I think that that is
so on point and actually looking at how
we can concretely help like the Amazon
strikes that were going on in terms of
you know helping people pay their bills
while they do that or or the the
Teamsters Local in Philadelphia that
I've talked about I think that's really
important and I think that that is going
to be one of the ways that the rubber
meets the road in terms of these things
I also think it's it's a hundred percent
right that basically the the both
parties do want to represent different
facets of basically on one hand that the
oligarchy let's just say it like the
base of the Republican Party is still a
handful of billionaires and ultra rich
people the Democratic Party has it's
ultra wealthy donors and they might have
some differing attitudes which are
relevant it's relevant obviously as
we've said a million times whether or
not you want to protect people
you know a daca recipients or you have
some basic commitment to civil equities
in in terms of not against housing
discrimination or for voting rights or
things like that now Democrats and their
donors don't often do a great job on
these things and there's a reason why
these things have been sort of put under
such enormous pressure both because of
the stacking of the judiciary by the
Republicans and you know the Republicans
winning political fights even as they're
actually on those issues they are
demographically in retreat
they shouldn't be sort of gaining new
grounds but they have been and I think
there's a variety of reasons for that
but again with the same core donor base
and class interests there's gonna be
alignment around concentration of wealth
around corporate power around the
capital advantage over labor and one of
the really disturbing ways that this
manifests too and I think you see this
in definitely also in Europe is that the
center has a two-fold game where it
basically says we can understand and we
can hear some of the economic problems
that people like Bernie Sanders talk
about but fundamentally we can't really
do anything right maybe we can maybe
maybe and probably not certainly in the
United States do some kind of small
moves to ameliorate those tendency those
trends in terms of inequality and lower
living standards and then they play a
double game with the populist right
where they'll say you know oh my god
these people are horrible they're racist
they're xenophobes they aren't socially
progressive and then on the backend
they'll actually say okay you know and
and particularly you see this in Europe
I think it's a little bit more
complicated the United States although
we see a fair amount of this in the
United States - where can we meet you
70% of the way on what your actual
migration agenda is as an example and so
you have this incredible move where
they're demonizing working class people
and suggesting that they're the cause of
xenophobia which they are not
discounting all of their economic
concerns across the board and then on
one hand kind of you know hysterically
moralizing and correctly calling out the
bigotry of the populace right wall
actually acquiescing to a fair amount of
that that agenda and you know that's why
at the end of the day at Davos Donald
Trump and JR Paulson ro and Modi and all
these other characters you know there's
money to be made there's deals to be
struck they're gonna get a nice
reception Bernie Sanders and Jeremy
Corbyn never would be yeah III think
you're a hundred percent right and and
this is not to say that we should
completely resign from any type of
strategy or strategical thinking when it
comes to electoral politics my argument
is we need to think about short-term
gains but also the long term game of you
know doing what we can to protect the
material interests of working people but
also thinking about like what we can do
to change the structure and the system
under which our electoral politics works
right so I think that the number one
issue is that we do have two different
parties that are controlled by people
who only have their financial interests
in mind and so you're right in that
there are some differences between the
two parties but when it comes to
economic policy that has a huge impact
on our day to day lives they're very
much in agreement with one another which
is why the you know Democratic
establishment will welcome the never
Trumper Republicans with welcome arms
while flipping off people who have voted
as Democrats but identify more left
people who identify as progressives you
know implementing those policy proposals
the progressives are demanding
challenges the power that Democratic
lawmakers have and they don't like it
and so yeah they've made this
calculation and it certainly worked out
for them during the Democratic primary
this time around but remember these
never
Trump Republicans did all sorts of
maneuvering during the Republican
primary back in 2016 and they failed
miserably and so it's hilarious to me
that the Democratic Party thinks that
being in cahoots with them now and
working with them now
will somehow help the Democratic Party
beat Donald Trump I think that that's a
flaw in their logic but I guess that
remains to be seen no remains to be seen
but I totally agree and actually my
commentary builds or fits really nicely
with yours so let's recognize that
right-wing populism is mostly a scam
that even as Donald Trump or Tucker
Carlson or Josh Holley can occasionally
and was great effect and obviously much
better than you'll hear from Nancy
Pelosi or most MSNBC hosts critique how
capitalism is working and yes there are
parties in Europe that because of
Europe's political traditions are more
likely to actually support social
policies and fit that together with
programs of extreme xenophobia that at
the end of the day the policy trends and
we can see this over several years now
whether we're looking at the United
States or Brazil or hungry or India or
Israel is that these right-wing
governments do not have a serious
economic strategy let's focus on the
United States look at the bailouts the
bailouts are a massive consolidation of
wealth and power for the financial
sector they have almost no labor
protections no systemic relief for
working people
this was the bill that was primarily
devised by Mitch McConnell happily
signed by Donald Trump and with a slush
fund for likethey comically corporatist
hack who should have been charged by
Kamala Harris Steve minuchin to oversee
his Treasury secretary the main domestic
policy accomplishment of the Trump
administration in
two tons of executive orders which have
as we all know generated an enormous and
brutal welfare and migrant refugee
populations but also just on
standard-issue Republican stuff making
it easier to pollute making it easier to
hide you know getting rid of protection
around Foreign Corrupt Practices acts
those all those things through executive
orders in the executive branch the main
policy achievement after trying to
destroy Obamacare we all know Obamacare
and they still are trying to destroy
Obamacare and we all know of course that
Obamacare is nothing like a solution the
only way out of the health care crisis
in the only humane answer is universal
governmental health care for everybody
in the United States that being said the
main primary domestic push of Trump when
he first got into office was trying to
get 30 million people 2030 million
people off of their health insurance
primarily by canceling Medicaid
expansion which was the most successful
part and the most just part of Obamacare
they passed a huge tax cut bill that
primarily went to the wealthy and also
have waged a relentless war against
people who rely on food stamps now we
all know that where they go when they
actually sort of diagnose the problems
of inequality and the collapse of family
structure and things like that is of
course too nationalism and various
rhetoric of blaming immigrants and
diversity as a substitute for the
problems caused by capitalism and of
course we morally object to that and
fight against that in humanitarian
grounds
and this also reveals a total strategic
divergence between a left or materialist
answer to these problems and the
right-wing scam that gets us there and
it also again is going to give us
important lessons for how to build the
Left that might actually have some mass
appeal and might have some sound
strategic thinking none of these
right-wing figures in the United States
our Pro labor union in any
systemic way they might occasionally
hint at pro-labor policies although
rarely with any substantive
follow-through and certainly not from
the Trump administration for most
Republicans in Congress it might
occasionally say yeah maybe we should
think about weight raising wages of
their media as an example or if they're
Josh Holley they might do some very
smart repatriation on supply chains
which we should be working on but of
course you can't separate from their
sign of phobia and rush to create a
dangerous cold war with China but when
you push them on labor unions and I'll
cite again our friend Dustin Costello he
says guys like Bannon and who make this
big show of being different kinds of
Republicans they sound like country club
types they all of a sudden don't feel so
comfortable about backing union policies
you certainly never seen an actual
right-wing populist move would be to say
the Democrats have lied about supporting
card check we're gonna support it that
might actually be a move of jujitsu
which you're never gonna see and let's
actually look I'm gonna quote from a
Jackman piece in 2019
called on Trump's war on workers let me
just place give you some examples of
what Donald Trump Trump's administration
actually has done with regards to labor
itself Trump has wasted no time in
rolling back many of the rather mild
labor regulations that are in place to
give workers some level of protection he
supported the repeal of Obama's Fair
Play and safe workplace executive order
that protected workers from wage theft
before Trump workers had to earn twenty
three thousand a year before the
requirement of overtime pay kicked in
now that requirement has been moved to
35,000 eliminating the opportunity for
growing low-wage low-wage workers in the
American economy and for the same low
wage workers Trump ran on supporting its
110 hour a ten dollar minimum wage and
is yet and has not taken any action on
it of course Trump is also said at other
times that American wages are too high
yes he renegotiated NAFTA with some
slightly enhanced
protections but the overall structure of
that trade deal doesn't change anything
and this is a really important point
because a right-wing populist story is
always gonna need to go to cultural
answers for economic and material
problems at their roots now to be really
clear and this is where the left can
make mistakes it's not about saying that
family life doesn't matter or community
life doesn't matter if those things are
constricted in a way that excludes
certain families or says that only
people from certain backgrounds or
certain identities have a right to those
things then of course we fight against
them completely but at the same time
this isn't like in a this is where
rhetoric about abolishing the family or
things like that some of the only places
in life where people might potentially
feel some refuge in today's world is
totally counterproductive in in and
foolish sort of rhetoric to lead with we
have to say that the breakdown of
community life people not having free
time people not being able to build the
lives they want however they conceived
it is a big problem that we have answers
to as well but we understand that the
base of why those problems are
developing is because of massive
inequality increased work area work
hours a freelance economy and basically
capitalism so if and I'm trying to and I
hope people can see the distinction I'm
making here because again the liberal
objection to this stuff is to point out
the moral depravity of the sexism and
the racism and all these other things
which we absolutely condemn and see as
well that's absolutely part of it but we
also have to look dispassionately at the
real problems that these people are
pointing to and then say again not only
are the answers they're providing
xenophobic toxic and bigoted they also
will fundamentally never work because
they don't have an actual strategy to
empower the only sustainable source of
counterweight to capital which is labour
and the only way of
connecting an emergent left that takes
place in a lot of areas like this people
consuming media people with college
backgrounds and so on is to build out a
left that can can sort of run in tandem
with a revived labor movement and think
strategically in that way and that means
practically thinking about how we can
best be of service of people who are
going on strike how we can not as sort
of intervening liberals with good ideas
or the right approach give other people
strategy but actually what the material
conditions are demanding from people the
enormous risks and costs of that and how
we can be supportive of that now
fortunately polls are changing labor
unions after being sort of under siege
for decades and of course they still are
economically under siege public opinion
polls are changing in 2019 look at this
graph here this is significant upsurge
in people's support of organized labor
because they recognize that that's the
only ground from which to have
protection and for more bold goals like
genuinely democratizing the economy or
giving people actual say over their
lives and how they live it we recognize
that labor is going to be the base of
that so in a way we're lucky because
this right-wing populism
is doomed to fail as a project but we
can only seize on that opportunity if we
get real and we get strategic and we
leave these people in the dustbin of
history where they belong yeah I think
you're absolutely right and one thing
that I would also bring up is the like
right-wing populism is only perpetuated
by the terrible messaging that comes
from Democratic leadership so you know
the example of Nancy Pelosi in front of
her expensive refrigerators that was
very effectively used against
Democratic Party by members of the right
and so they're able to position
themselves as individuals who are
looking out for the best interests of
working Americans when in reality you
know behind the scenes we know what
they're capable of and we know what
they've done we know that they had
absolutely no interest in creating more
jobs or increasing higher or increasing
wages by cutting taxes for the top one
percent two trillion dollars in tax cuts
for the wealthiest Americans and none of
that money went toward improving the
lives of employees all it went toward
was buying up stocks right this
corporate stock buybacks and so we also
need to be mindful of the failure of
messaging on the Democratic side but I
think that independent media can do a
better job in just really highlighting
what Tucker Carlson is really doing
right and it reminds me of the debate I
had with Ann Coulter a few years ago you
know one point during the debate she she
said this she she claimed that she was
concerned about immigrants coming into
the country because they're going to
take fast-food jobs away from black
people so like sure because Ann Coulter
of all people is very concerned about
black people first off like boxing black
Americans into fast-food work right and
saying like oh the real enemy here is
you know the immigrants who are coming
in and taking these jobs away from them
now I would argue that we have an entire
economic structure that's the real
problem here and it's not working for
anyone except for those at the top
absolutely there's no question about it
um and and again as long as we leave
those openings for them we have to be
able to answer not just on grounds we're
comfortable with we have to be able to
talk about things like community in the
terms that we talk on them which is
inclusive broad-based and cosmopolitan
but also you know receptive to different
people's desires
and how they want to live and how they
want to do things and then we also just
need to relentlessly say look if you're
concerned about fast-food workers then
why don't you support paying everybody
25 bucks an hour and single-payer health
care and there really is no way around
there is no coherent policy way around
that and the only way to ensure those
gains that protect those gains is labor
unions which is why all the data we have
from across the world shows higher labor
union concentration and power increases
living standards period that's its
undebatable no matter how much
propaganda says otherwise all right guys
we are going to take a very brief break
and then we're going to come back with
our guest Glenn Greenwald if you're
watching this hit the like button and if
you're new to the channel make sure you
hit subscribe
Anabelle so you get the notifications
this is week ends with ana kasparian
and michael brooks we'll be right back




welcome back to weekends with Ana
Kasparian and Michael Brooks Michael
Brooks joining us now is Glenn Greenwald
he's a journalist for the intercept he
joins us now Glenn thanks so much for
being here thank you for having me it's
a very exciting combination you too and
godsey your new show
thanks so much thanks Glenn we wanted to
talk to you about the corona age and
civil liberties in general and we'll
just start off what will be a pretty
broad-based conversation with some
terrifying footage from Singapore of a
robotic dog from that was I think the
company's Boston Dynamics basically
walking around a park in Singapore with
an automated message telling people to
keep their social distance this dog also
has um you know monitoring ability so it
can track sort of like how many people
are coming in and out of the park and
and so on I mean well what do you think
of this Glenn are you excited by this
amazing innovative new technology and
looking forward to bringing it to a
partner you yeah I am really giddy about
it I love this kind of mechanised
government surveillance and control as
everybody knows you know I think on the
one hand you can look at it in a very
clinical and rational way and say well
look there's nothing particularly
menacing about it the police themselves
are often abusive and human this is
nothing more than the analog of say a
fighter pilot being replaced by a drone
pilot so that there's still a human
operating the controls and and whatever
it does it's doing solely because
there's a human behind it so what really
is the difference between having that
there and having a human perform similar
functions but I think the reason that
particular video resonated for me and
then for so many people went really
viral almost immediately after I posted
it is because you can see the potential
for abuse just like there is a
friends between having a fighter pilot
endangering her or his life flying over
a particular territory and dropping the
bomb the danger to that human and the
human sense becomes a constraint on the
kind of violence that could be imposed
whereas if it's just like a video game
where somebody's in a trailer in
Colorado flying a drone and mechanized
aroun over Yemen or Afghanistan or
Pakistan it's much easier to just kind
of distance yourself psychologically
from the humanity involved because
you're just seeing it digitally on a
screen I think it's the same here I mean
obviously this particular robot is
equipped with no weapons only with only
with cameras and tracking devices but
you can easily imagine it being equipped
with weapons and there are much more
formidable one already I kind of opted
the assembly line that are immune from
resistance or guns so there's once these
kind of things are unleashed there's no
taking them back and there's no way you
fight them any longer and I think the
day most dangerous part is the more we
mechanize our interactions the less
humanity there isn't it and the more
potential there is for abuse yeah you
know watching that video what really
struck me was how terrified people in
that Park were as this robot is just you
know walking around surveilling the
scene and and really it is terrifying
because while we certainly do deal with
law enforcement that carries out abuses
and brutality there's still a human
element to it so I like that you mention
that I mean when you're dealing with
robots there's absolutely no compassion
empathy human emotion attached to it
it's literally just a robot that is
enforcing something that's been sold to
the general public as a policy that's
meant to protect us and we see that over
and over again I mean we see it in
various contexts we're certainly seeing
it today with the coronavirus and I do
really appreciate the nuanced discussion
that you had with Edward Snowden on your
podcast system update because this is a
difficult issue
you to navigate when you want to balance
civil liberties with keeping the general
public safe and so I appreciated that
you came at it from you know just this
perspective of understanding the
importance of social distancing during
this pandemic but wanting to do it in a
way that doesn't violate or you know a
crouched upon encroach upon our civil
liberties and so like how do we do that
what do you think the right answer is
you know I don't like the surveillance
state but how do we persuade people to
actually follow through with these
guidelines especially in a country
that's incredibly distrustful toward the
government yeah there's a really
important but difficult questions to
answer and I found myself grappling with
them internally obviously you know my
work as a journalist and then before
that as as a lawyer has been focused
primarily on civil liberties on
defending civil liberties in turn means
just kind of developing an almost
instinctive opposition to any attempt to
increase government authority and
control and power in the name of
protecting people from a particular fear
in the last 20 years that debate has
taken place in the context of the war on
terror where I do think overwhelmingly
the threat that has been presented to
justify increased surveillance powers or
detention powers without charges or
Guantanamo or rendition or torture or
all the wars has been radically and
wildly overblown I mean we the threat
that you're gonna die in a terrorist
attack at the hands of an Islamic
radical group where the threat is
actually less than for example the
threat that tomorrow you're gonna slip
in the bathtub and hit your head and die
and your own bathtub or go to a
restaurant in the pre koba day and
develop an intestinal illness from
something that you eat the threat was
really minuscule versus the the powers
that were being justified in their name
and I felt myself at the beginning of
this pandemic kind of having thought
processes that I never expected to have
kind of bargaining with myself and and
kind of the discourse about well maybe
short term increases in mass
surveillance are necessary you're
justified in order to stave off more
long-term brutal repression like we saw
in China in the early stages of the
pandemic because they think that when
you have this terrifying new threat and
I do think the threat of this virus is
infinitely greater and more concrete and
more real than say the threat of
terrorism from Islamic radical groups
we're we're psychologically constructed
to have the our first order needs
survival and so no matter how much of a
symbol of return you are no matter how
kind of rationally intellectually
equipped you are to resist government
authoritarianism instinctively you want
to be protected from this really scary
threat you want your children to be you
want your family members to being your
friends and your society and so you do
have this kind of fear that overtakes
your rational faculties and makes you
vulnerable to government claims that
they need more power and I can I felt
that process much more viscerally than I
ever did before and took me a couple
weeks ago and think about the fact that
the problem is whatever powers we vest
in the government now in the name of
temporarily increasing their authority
so that they can manage this crisis and
get past it it's tempting to that sounds
tempting right like hey here's just some
power for you to hold for a few months
or a year until there's about 16 or
there's a treatment or until we're past
the epidemiological curve that makes it
dangerous but what we learned from the
war on terror it's the same thing they
said about things like the Patriot Act
and the authorization to use military
force in 2001 hey don't worry this is
gonna be a couple years until we get
control of this new threat and here we
are 20 years later and nobody thinks
about rescinding the Patriot Act or the
authorization to use military force if
you hol have a vote on it in Congress it
passes by a vote of like 92 to 6th and
the Senate because it's become a part of
our political framework and that's the
same for whatever powers we now vest in
government so you know I think that we
can do a lot to persuade our fellow
citizens of the importance of staying at
home I think people are staying at home
voluntarily in large numbers even where
it's not mandated not
is financially able to do that because
not all governments in fact most
governments aren't providing them with
the sustenance they need so they're
forced to go outside often against their
will but I think persuasion and
education and kind of collective action
of that sort is a much better course
than just handing over whatever powers
government's claim in the name of
managing this crisis Glenn I wouldn't
follow up on that and and and take this
in an in a slightly broader direction I
think one of the things going back to
the the Snowden revelations that you
reported and I think just in terms of
having a framework for understanding how
we protect privacy and civil liberties
today and even the cultural spillover
effects of people sort of like you know
you see the cultural consequences of
people not taking like privacy generally
seriously and how that impacts people's
relationships how they relate to the
world how they relate to social media
platforms um that we can't just look at
the threat to civil liberties as coming
from government we have to look at it as
sort of like a hybrid threat involving
the private sector involving companies
involving the relationship between the
you know basically like the surveillance
state but all of the companies that
provide the infrastructure of the
surveillance state in an age of
privatization and hyper capitalism so um
I'm also wondering like as we push back
on this and and think about it do we
also need to be really clear with with
the public and even in our own
frameworks that it's like it it's
government's ability to mandate these
things but it's also like another
escalation and what you know Google or
Apple can do as private basically
entirely unregulated or you know greatly
unregulated companies can do in terms of
tracking your rare abouts sharing that
with law enforcement officials or even
private security firms and you know the
the overall kind of encroachment on our
lives not just from government
but from also really the corporate
sector as well
yeah absolutely I mean I would make two
points about that one is when I when I
talk about the surveillance state or
even the military-industrial complex or
the deep state or whatever you want to
call whatever your favorite term is for
this kind of permanent power faction
that resides in Washington and exerts
power regardless of the outcome of
elections and fairly similar in constant
ways both in the military / intelligence
realm as well as in the financial realm
I don't mean just the government in
terms of public entities because to me
there really is no genuine effective
division between government on the one
hand and powerful corporations on the
other I see them as far more merged than
I do as separate entities so for me the
surveillance state isn't just the NSA
and the FBI and the CIA it is also
Google and Facebook in all those
corporations that work in conjunction
with those agencies a big part of the
Snowden reporting was how closely
intertwined they've become and the
reason for that is that the way our
politics in the u.s. is now structured
is the bold political parties are funded
by those corporations and the
legislative process is controlled by
them so if you were to have what would
what a healthy Republic or democracy
would look like which is government over
here in corporations overheat your you
would have government as supreme in
terms of its power because that would be
the power of the people exerting control
over corporations regulating them
placing limits on what they can do on
how much money they can make what kind
of taxes they have to pay that's the
that exists in theory in United States
but the reality is way different I mean
Google and and and and Amazon and these
companies are way more powerful than
essentially every government both
political parties are holed into that no
one really can control them and they
work hand in hand all the time I see the
government more as an arm of corporate
power then I see corporations as some
separate entity from the state that is
to sub to its superior authority so I
agree completely when I talk about
privacy when I talk about the
surveillance state
I'm absolutely
talking about not just what the NSA and
the CIA are doing but what their
partners in Silicon Valley are doing as
well and there's no way to restore or to
protect civil liberties by only focusing
on public actors and ignoring private
actors because private actors I see is
our the more powerful entity then a
related to point to that that I think is
incredibly important to think about is
with this quarantine which I'm in favor
of and and in I believe is necessary and
rational and I'm doing myself I'm not
out there agitating for an end to lock
downs I do think there have been some
excessive use of police power and in
ways that seem kind of thuggish to me
but by and large I'm in favor of I
believe in the science and the consensus
that this lockdown is necessary I'm at
home and so I'd be a hypocrite if I
thought otherwise but one of the effects
of it is that we're now living our lives
more digitally than ever before we were
already living our lives incredibly
digitally prior to this pandemic you
know working online communicating online
living the major part of our lives even
like intimate private parts of our lives
online that have affected us
psychologically and as a result
depression has been increasing anxiety
disorders addiction suicide there's been
lots of research about the effect of the
internet and it's pervasive effect in
our lives on that but now we're doing
that more than ever so other than the
people with whom we are sheltering in
place essentially all our actions are
now digital are all our interactions
with other people are now digital which
means everything we do in the day goes
through Skype that we're using now or
zoom or Facebook or Instagram or Twitter
which means that we placed more of our
lives than ever before in the hands of
these corporations and as somebody who
has done a lot of work over the years on
trying to create space for digital
private or privacy individual privacy in
the digital age it's very alarming to me
because I do think this kind of training
that we're getting is gonna endure past
this pandemic you know we're hearing
these like proclamations and positive
tones about hey look we're learning that
we can all work remotely we don't really
need to go into work anymore great so
we're all gonna just stay at home now
never go out never look in each other's
eyes and never or
interact interpersonally and we're just
gonna sit in front of our computer
screens and live our lives in this kind
of virtual reality it's certainly the
case that we're doing that now and it's
making individual privacy extremely
elusive yeah it's so important to touch
on that because it's a great way to
divide people and prevent them from you
know engaging with one another
organizing with one another and and
creating groups that fight for things
that we need together but what I want to
just quickly go back to what you said
about this marriage or collaboration
between the government and these massive
tech companies because I see I see that
marriage as part of the problem when it
comes to encouraging people to stay home
so you alluded to this a little bit but
I want to kind of like suss it out a
little more so one of the best ways I
would argue to persuade Americans to
stay home and not go out is to take care
of them and their fundamental needs
while they're isolated self-quarantine
iing doing what they're supposed to do
following the guidelines but I mean even
now in this moment of crisis where tens
of millions of people are filing for
unemployment which means that many of
them have lost their employer provided
health insurance you have a democratic
party that's unwilling to fight for what
people need in order to stay home do you
think that their relationship with these
tech companies plays a role in that
because these tech companies love tax
cuts these tech companies certainly
don't really see a problem with the way
they treat some of their workers right
so is it the tech companies that are
persuading Democrats to kind of shy away
from passing actual stimulus that would
benefit the average American as opposed
to these massive multinational
corporations because I don't think that
all the people who are out there
protesting are necessarily bad people I
think the media likes to really hone in
and focus on
some of the more outrageous people who
are out there you know the people who
unfortunately like to carry the swastika
signs and everything like that but I
don't think that they're representative
of all the people out there protesting
these stay at home orders I think that
there are Americans who are devastated
right now financially because they're
forced to stay home and at the same time
the government hasn't really provided a
substantive relief bill that can take
care of them while they're at home I
couldn't agree more I'll just use Brazil
as an example where as a lot of people
know I'm I live and I'm based in Brazil
I would say Brazil is maybe seven to ten
days maybe two weeks behind the US on
the epidemiological curve so Brazil
which has a slightly smaller population
than in the US but only slightly it's
the sixth most populous country in the
world
he's now arriving at the point where we
have seven hundred eight hundred deaths
per day with the official count and by
all accounts it's much much much greater
because of the lack of tasks and you
know you have you know glittery TV stars
who work for the big networks who go on
and kind of inve morally about the
imperative of staying at home and the
reality is 70 to 80% of the population
at least that lives in extreme density
in favelas can't stay at home because if
they do they're literally going to
starve to death because it's the the
government has provided extremely little
in the way of government has spent and
it's delayed and it's difficult to get
and so staying at home is really a
privilege it's a privilege if you live
in the West if you live in a country
that does offer the kind of sustenance
that's necessary if you've lost your job
or even if you haven't with the economy
slowing down to almost zero to be able
to do it and it's a luxury if you live
in any country and you're you have the
kind of job like we have that allows us
to work from home but there's millions
and millions of people everywhere who
can't work at home who can't stay at
home and then there's a lot of people
who just believe that it's repressive
and tyrannical to force them to do so
and I agree that while there's some
elements of those protests that are
really ugly and driven by
very ignoble impulses there's a lot of
people who are just in good faith saying
our lives are already so difficult and
now you're gonna force us to stay at
home and provide very little support
that we would need to do that in a way
that enables us to have any kind of
quality of our of life we choose to go
out and that should be our choice and I
think you know the thing that you
touched on your question is the most
important thing which is what is the
nature of the Democratic Party and you
know a couple weeks ago Nancy Pelosi did
that interview where she showed off her
massive you know dual industrial
refrigerator each unit of which cost
about thirty thousand dollars it's more
than a lot of people make in a year and
showed off all of her you know like um
fancy ice cream that had been placed
obviously not by her in very orderly
ways she's very proud of this like
designer ice cream and it resonated and
revolted a lot of people not because
people think Nancy Pelosi shouldn't be
able to eat ice cream it's how a lot of
neoliberal pundits tried to frame it was
because it illustrates what the
leadership of the Democratic Party is
they're not people who have anything to
do with the working-class Nancy Pelosi
is and her husband are worth you know a
hundred million dollars she's one of the
richest people and all Congress so is
Dianne Feinstein so is the entire
leadership of the Democratic Party Joe
Biden in Barack Obama and Hillary
Clinton live in these massive
multimillion-dollar estates with weekend
houses and summer homes and they're so
out of touch with the ordinary Americans
so of course it's so easy for them to
stay stay at home we're gonna give you a
few crumbs in the stimulus package and
keep your mouth shut and if you you know
that you're dissatisfied with that if
you go out on the street and protest
then it means there's some kind of like
retrograde Neanderthal or fascist I
think that a lot of this is about the
cleavage between the party that's
supposed to represent the working poor
and the working class on the one hand
and the actual leadership of that party
and the other we see it manifesting over
and over and I don't think it's ever
been as kind of vibrant this this this
this this breach as it has been over the
last few months as this pandemic has
made all of our lives difficult but in
very different ways based on our
position in status
yeah I just want to pick up on that a
little bit because I think you're
completely right about the nature of
them crowded party and I also think that
this is another area where there is and
you know people forgive me for this
terminology but I do think there is like
a silent majority in the working class
in the sense that most poles in the
United States it's like a healthy 70%
and it tracks pretty closely across the
board people do want to shelter in place
because they understand the enormous
danger of this situation and many people
you know certainly speaking from from
New York like you know you know people
who've died or people who've gotten
extremely ill and so you have this
dynamic where you know Congress
collaborates in a bipartisan fashion I
think you know Bernie I want to always
give credit where credit is due
got a couple of decent things in there
but it passes this just monstrosity
that's basically just a giant you know
monopoly consolidation for platform
capitalism then you know that that's
totally screws workers and poor people
across the board and many middle-class
people in fact and then you do have
these protests and and I want to just
balance and run it and run this by by
you as well that there is always the
kind of neoliberal pundit tendency where
it's like okay that's somebody you know
I don't like their clothes I don't like
the cut of their jib they're out here
demanding the reopening that's
unscientific blah blah blah blah blah
and so a couple of weeks ago I was
resisting that I was saying no look we
got to be honest here there is a huge
economic need but then at the same time
we also need to be real obviously that
you know there is a funding source from
de Vos family for these protests in
Michigan and now in the last couple of
weeks there's been a huge change I think
between a mixed group of people some of
whom were like proud boys and that kind
of trash but also people saying like hey
I can't afford truck payments I can't
like I need this stuff the real stuff
and then in the last couple of weeks it
has gotten into this sort of like
menacing gun Confederate flag Nazi thing
and then you want to run in tandem with
that too like it's so fast-moving that
we can't get attached to one particular
narrative
interpretation which is always what
we're hearing whether it be you know
from basically all mainstream partisan
pundits so that's just my riff do you
agree Glenn my monologue well I think I
mean I think there's a lot there to kind
of dissect so first of all an on alluded
to this earlier which is you know one of
the things that concerns me a lot about
the pandemic and the lockdown measures
that as I said earlier I support and by
lockdown I means some kind of
combination of voluntary quarantine with
some degree of government enforcement
not necessarily the maximalist lockdown
models that were seeing is if you think
about it what are the most important
things to have a healthy democracy and a
healthy government in political order is
that the people who wield power economic
power in political power have to fear
the majority of people who don't real
the greatest power you know if you look
at like the 20th century American
oligarchs typically kept ships offs
offshore out of fear that one day there
would be a socialist revolution they
would have to flee which is to fear that
you want them to fear defeat to feel and
you know for that reason they were FDR
was willing to persuade people you know
the oligarchs look this new deal is in
your interests because it'll preserve
the system of capitalism that will let
you continue to be incredibly rich but
you can't start people to death or like
make them have mass misery because if
they do they're gonna revolt and they're
gonna protest and they're gonna overturn
the system on what you depend so even
though we're giving to them more than
you want it's actually beneficial for
you that's that fear that they need to
feel that if they go too far they're
there the order that they want to
preserve will be imperiled now that
we're all stuck at home is that fear
come from
we can't even gather together in a
protest both because we're rationally
afraid of one another and getting near
one another because we're viewing one
another as vectors of a lethal disease
as opposed to fellow citizens with whom
we engage in solidarity and in
comradeship in order to
agitate for political change but we're
also often prevented by the state using
the power of the police of violence from
gathering together where amazon will
fire you if you try and do it if you go
and strike and and and so we've really
become we were already pretty weak in
the face of these institutions we've
become infinitely weaker and so there is
a part of me that wants to see some
defiance on the part of the citizenry
but at the same time I think it's
important to realize that kind of the
neoliberal pundit by which I mean the
kind of sweet spot of the establishment
Democratic and Republican Party
operative spokesperson journalists
always hates protests because Prout like
real protest I don't mean like a nice
little March that has a permit and all
that I mean like a protest movement like
they hated Occupy Wall Street because it
was like dirty encampments to them and
it seemed kind of threatening and it
couldn't really control it they hated
the Tea Party movements which also
started off with anger about the bailout
then quickly got co-op brothers and the
right into being just like this kind of
anti corporate tax standard right-wing
movement but it started off like with
some pretty interesting overlap with
Occupy Wall Street about anger about the
bailout they just always hate protests
they want to dig legitimize protest
because protests are what put fear in
the hearts of the leads and so I think a
big part of the reaction to these
protests that we're seeing the reason
why there's an attempt now to just
bright them all off and demonize them
all using you know the fascist elements
that are part of it is exactly because
there's always this instinct to demonize
any kind of protest movement or any
attempt to bring about political change
outside of the very prescribed and
controlled means that the two parties
jointly approve of so I think there's a
lot of that going on too but I one of
the things I really worry about is that
we're really more fragmented and divided
it just weaker even like physically
weaker because none of us can exercise
we're just kind of sitting at home then
we ever have been before and I really
worry about what the enduring and
ongoing effects of that will be yeah
absolutely
I mean when I looked at the initial
coverage of the protests I couldn't help
but think about the way the media
portrayed Occupy Wall Street protests
right I mean it was not a mistake that
they would focus on specific people who
apparently didn't seem like they knew
what they were protesting about for
instance to kind of paint this picture
of the movement right and so I think you
know people who identify as you know I'm
on the left for instance don't don't
fall for like the mainstream media
narratives in regard to protesters I
think it is important to kind of
disaggregate like the bad faith actors
and you know the members of the Trump
administration who are helping talk
these protests but that doesn't
necessarily mean that that's
representative of all these protesters I
think we need to be able to
differentiate between the two groups I
want to go back to the Civil Liberties
issues because there have been problems
with the Trump administration exploiting
what's happening with this pandemic for
their own political project so for
instance the Department of Justice under
Attorney General William bar contacted
federal judges and indicated that they
would like these judges to hold suspects
indefinitely if the White House would
like that even if they haven't
officially been charged with something
which of course you know will continue
to deteriorate our already lacking
criminal justice system I'm curious if
you've followed that story at all and if
you can comment on it so I haven't
actually heard about that particular
story and if anything that might
underscore the point you're making right
which is that when there's this kind of
intense constant fear and we're all
focusing on this deadly disease power
centers do get away with a lot more than
they otherwise would be able to get away
with I mean that's something that in
ordinary times would never get past my
detectors it's really even the
wheelhouse of what I write and it's just
not something I even heard about I think
I've just noticed you know in other
instances where I've tried to
concerns about what the Trump
administration is doing with regard to
civil liberties or what particular
governors are doing here is all the same
thing there's very look to even want to
hear about that and I understand why
because when you're hearing constantly
about you know people dying hideous
deaths or even stuff praying so severely
even if they recover I mean Michael
alluded to that earlier we all are now
starting to know people personally who
have become infected who have suffered
greatly or who have died it seems like
to most people that it doesn't make a
lot of sense to worry all that muck
about steps that the government is
taking in order to fight off this virus
to keep us alive I know like you know
that that video that you started off
showing that went viral I got attacked
by a lot of people like kind of like
Silicon Valley defenders and
authoritarians is saying that oh look
you know my priorities are so inverted
that I would care about this harmless
robot when in reality all it's trying to
do is this really benign function of
warning people to maintain social
distancing nobody really wants to think
about when they're scared what the
government is doing and the government's
know that that's why they like for fear
levels to be high because sometimes we
just are distracted and we don't even
notice what they're doing but then when
we do notice what they're doing that
fear is such a like potent component of
our psyche law optical make up that it's
very easy to exploit oh we're just doing
it for your own protection so I can't
comment specifically on that particular
initiative but the fact that I can't is
kind of mr. booth yeah yeah yeah you
know I think that's that's exactly the
point and it was a it was an initiative
a couple of weeks ago that bill Barr it
was something that would have had to go
through Congress because it was a DOJ
request but essentially it would in
times of quote-unquote emergency as very
broadly defined basically you know allow
trial without detention I mean it would
be a direct threat of habeas corpus they
they tried you know they put out a
bureaucratic like no this is just
logistical you know
but the consequence is the consequence
of it there was also something in it I
don't know what happens with it of like
potentially being able to charge people
with bioterrorism of things if you
knowingly expose somebody to the
coronavirus so yeah no it's funny
because when you know I've talked about
this before you know prior to 9/11 I
wasn't paying a lot of attention
politics is focusing on my practice I
thought that was more kind of
consequential and impactful the politics
of the 99 you seem kind of small small
scale with like the little wooden ski
scandal but never really interested me
there weren't you know it was the after
the fall of the Berlin Wall in the end
of the Cold War and there wasn't
something there wasn't a lot at stake
and after 9/11 one of the first things
that really regrab my attention when I
you know in terms of politics was this
case of Jose Padilla who was a US
citizen who was in Afghanistan and
returned to the United States and who
was arrested at Chicago International
Airport at O'Hare Airport and the
government the Bush administration
charged him as an enemy combatant and
put him in a military break in North
Carolina with no charges no trial no
lawyers nothing and kept him there for
two and a half years and it shocked me
not just that the US government had done
that but that it received so nobody
cared because it was March of 2002 it
was five months after 9/11 that people
were still petrified the anthrax attack
came after that and that was when I saw
Wow when you put the population in fear
you couldn't do anything right like
that's the line that we thought we
always think will never be crossed that
the government will have the power to
start rounding people up which as I'm
listening to you is what Bill Maher is
suggesting and kind of claim the power
to imprison American citizens without
any due process that's right no habeas
corpus that the government did do that
and not just in theory but in practice
after 9/11 and it received very little
attention that was one of the first
things that propelled me want to started
writing about politics Glenn Greenwald
we're really grateful that you did that
and we appreciate your time
thanks so much congratulations on the
new show guys thanks for having me
we'll take a brief break and if you're
watching hit subscribe we'll be right
back




welcome back to weekend's i'm ana
kasparian and let's talk about some salt
alright let's sprinkle some salt into
this show so look there are very few
things to like about the Trump
administration in fact I would argue
that the only tiny tiny silver lining
that I see is the way Donald Trump
reacts to members of his own party who
are not adequately loyal to what he
wants what he needs and the crimes he
wants to commit one of those people was
Jeff Sessions early on in Trump's you
know tenure and sessions thought you
know I gotta play by the rules I'm gonna
go ahead and recuse myself in this
Russia investigation and that made Trump
furious because he wants to be
surrounded by lackeys he wants to be
surrounded by people who carry out
whatever Trump wants to carry out and so
Trump's been attacking Jeff sessions
over and over again and maybe this makes
me a bad person but I have personally
enjoyed watching these moments in the
Trump presidency because for all of the
strongman tough-guy persona that you
know the right-wing politicians have
it's so easy for Trump to just go in
there and like I don't know for lack of
a better word unmanned them and that's
what you're about to see if you're a bad
person for liking that Ana then I'm an
awful person this next clip if you don't
appreciate how awesome this next clip is
then I I don't I don't know what to tell
you here is Jeff Sessions getting
interviewed by Fox News he was on to say
that you were a disaster what do you say
to that sir well I did what I had to do
I was appointed his attorney general I
was honored to take that office
it was haha I love that
so much and I remember at CPAC a couple
years ago Trump didn't okay I always
tell the story I have to tell it again
both a couple of months prior to this
speech I think this is in 2017 maybe
2018 someone like Bob Woodward had put
out some dumb book about you know like
the gossip inside the White House and
apparently Trump called sessions in
Trump's words as quoted by Woodward a
southerner and Trump got
Twitter I'm sure because he had anxiety
because he's pretty popular in the south
and said I never said that never called
him quote unquote blah blah you know
that southerner never said that
being from the south is great like two
exclamation points it was it was a very
good tweet and a couple months later
he's at CPAC and he's doing impressions
and all of a sudden he just got it just
does his his actual impression of Jeff
Sessions is just amazing I would never
say that
oh but like what I okay so it's it's
entertaining to watch it because by all
intents and purposes Jeff Sessions is a
whole he's a horrible person who make no
mistake carried out the vast majority of
what Donald Trump wanted and and to be
specific one of the most heinous Trump
administration policies was and it
currently is putting innocent people in
cages at the border I mean just horrific
and Jeff Sessions was giddy about being
able to implement that zero tolerance
policy at the border even as people were
fleeing violence in their own countries
looking for refuge here in the United
States these are the asylum seekers
right so that's part of the reason why I
laugh at
the abuse that people like Jeff Sessions
have to deal with in in trying to
maintain their own political power
because that's what this is really about
right these are just lo some politicians
who really don't have any self respect
like they're willing to put self-respect
on the back burner in their quest for
power and what Jeff sessions wants right
now is his Senate seat he wants to win
back his Senate seat which he gave up to
work for Donald Trump and in order to
win that Senate seat unfortunate for him
he needs to appeal to Republican voters
the vast majority of whom love Donald
Trump like Donald Trump's approval
rating among Republican voters is in the
mid 90s it's crazy so Jeff Sessions has
to go on television and deal with those
types of questions deal with that type
of abuse from Donald Trump and not fight
back at all he has to like have that
ridiculous smile on his face and talk
about how like he's you know he was a
great he was a great waterboy for Donald
Trump he did everything Donald Trump
needed him to do like it's incredible I
will say in my own words it's very dim
witted smile there was Minnis you know
slight progress in terms of using the
Justice Department to investigate
policing and racism and police brutality
across the country reversed by sessions
jeff Sessions doesn't get a federal
judge appointment Reid Ischl appointment
in the eighties in the Reagan 1980s this
guy had too much of a racism problem to
get that appointment
he's Trump's Attorney General I also
would say real quick though too that
there's this big you know if somebody
says hey I just genuinely don't think
Trump is funny whatever I you know I
guess there's some subjectivity to
comedy sure although I'm skeptical but
there is a big difference inside usually
it's the difference between liberals on
the left but of people who just are
constantly freaking out about Trump
cannot see when he's actually being his
stare
and people who obviously understand that
Trump is just this absolutely grotesque
ridiculous figure that's actually
partially what makes them so funny is
that all of these people have invested
so much I you know no ideas and him like
bringing back being a real man even as
he is much more analogous to like a
1990s like coffee host like on some like
New York public access show like making
comments about like I saw funny
thing happened to me on the way the
forum and those girls are looking fat
like he just he has way more of that
vibe like he honestly and I my
grandmother is an infinitely better
person than Donald Trump but some of the
inflections are like a one-to-one
between like a Long Island Yenta so
there is something hysterical about that
and my point is is like if you think
that Trump is funny and you get how he's
funny way better chance you could beat
him if running around was just like
freaking out about Trump worked then we
would be cruising to a Hillary Clinton
re-election but we're not so people have
to at the very least again
dispassionately understand his appeal
which is a obviously a really low and
disgusting one but it's also super funny
yeah well and one final point on that
cuz I think you're right you know being
outraged by what he's tweeting has not
yielded any results that we've wanted
but you have to kind of attack the
persona that his supporters find
appealing and and it's like this
tough-guy persona that Donald Trump has
but when you really like take a look at
him objectively Donald Trump is a little
like he does nothing more than cry
all day long about how the media's
unfair to me he's not an alpha male at
all but his voters think he is so I
think that we actually would do better
in messaging how pathetic and weak he is
like laughing at him and pointing out
his weaknesses incessantly I would argue
is more effective than constantly being
outraged by what he's putting on Twitter
because the truth is he wants you to be
outraged by what he's putting out on
Twitter that's worked for him I think
it's been part of his honestly is
electoral strategy so don't give in to
that I think it's much more effective to
just call him out for the incredibly
weak child that he really is and the
fact that he doesn't look at a
presidential at all and it's
embarrassing and sad guys I I just want
to say as always Anna thanks a million
kale thank you thanks to the whole
Jackman team if you're watching this and
you're new here make sure you hit
subscribe there's tons more on the
Jacobin channel we will be back next
Saturday as we always are thanks Anna
thank you



## Keywords:
