---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DYeXbWzI6l0
---

# Video
What Should New Leftists Do? A Guide.
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DYeXbWzI6l0)

## Transcript:
first a word from our sponsor Supremacy
1914 Supremacy 1914 is a free online PVP
strategy game where you can pick a real
country to lead during World War I and
fight up to 500 other players in real
time in games that can take weeks to
complete or days if you're good use a
variety of historically accurate
equipment that you disposal from
different units such as Cavalry to tanks
and planes to build the best army you
can declare war on your neighbors Forge
alliances with your friends and other
players choose your own strategy over
historical maps and engage in Epic
Battles to take over the world my
favorite aspect is the long-term
strategy part which gives it fantastic
depth and replayability don't forget you
can play the same account on both PC and
mobile and without missing out on an
exclusive gift click on the link in the
description to get 155,000 gold and one
month of Premium subscription for free
what are you waiting for the offer is
only available for 30 days so don't lose
time thanks to Supremacy 194 for the
sponsorship it allows me to pay my
editor fairly which is
appreciated hello I get a question very
frequently I'm a young leftist and I'd
like to contribute to the movement
somehow what should I do I'll break my
answer to points as there isn't just one
thing to do of course this is just my
opinion so feel free to add to or
criticize these points in the
comments first and foremost I think you
should pursue an education any education
is fine but in my opinion the more
technical the better some of you may
think that this is strange so let me
explain my reasoning we as leftists are
working towards a socialist turn in our
respective countries as a result of
every Revolution historically there has
been significant brain drain that being
a net loss of Highly Educated technical
Specialists amongst other members of the
intelligencia this creates a need for
what was deemed in the Russian
Revolution as Bourgeois Specialists
those that know the ins and outs of
different complex Machinery organization
and maintenance of data difficult and
timeconsuming engineer work amongst many
other things there will be no shortage
of poets and writers and political
agitators and the like during any Grand
social change there will however be a
shortage of people skilled in management
certain medical professionals many
engineering and other technical
specialities Etc once power is won by
the working class the construction of
socialism begins and that's when the
real Revolution happens the more
leftists that have tangible skills
outside of just political agitation the
better as it would at least somewhat
reduce the burden of specialist scarcity
even if your nation doesn't have a
revolution you could contribute to
movements anywhere in the world by
either lending assistance with your
knowledge or if you're in a particularly
well-paid field at least assisting those
movements monetarily should you so
choose number two read Theory as London
said without revolutionary Theory there
can be no revolutionary movement there
exists a 101 reading lists around but a
safe preliminary reading of the classics
is always a good place to start off I
have a whole bunch of reading lists with
a dedicated video on just the basics you
can view here theory is like an endless
well the more you read the more you'll
need to know but that isn't particularly
a Bad Thing another important aspect of
reading is more intersectional analysis
the colonization literature or
literature covering the pitfalls of
eurocent thinking or other fallacies
like France Fon Edward a and seamin is
crucial literature discussing cyler
colonialism too is very important
especially if you live in a settler
colonial society the US Australia the
settler Colonial entity Etc works like
sakai's white settlers or ilm pape's
work on Palestine for example also be
sure to be up to date with the economic
analysis of the world Marxism is not a
static Theory and is based on the study
of the material conditions of the world
around us Zack cop's work our G's work
on unequal exchange John Smith TKA laon
and samin again there's so many authors
you could at least dip your toes with or
in that sounds a little off there's more
reading recommendations on that here if
you'd like a video covering this topic
to get you the basic idea before delving
in check out my video on imperialism and
unequal exchange
here number three join an organization
if you don't you're a solitary figure
that pretty much can't do anything a
well organized and educated group can
carry out Mass work help with Community
organizing help those in needs such as
the homeless the unemployed Etc while
conducting political work as you can
break down how the system is designed to
not help them etc etc I personally
believe the best example of efficient
and coherent organization especially in
urban centers is that of the Black
Panthers educate yourself and strive to
emulate them there has to be a reading
group or party cell Student Association
or other formal organization within your
area if there aren't anyone might be up
to you to make the first doesn't even
have to be explicitly Marxist per se as
long as the group is critical of
capitalism and its byproducts racism
sexism
Etc keep in mind though this is where
reading theory is important you need to
have a coherent theoretical line within
yourself so you don't just get sucked
into whatever this or that group
believes as much as some people don't
like to hear it much of the time there's
a right answer and many many wrong
answers to a certain question regarding
Theory the necessity of reolution is an
example of such a question as for
details around organization building you
can check out my early video on the
topic air if you're employed organized
within your workplace join a union for
example a good book to introduce
yourself to unions is why you should be
a trade unionist by Len
molski number four arms now I'm not
telling you to lar with an AK what I'm
saying is the knowledge of handling a
weapon and knowing your way around all
its aspects comfortably will never be a
detriment in fact it only has upside if
it never comes in handy at the very
least it's a productive hobby to make
friends in at worst a useful skill
should you need it which I hope you
won't inshallah if you happen to live in
a country where you have abundant access
to ranges organizations based around
their use Etc then you have no excuse
the SRA in the US is an example of such
an organization with a socialist leaning
I believe they have branches all over
the us but don't quote me on that
consult their website otherwise and it
sounds silly but Airsoft is great
exercise is great fun with friends and
can lend at least some parallel just
don't larp though for the love of God if
you Happ to live in a country where it's
impossible to get a hold of anything
well then I guess theoretical knowledge
is better than nothing there is no
shortage of videos on YouTube for that
case I'm una aware of any country that
bans it outright I don't think even the
stricter European countries still have
licensing you can do which although time
consuming and maybe even a little pricey
in places is still nonetheless worth it
in my opinion number five tone down the
Zeal almost everyone especially when
they get into something new tends to be
a little overzealous many times boarding
on obnoxious point being Marxism has
fantastic explanatory power for the
world around us why capitalism is the
way it is also comes with logical and
well reason theory for how we can change
what we perceive to be Injustice a lot
of the time your first reading of these
things really does blow you away and as
a result you become almost fanatical
getting to hourong essay arguments on
the internet at work or at school and
just generally not being a good
representative of what atist should be
until you finally cool down my advice is
to calm down the time you spend arguing
is better spent reading Theory it's
always your business to explain things
in a down toe and calm Manner and as
friendly a way as possible it's not my
responsibility to educate you is a
liberal excuse for self aggrandisement
not the approach of someone genuinely
looking to improve
Society likewise Marxism is a tool but
like every tool can't be used in every
single use case the economic analysis is
solid a lot of the Soviet sociology
rooted in Marxism isn't really as much
be Discerning and read
widely a minor addendum when entering
into Lefty spaces whether online or IRL
you'll quickly encounter some people
calling for left Unity which is the
concept or desire to unite different
factions and ideologies of wider left
towards a single goal at the most or
general cooperation at the very least
although a good sentiment what defines
what Tendencies You should Unite with
are this or that tendency sufficiently
left for Unity is there even such a
thing as being sufficiently left I think
it's clear that certain ideologies
factions or whatever else are definitely
not sufficiently radical enough the
social Democrats are the prime example
these people are not interested in
overthrowing the power of capital they
want capitalism with a human face for
the well-meaning amongst you that think
I'm being too harsh look at our own
history every time any revolutionary
organization attempted to unite with
social Democrats at best got an unsteady
and unreliable Alliance and at worst
outright betrayal which was the most
frequent course of action historically
this is the largest group almost
exclusively Wern countries in my mind of
the quote unquote left we with more
radical beliefs should actively avoid
uniting with unless it's to recruit but
more on not later so yes there is such a
thing as sufficiently left or better to
say radical meaning anti- capitalist
from this category what do we have the
Marxist list and related groups meaning
ma ET
historically as well as the current
largest group of explicit leftists
anarchists and related groups anarchos
syndicalists Etc and the quotquot
Democratic socialists can all these
groups work together well on paper yeah
in reality the issue is a little more
complicated first of all they all have
different goals Marxist lists want a
proletarian State the anarchists want no
State at all and the Democratic
socialists a silly name as if the other
socialists aren't Democratic well I
don't really know what they want some of
them are baby MLS who are still too
scared of the stigma around the Soviet
Union some some are baby anarchists that
haven't found kotkin yet and some are
sad European style social Democrats not
interested in getting rid of capitalism
at all all of them have definitely not
done enough reading regardless I'll
leave it up to you as to whether these
are just modern social Democrats or
people with the deeper conviction of
socialism my conversations with these
people never went beyond oh yeah I want
Healthcare like in Denmark or something
they just strike me as liberals that
idolize European welfare states educate
them I'd say what does that leave us
with Marxist lists and anarchists the
only two groups of any significant
number that are genuinely anti capital
list honestly people from these groups
calling for left Unity why we don't
agree on the basic principles we don't
agree on strategy we don't agree on
tactics there is very little in fact
that binds us together if one of you
wants to advance a program of conquering
state power in order to wield this for
socialist construction while the other
wants to Simply abolish the state in one
stroke where can there be any
reconciliation it's impossible to merge
the two positions so already already is
starting off on Shaky Ground moving into
questions of authority hierarchy
economic organization etc etc The Divide
only gets wider does that mean that the
varying trends of Life shouldn't ever
work together no of course not a united
front is useful in some cases and other
cases maybe temporarily you share the
same goals so you can work together
however a long-term strategy of unity
amongst opposing Trends within the left
is nothing but well postering Unity for
Unity sake another thing that I see is
that under the name of left Unity what
certain groups really want is do not be
criticized I don't mean to be called
mean names or whatever I'm talking about
criticism in the Marxist sense I have
immense respect for anarchists and I
admire their conf to their cause
especially historically at the end of
the day I chose Marxism lism over
anarchism for a reason those reasons are
rational and based on what I perceived
to be the incoherency of anarchist
political strategy that is not being me
nor is an attempt to silence anarchists
this is simply Marxist criticism that I
can explain in much much more detail
sometime in the future I in fact invite
the same from our Anarchist comrades
criticism is what drove socialism
forward and allowed it to develop other
than this joining with all the differing
and wild trends of the left will result
only in a weak tapestry held together by
very FL limsy threads it's all cute and
pleasant when there's no real movement
in your country of course then you can
work together but when the class
struggle intensifies things change that
being said what can we unite on at the
present time those things aren't
intrinsically connected to our
fundamental political positions very
simple raising funds to release
protesters or activists from jail boo
drives for the homeless suppressing
fascism research and agitation work
Gathering Intel and exposing corrupt or
reactionary elements in the community
for example whose local representative
is being law Beed by what organization
and how that's a great one organizing
against capitalism and educating people
all are very valid things that not only
can we unite on but we should unite on
use your imagination there's way more
that could be done that will have a
positive impact on the overall movement
what we need isn't so much political
Unity between different leftist
strengths but class unity in class
Consciousness within the working class
Supremacy 1914 is a free online PVP
strategy game set up during World War I
choose your own strategy engage in Epic
battels and take over the world within a
dynamic and fun test of your abilities
don't forget you get an exclusive gift
of 15,000 gold and one month or premium
subscription for free when you click on
the link in the description the offer is
only available for 30 days so don't lose
time click the link in the description
choose your country and fight your way
to
Victory that's all for this time if you
enjoy what I do then please consider
supporting me on patreon it really does
help I'd like to thank my patrons so
thank you too Nitro dubs Kenny Thomas
Roberts Nicholas Owen Baker T wood Dr
Lemon man Lumix Charlie and Eric
ultimate Turan Daniel athel the generic
guy Santiago Pereira rain sander corvis
David free confuse m Mariana movich
Robie Richardson and M kadro thanks for

watching


## Keywords:
