---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o9s8p5CQ44o
---

# Video
What Frantz Fanon Can Teach Us About Gaza
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o9s8p5CQ44o)

## Transcript:
France fenon is without a doubt the most
significant theorist and practitioner of
anti-colonial
struggles I think his thought is still
relevant and we can use it to view
what's happening in

Gaza first a little bit about France
fenon so fenon was originally from the
island of martinic which was a French
colony and eventually went to France and
studied
Psychiatry which was then kind of
similar as
psychoanalysis from there he goes to
Algeria and practices in the native Ward
where he treats the Arab patients now
this is just a brief sumission of his
rich life
but while in Algeria he also publishes
his first book which is called black
skin white
masks then his second book a dying
colonialism and then before his death in
1961 The Wretched of the earth now all
of these three books were published in
French and then translated into English
while in Algeria fenon also joins FN the
Algerian Liberation movement which was
actively engaged in armed struggle
against the French Algeria by then had
been a French Colony for almost 200
years so fen's
ideas stem from his knowledge of
psychoanalysis and a study of literal
colonialism in Algeria but what makes
his thought richer is that he's also a
psychoanalyst so he looks at the
psychological impact of material causes
of
colonialism now if you look at his first
book black skin white masks It's a
Wonderful an eloquent book the main idea
that I draw from it is that for and on
as he looks at the colonized Arab
subjects he
realizes for the Arabs but also for the
African colonized subjects that
resolution of erus complex is almost
impossible for a colonized
subject what is the resolution of edus
complex
right simply stated if we use Freud and
then a little bit of laan the resolution
of arus complex is that a child in the
process of growing up acknowledges and
accepts what is called the law of the
father right the literal father but also
the metaphoric father and submits to it
with a hope that eventually he will also
become a father figure after arpus
complex is
resolved that is when you become sort of
a fully realized and functional
subject but what fenon says is that
within a colonial
situation the resolution of arus complex
is acknowledging and accepting the
sociopolitical order installed by the
white
master and because of that it is almost
impossible for the colonized people to
resolve olve the edus complex and move
on right so the colonial
experience makes it almost impossible
for people to resolve their edus complex
that's the Insight that we get from
black skin white
masks now dying colonialism and wretched
of the Earth are more radical books
because that's by the time because by
the time fenon writes those he's already
actively engaged in the Algerian
struggle for freedom and I think the
insights provided both in the black skin
white masks and The Wretched of the
Earth are crucial in understanding what
has historically happened to Palestinian
people what has happened in Gaza and
what is happening in Gaza right now in
the beginning of The Wretched of the
Earth fenon First explains the nature of
colonial
experience in his view colonialism was
established through acts of
violence hence to make themselves free
the colonized must
actively overthrow their colonizers
that for him is a psychological
necessity for the colonized to
claim themselves as fully human an ouer
of the colonizer physical removal of the
colonizer whether you agree with that or
not that is what he theorizes through
his study of psychoanalysis and
Trauma then in the beginning of the book
he also
describes the physical manifestation of
colonialism right so the colonial space
the urban spaces created by the
colonizers which are always separate
from the native population and the
kasba the town
overcrowded right
underdeveloped part of the Native
town and within that he then theorizes
the role of desire and
oppression that if you have your dream
word right in front of you where the
foreigners who came in and took your
land live and you live in poverty and in
crowded conditions with not many rights
that place becomes your ultimate place
of Desire that is what the native
desires to have that to take away the
people who live there and supplant them
that becomes a psychological imperative
in colonial
situations the more the oppression
increases the desire to assert yourself
and the
desire to fight the oppression also
constantly increases in terms of
psychology
there is no possibility that by
oppressing the people more and by
forcing them into a corner you will make
them submit for fenon that does not
happen if the
native is still alive and wants to be
fully human resistance is the only way
through which that Humanity will be
expressed until according to fenon the
world is turned upside down until the
least becomes the first so until the
sociopolitical order established by
colonialism is
reversed that is classic fenon so we got
about two three insights from two of
fenon work the first one that resolution
of arpus complex is impossible for the
colonized subject because
what he is expected to submit to the law
of the father is the law of the
colonizer right which he cannot submit
to unconsciously or consciously two the
division of space between the colonizer
dream word and the nightmarish word left
to the
colonized makes that space a place of
desire and since the colonizer
colonized relationship was built on
violence it can only be undone by
undoing the colonial project itself
these are the insights that we get from
fenon I'm obviously oversimplifying him
right so I encourage you to read his
books but also I also have quite a few
videos on fenon and I'll post the links
in the description please go ahead and
watch them and those might also help you
understand fenon work better now let us
talk about Gaza its past and what's
happening in the present and then look
at it from the insights we just
discussed as provided by France fenon
Gaza is the world's largest
prison 2 1 million people or a little
more live in this congested Urban space
they are enclosed within a
wall an almost impenetrable wall and
there are only two entrances to that
Enclave one from the Israeli side and
one from the Egyptian side and both are
heavily controlled nothing goes in in or
comes out without the control of
Israelis on one side and Egyptians on
the other side within this confined
space people live their lives build
their lives within the
chances that they can have there and of
course there is a
hierarchy and people are governed by
Hamas whether Hamas is elected or not
that's besides the
but this is the largest prison camp in
the world by any definition of prisons
and camps people of Gaza the
Palestinians are also
aware that Israelis have place them in
that
position that's the literal fact of
history they also have a very strong
nationalistic ideology where they think
ofs
as Palestinians who were evicted and
displaced from their homes which were
mostly in the current day state of
Israel and then coupled with that is the
looking across or imagining across the
border the beautiful places of the state
of
Israel now these people cannot submit to
this order order and resolve their adus
complex because that would mean giving
up their own voice their own identity
and succumbing to what the Israelis
would like them to be silent people who
accept what's happening to them as their
fate so that's one impossibility
psychologically speaking and fenon has
taught us
that the other aspect of it is since
their condition is established through
Brute Force the ultimate Way of
negotiating that is through
equally stronger resistant Force hence
the emergence of
resistance isn't just that is
accomplished through
indoctrination it is the psychological
precondition and becomes the
psychological imprint of living under
occupation encircled in the walls so the
very thing that the israelies have
created to control the
Palestinians is the very thing that
creates the psyche of
resistance that idea also comes to us
from fenon and then beyond
that reducing Gaza stript to to the
largest urban slum in the world and then
just oppose it against what's available
to Israeli citizens who live on the land
that these Palestinian subjects think
was once theirs add that ingredient to
it and you have a perfect recipe for
permanent struggle for
freedom and that freedom ultimately in
its successive forms would
imagine outing the oppressor not just
negotiating with the oppressor undoing
the physical oppressive conditions that
exist now take it a step further right
now Gaza is pretty much all destroyed
people are
starving hospitals are destroyed schools
are no more right now the Israelis logic
is that we're going to destroy Hamas and
we don't care in the process how many
people die the hard right Israelis
basically say there are no children in
Gaza because everyone is a Hamas
sympathizer so their strategy long-term
or shortterm is vanquishing the
Palestinian Spirit through brute force
and Collective
punishment now I just discussed fenon
with you
what do you think are the chances that
that strategy will create humble Meek
and Silent People if you look at it from
a phenian
lens you can already tell that whatever
is left in Gaza whosoever survives this
new
invasion they are not going to become
Meek and submissive people
that would be defying the basic dictates
of a traumatized psyche if they want to
heal themselves if they want to claim
their full Humanity they will have to
prove to themselves and to everyone else
in the world that they are resilient and
they will fight back and that they will
not succumb to oppression that is The
Logical psychological outcome of
Oppression and that is what is is likely
to happen so let us look at the
similarities between the history of Gaza
which I just briefly talked about and
what's happening in Gaza and what fenon
was writing about when fenon was writing
the wratchet of the earth FN and the
algerians were in open revolt against
French colonialism there was a brutal
war going on and the French were brutal
in their methods of putting down or
trying to put down the Rebellion right
now in
Gaza what is happening is actually far
more brutal than what the french
did when fenon writes about the Arabs in
Algeria what he writes about is that how
the more brutal as more brutal the
French tactic becomes the stronger the
resistance becomes and the reason it is
becoming stronger is that there is no
other way for the algerians to claim
their full Humanity other than
constantly fighting against the colonial
system because that's the only way they
can truly Express their full humanity
and the only way they can replace the
colonial order in that context is
through
resistance Kaza right now has almost
been obliterated right people are
starving more than 33,000 people have
been killed the entire infrastructure is
destroyed more than 7,000 of those
killed are children children are dying
of curable infectious diseases people
people are eating
foods that were supposed to be fed to
the animals these are The Facts of Life
Now what do the Israelis expect from
these actions right if you look at the
right-wing people in Israel including
some cabinet ministers their idea is
that through these acts of collective
punishment they will be able to break
the will of the people of Gaza and make
them see that is Israel is a powerful
force in the world and they should not
so to speak mess with it if we take our
phenian insights about how human psyche
works and how it tries to heal itself
and claim its Humanity that's tactics
has not worked for 76 years and it is
absolutely not going to
work so in order for us to understand
what going on and to find a way
forward reading fenon carefully and then
applying those
insights within the current context of
Gaza is crucial and important so to sum
up I started with phenon one Insight
from black skin white masks which was
that it is impossible for the colonized
people to resolve their edus complex
under colonialism
because they cannot submit to the law of
the father because that law of the
father is mandated by the colonial power
that was the case in Algeria and that is
the case in case of Palestinians both in
West Bank and
Gaza then we took some insights from The
Wretched of the earth especially about
the colonial space in comparison to the
crowded colonized space becoming a place
of desire and
the colonial imposition being a violent
act or a series of violent acts the only
way of claiming full Humanity within
that context is by actually overthrowing
the oppressive system of colonialism
that was true within the Algerian
context and is true within Gaza and West
Bank and Palestinian and Israeli
context what we can take from this is
that fenon isn't just a theorist he's
also an active participant in a freedom
struggle that if we read him carefully
me you right common people in this world
maybe we'll understand the Dynamics of
this
Beyond these are Palestinians and these
are israelies and they somehow
absolutely do not like each other but
fenon enables us to look at it from a
psychological and experiential point of
view and maybe if the US policy makers
read him and looked at Gaza with that
perspective and if the Israelis did so
maybe they will change the way they view
Palestine they will change the way they
treat
Palestinians and maybe that changed then
in perceptions and actions
will eventually help us work toward
peace for Palestinians and for
Israelis that's all that I wanted to say
today now if you have a few moments
please take a look at the playlist on
Palestine that that will come up see if
you can watch some of those videos and
send me your comments if you haven't
subscribed please subscribe to the
channel and as always I'm deeply
grateful to you thank you so much stay
safe and from me to you as always peace
and love


## Keywords:
