---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1vZUk113oAw
---

# Video
WHAT POLITICS TAUGHT ME | Yanis Varoufakis â€” Podcast Episode 1
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1vZUk113oAw)

## Transcript:
you're listening to Eye of the storm
podcast and if we accept that logic of
the Lesser evil we're doomed we're
doomed asum as a species when when
there's a sense of emptiness and lack
that that vacuum if you like get gets
filled by the toxic values of our
culture and you end up chasing things
which are never going to make you happy
but induce a series of kind of addictive
behaviors you could hear the fear in
their voice and they would say uh I'm
sorry sir but I cannot help you if you
need to look into this further call this
number we're in a situation where the
the short-term incentives of individual
actors whether we're talking about
corporations or or nation states are
misaligned with the interests of
everyone in the longer term that is why
some of us are socialists who do not
believe that democracy is possible
unless it penetrates the workplace
unless we have one share one person one
vote and
believe me they hate that they do not
want you to be
free this podcast accompanies the
acclaimed new docu series in the eye of
the storm which follows the remarkable
journey of Maverick Economist politician
and whistleblower Janis
veracis both the series and podcast
explore the connections between power
democracy capitalism and the deepening
crisis of civilization
the series is available to watch now
details in the
description enjoy the
conversation so look to begin maybe I'll
say a few words about why I asked you to
do this podcast what the whole idea
behind it is and and we can jump right
in
um so for
me you know I've been working on a do
doumentary series on you and that series
covers your political
Journey uh how you've been grappling
with some of the biggest challenges of
our time from the crises of capitalism
democracy
inequality climate change the rise of
fascism and this series by the time we
this episode goes out will be available
to the
public um so the idea of the podcast is
it's really an excuse to explore more
deeply some of the themes in the series
series uh by putting you together with
some incredible guests but I thought it
made sense that for our first episode uh
we would just have a conversation
between you and me um marking pretty
much a five-year
anniversary uh of of this project I mean
I think I got in touch with you about
five years ago um so my first question
to you is do you remember what your
initial thoughts were when I approached
you with the idea of this project
because cuz I imagine that having a
stranger set out an idea to come and
tell your story um that might that must
sort of invoke some feelings of
hesitancy or caution um do you remember
how you felt at the
time I was um I was deeply honored to
begin with that um you know you you
should choose me of all people to D
dedicate so much time and energy um I
was worried that
um because of the historical accident of
2015 and the fact that was I was
propelled to a limelight which uh had
nothing to do with my substance and
everything to do with the historical
Moment In Time an accident of history
that maybe all that attention uh was um
misplaced uh and what did I have to add
to um you know to to to to the whole
gamut of insights that uh you could have
uh gathered from elsewhere uh it was
only when we started talking in front of
your camera at the uh megaron building
where you hire that um dark room in
which we cooped up for so long it was
only there that um I I I started opening
up and uh it was your questions taking
me back a long time and making
connections which I would not have
thought of making myself that I felt
well or maybe there is a story here to
be
told yeah I remember I remember those
those days in the dark room in in Athens
um it was quite intense we did 3 to four
hours a day for I think six consecutive
days how was that experience on your
side you know when when you're waging a
war because that's what we are involved
in you know the powers that be
remarkably powerful forces
that are usurping people's lives and uh
uh you know condemning our collectivity
to a substandard way of life uh when
you're waging this war from a position
of weakness in particular um it's all
systems go and it's you always live for
the
moment you have no Privileges and
luxuries in terms of uh
reflection reflection becomes a luxury
that you can't
afford uh so you know being cooped up in
that darkened room with you um taking
our time and answering questions about
uh a long uh you know disappeared past
and bringing them up to
date informing the past with uh insights
from the from the present and vice versa
I was great so I really enjoy that and I
owe you a great debt of gratitude not so
much for the outcome for the uh the
documentary that of course as well but
primarily for giving me the time and the
space in order to reflect in that way
and I have to tell you you probably
don't know that I'm sure you don't know
that that it has changed uh the way I
have been thinking about
myself um so to to give you a concrete
example after I finished my book on
techn
federalism um our conversations made me
think of uh um figures that are no
longer with us with me um starting of
course with my my father but also my
mother and my
grandmothers one of which I never met
but which has had a profound influence
on me through my
parents so
the outcome of that is that I'm writing
a book which is uh autobiographical
without me being in it that's you know
but and I don't know what whether that
book will be any good whether I will
manage to finish it whe whether I will
manage to convince any decent publisher
to to publish it but it doesn't matter
because working on it is a great source
of joy for me and insight so I have you
to think or to blame for it
well look that that's an honor and it's
a lovely thing to hear uh thank you I I
I cannot wait to read to read the the
end product
um but I wanted to go back
to I mean you've been a leading
Economist and political analyst now for
a few
decades and I'm just curious how what's
your approach to making sense of the
world this
everchanging um complex reality
okay the way I approach um the
world is a combination of uh the
dialectical the
inquisitive and the
holistic
so on the one hand it needs to be
holistic so any attempt to understand
the world through
economics economic theory is bound to
crash onto the shoulds of
reality um so holistic is the
approach uh the dialectical in the sense
that um everything is pregnant with his
opposite as Hegel taught KL Marx and as
you know my parents taught me that
um as you are
confronting the powers of
evil uh there is good in that
confrontation and also there is evil in
the forces that supposedly are pursuing
the good that's why most revolutions
have ended up eating up their children
and every uh freedom fighter has had a
CH a chance has had a a tendency to
become authoritarian at some point in
the peace uh so the holistic and the
dialectical go hand in hand but
primarily it's
curiosity inquisitiveness you know not
to take things for granted so you know
keep analyzing
never lose the power of synthesis that's
the holistic part and always beware of
black and
white tales about progress about change
uh because there is a lot of white in
the black and a lot of black in the
white and and specifically on
economics I know that the traditional
education in economics is very narrow
it's going to be neoclassical economics
presented as simp L economics but that
leaves so much out how much of your
economic understanding is a result of
your own self-education and
investigation and how much came from
your formal
education very little came from my
formal
education and I think that that is the
case for most people formal education is
important because primarily it gives you
the space and the time to think about
things so the greatest um benefit of
going to University for instance in my
case was not what I was taught by my my
lectures thought that was a minuscule
contribution to my own understanding it
was a fact that you know when you at
University especially back then when
most students didn't have a full-time
job effectively they were granted by
Society by their municipalities uh the
local counties and so on uh enough
income to be able to uh spend some time
thinking and discussing and reading why
so that was what my formal education
gave me uh but it was my engagement with
activists with artists with uh poets
with uh uh with trade unionists uh with
people on the ground which uh allowed me
in that space that formal education
created shielding me from uh the
vagaries of the labor market the fact
that I didn't have to work 10 hours a
day therefore I had time to think it was
that that space um inhabited by uh all
those uh stimuli from different people
from different walks of life that
totality was what contributed most to
the way I understood the
world in 2014 you made this transition
from longtime academic to politician or
you began the
transition
um I'm curious to know if the experience
of working in politics for the last how
many years it's been now I suppose a
decade um has that changed your
political understanding your outlook um
your view of democracy and and power and
that sort of
thing this may sound uh Preposterous but
um I don't think I learned anything from
my experience in the corridors of power
in the rooms in which decisions are
being made
um I learned a lot about
backstabbing I learned a lot about how
dismal politics is uh I always knew that
it was but it's one thing to know it's
quite another to experience it uh I
learned a lot about treachery amongst
your
comrades uh I was impressed by the
extent of the inanity of the technocrats
that supposedly are good as technocrats
uh technically speaking they were not
they were very Third Rate I always knew
they were not spectacularly good but I
wasn't expecting them to be that bad
technically you know by their own the
terms of their own profession so people
from the international monetary fund or
the European Central Bank uh if they
were students of mine at University
would probably have failed them they
would particularly chronic um I always
suspected that but it was good confirm
it and a bit disheartening to find out
how bad they were
um but the ugliness of politics
especially within your own Circle the
circle of
comrades because Ro I did explain this
to you during the documentary but I'll
say this once more you know when I was
doing battle with the late now late Wan
sh or with Mario dragy um it was um hard
it was extremely tiring but it was also
uplifting because you know there was the
enemy the enemy of your people who were
trying to exact the pound of Flesh from
the uh people who could least afford to
give it but it was a an honorable
fight it was within our own cirle back
in Athens Max comrades you know the fix
column Jeremy Corbin in Britain knows
this very well his problem was not the
Tores the people his own shadow cabinet
were the ones wielding the knives
similarly here with us um
I KN I always knew that that was the
case but I didn't expect it to be that
that Fierce and also
after I left the government and I left
the governing
party I was astounded by uh the site of
people that I considered to be of my elk
to be you know just as I was uh
committed to the cause how quickly they
forgot about the cause and they were
lured by the semblance of power to stay
within the government and you know look
at me as a scans as somebody who was
strange for having quit um and even in
our own party Mar 25 and de5 I have to
say uh the fact that people whom I had
assumed could only be there because they
were ideologues ended up proving that um
The Lure of power is exceptionally
strong or the The Lure of something
resembling power which isn't even power
which is even worse because you know if
Judas uh betrays you for 30 pieces of
silver well it might as well be so if
the silver is genuine not fake but when
they do it for fake silver that is more
surprising and this
happening yeah well I mean that's one of
that's one of the things that makes your
story so fascinating is it is very rare
to find people who don't succumb to the
kind of gravitational force of of power
and manage you know at those key moments
to hold on to their integrity and and to
say no as you did to to the
troa
um you have told me uh personally and
also in the series some fascinating
stories about the personal cost of of
standing up to powerful
interests um so you know we can leave
the stories in the series for people to
go and find out about but there was one
which you told me after we finished
filming um and I wanted to ask if you'd
mind talking about it here and it was to
do with your support for Julian Assange
and how that ended
up costing you literally
financially um I think it's a
fascinating story and something that I
think a lot of people would be surprised
by what happened was uh access to our
bank accounts mine my wife's uh uh was
suspended without us being told you know
it's you know you go to the ATM and uh
um the card U is spot out and you don't
even get an explanation and when I was
calling the bank uh initially you know
the help line the uh the person on the
other side of the phone line would be
extremely po right oh Mr vakis you are
one of our of our valued customers and
uh uh don't worry we'll sort out the
problem in a jiffy that kind of thing
very very pleasant and very positive
until suddenly their voice changed
clearly they saw something on their
screen and they went absolutely cold you
could hear the fear in their voice and
they would say uh I'm sorry sir but I
cannot help you if you need to look into
this further call this number so I
jolted down the number and I called the
number and there was a a telephone
service an answering service and it said
for the reasons of National Security
your account has been suspended
indefinitely and you will not be told
why and you have no access to um
appeal that that's
it that's it and then you think right
they know no bounds to the exercise of
illegitimate power they don't even give
you a chance to find out why or what can
you do they just cut you out and this is
a statement of power on their behalf
that you know we can do whatever we want
with you uh and it's very easy to
terrorize people you know um and it's
very easy to lure them into the other
side of the to the other Camp to the
other side of the war of the battle uh
the trick is to be privileged enough
because I consider myself to be very
privileged in the sense that I did
happen to have some money um completely
accidentally um in another bank account
that tied us over for a few weeks until
we could see what happened and also the
great privilege of not wanting anything
this sounds almost Buddhist or or stoic
but um after I left the government I
didn't want another government position
I didn't care about being a member of
parliament I didn't care about being
anything I mean I was happy doing
nothing doing nothing you know being in
at home and writing a book even if I
didn't have a computer I mean as long as
I had access to pen and paper I was
happy um so if then they can't get you
if if you don't depend for your living
on uh being subserviant on Towing the
line uh then you're free and believe me
they hate that they do not want you to
be
free I think that's I think that's a
really important point about
why going from the level of individual
activists all the way to people who make
it into the political realm as
politicians
advisers that a lot of people do start
out with a a sincere desire to improve
things to to change the world but I
think too much emphas has put on the
externals initially I think there's a
dialectic between external change and
internal change and that unless we are
sort
of trying to
cultivate a healing a development a a
sort of a sense of wisdom internally
we're going to be very susceptible to
all the traps and trappings and
temptations laid out for us externally
absolutely but then again it's important
not to
pontificate uh not to lecture people who
are not privileged like I am I'm middle
class I am privileged I don't need to
work for Del Liu or for Uber or you know
I I don't have kids that depend on me uh
and and on on being a guest man for them
to go to
university um if I did then maybe I
would have been far less bra than I am
so I am the last to uh criticize those
who um you know are less free than I am
because freedom is not I mean it it part
partly it
is within us ourselves within our own
Spirit but a large part of it has to do
with
Alternatives What alternative do I have
to that which is being offered to me by
the mafia
by the state by the NSA by the CIA by my
political party by whomever uh if the
alternative is starvation or my children
not going to school then I have no
alternative then I am a slave but that's
why I'm saying I'm privileged I had
Alternatives that's true but there are
many many privileged people who who
nevertheless do succumb to various forms
of Temptation um the promise of of high
status position
wealth the illusion of power as you say
it's often not real power um so you're
absolutely right to highlight the
material Dimension but that's never
sufficient is it there's there's always
something else needed
um do you feel that your father's
example is part of the reason that you
were able to to walk away and take what
is quite an unusual path from Power my
mother and my they both of them you
see when I was growing up in the middle
of the fascist
dictatorship and then the 1970s the late
1970s just before I came to England in
1978 our family was uh not well off my
parents were struggling financially they
were not poppers they were lower middle
class managing to make an meet and then
at some point after
1974 uh
making a decent life decent living
nothing fancy but enough to to to live
reasonably
well that family while they were on the
verge between a comfortable and an
uncomfortable material life they managed
to extract a huge amount of joy out of
life I had a fantastic childhood uh and
as a teenager we all I remember is
you know fun and games and good feelings
in very difficult times even when you
know my father was in prison or my
mother's brother was in prison and on
death row to be
precise I remember the laughter in the
household I remember that uh um you know
we we were better off in every way not
materially but we were better off than
any of my school Chums because I so
happen to have gone to a very expensive
private school uh even though my parents
could never afford that just because the
owner of the school back then um set
aside several places for children of uh
people who had been uh imprisoned or
persecuted by the dictatorship so I
happen to be amongst Ultra rich
kids and they were not having a better
life than I was actually I was having a
far better life than they were that's a
huge boost to one's uh confidence and a
and a major contributor to having a
philosophical approach to life that you
know money can't buy you love when when
lenon and the Beatles were singing that
it made perfect sense to me because I
could see my my my my school friends who
were you know Rich Kids exuded a
loneliness which I didn't
feel um I mean I can relate to that
myself I've been very fortunate to have
a very happy family life um and I think
it makes all the difference when when
there's a sense of emptiness and lack
you you end up that that vacuum if you
like get gets filled by the toxic values
of our culture and you end up chasing
things which are never going to make you
happy but induce a series of kind of
addictive behaviors for power for wealth
for for attention all kinds of things
um I wanted to just take a step back
and and ask I mean you've made this
transition now into the world of
politics this is pretty much what it has
been for the last decade um almost
exclusively what you've been working on
um endless Zoom meetings campaigns
elections
do you ever regret making that choice in
some sense would it have been easier for
you more pleasurable for you to live the
life of an academic traveling talking
about your ideas studying is that
something that you found difficult to
leave there is no doubt that I miss the
anonymity that I'm I have wasted a large
chunk of my energy and time fending off
uh um SE seriously toxic and poisonous
attacks that I could easily have lived
without but you know Ro again it's a
it's it's a philosophical stance I never
regret what I've done um I regret
particular choices not but not that
large choice because you see I mean from
2003 20 2005
onwards uh I
started participating in the public
discourse about what I had considered
back then to be the forthcoming tsunami
of the financial crisis and um I
wouldn't have done that if I hadn't felt
that a new 1929 was approaching I
started feeling that in 2003 up until
then I was perfectly happy to be
completely cooped up in my own office of
the University whichever University I
happen to be at uh to work on esoteric
models like you know playing chess for
instance you know that kind of game
theoretical stuff which is great fun but
social
irrelevant and historically irrelevant
uh so from 2003 onwards I began opening
my mouth commenting on the world around
me and getting angry with um the innan
reaction of the elites to what I
consider to be an inevitable massive
crisis of capitalism that would destroy
the the life of millions if not
billions so once you start getting into
that Groove and you start speaking out
as to know what shouldn't have shouldn't
have been done and what should have
happened instead and then at some point
you get an
opportunity to do it yourself you know a
politician comes to you and says okay I
agree with what you're saying come and
do it well I would never have forgiven
myself had I said no to that opportunity
I knew that the chances of success were
minuscule I knew that I would be ejected
by A system that would never accept
somebody like me trying to
tamper with it to tamper with its
capacity to extract huge rents and
incomes and wealth from the many but I
would I would be damned if I didn't give
it a short and I'm glad I gave it a
short and I'm you know I'm glad that I
nav navigated reasonably well
the um the Minefield of uh traps and you
know offers of threats and so on that
could have caused me to uh to steer in a
manner that I would have regretted I
didn't steer in a manner that I
regretted in the end uh I resigned uh at
the right moment that was my great great
great you know concern would I resign at
the right moment neither too early nor
too late neither to you know lay down my
arms before the chance of victory had
disappeared
nor essentially to become compromised uh
with my weapons but not using them on
behalf of those that I raised them uh in
favor of initially so no no
regrets good good to hear
um I mean from my perspective it I don't
know if you would frame it this way but
it
seems that sometimes have a choice
between sort of pleasure and
meaning

and it can be tempting to choose a path
of pleasure and that it's more enjoyable
in the short term it's it's it's easier
you you're attacked less um you're
praised for what you're doing but at
some at some level you know that it
lacks meaning there's less meaning to
what you're doing and the path of
meaning um affords a deeper sense of
well-being than than pleasure ever
well you see I think that the ancient
Athenians had it right it's all about
udonia the Greek word for a successful
life which to them was the only only way
you can achieve
pleasure the idea of
pleasure comes in different depths and
scales and Scopes so you can you you you
you you scratch your head when it's
itchy and you feel it
a kind of pleasure but then of course
there are much much deeper pleasures and
you know the Ancients the ancient
Athenians believe that um the deepest
pleasure
the most powerful pleasure that you can
have is combined with virtue with you
know with doing something that is good
Aristotle have this idea uh that um
money making can never be
pleasurable that you may be drawn to it
you may you know enjoy making more money
but it will never fulfill you whereas
building a boat that's the example he
gave building a boat is pleasurable
because it has a Telos where Telos means
an end so you know when the boat has
been built because you can see it
floating you can just jump in it and you
know go for a a little sale uh and
anything that has a teos that's where
the word teleology comes
from a beginning a mid an end creative
Endeavor is by nature virtues and if you
do
it if you build that boat then the
pleasure you will get will be much much
greater than the pleasure of Simply of
sailing in a boat it's because you built
it and because you saw it all the way to
its sters to its end and that is a
pleasure that is much deeper than
scratching your head or simp you know
you know winning 10,000 quid in a
lottery uh
so I I think that's what your question
is all about deep pleasure that can only
come from virtues deeds and virtuous
Deeds must be creative deeds and making
money cannot be a creative deed since
money is only a means to an end not an
end in itself and if it comes an end in
itself it destroys your soul simply to
make it
right and when you
multiply these incentive these perverse
sort of narrow selfish
incentives um for monetary gain for fame
for status across a population of 8
billion
people we end up with the existential
crisis that we're facing now as a
civilization and one question I've I've
been grappling with myself recently is
how is it that we are collectively
creating a future that none of us really
want um we are heading very likely to
some kind of collapse of civilization
and possibly
worse how do you make sense of this
situation this this sort of imperative
to
self-termination um without anyone at
the rudder without anyone seeming to be
in control
this
is the great game isn't it the
combination of self
realization uh and uh a process where
the Deeds of each one of us towards
their
self-realization is in the interests of
the common
good now Adam Smith made a name for
himself as the great propagandist of
capitalism of free
markets by
putting forward the Preposterous and
fascinating and very heretical view back
then that we don't have to worry about
the common good as long as we have moral
sentiments in a society of Bakers
Brewers and
butchers uh where we all bound together
by a sense of
community competition between the
different butchers and Brewers and
Bakers each one of them seeking their
own self-interest to serve their own
self-interest that will automatically
create a good Society the common good
well maybe it would have done if we all
lived in small villages in the southwest
of England and we were all Bakers
Brewers and butchers uh but that's not
capitalism capitalism is the Exon
mobiles and the Googles and the you know
Ford Motor companies and uh the Adam Co
and Facebook and meta and all that and
when they are competing with one another
it's not
competition uh on price or on quality it
is rivalry between what I say in my
latest book uh techn feudal Lords it's
the Middle Ages made far far worse by
digital techn Technologies which have a
capacity to liberate us but when they
are deployed in the context of this new
form of feudalism techn feudalism they
become our greatest foes the greatest
detractors of our Liberty and our
democracy and then uh you have neither
self-realization nor the serving of the
common good and that's where we are
today so even the liberals who
supposedly care about the liberal
individual and Adam Smith should um join
forces with us to um reclaim our means
of production our means of distribution
our means of
communication our means of determining
our behavior from the very very few who
have property rights over
them is a useful frame for trying to
understand this trying to understand why
we're in this
bind game theory in the sense that we're
in a situation where the the short-term
incentive s of individual actors whether
we're talking about corporations or or
nation states are misaligned with the
interests of everyone in the longer term
and it's this challenge of trying to
break out of that trap so we're able to
cooperate to advance everyone's
interests because the the the the
rivalrous game of short-term interests
for maximal personal gain or gain of a
corporation or nation is simply heading
to
self-destruction um does that make sense
to you and and if so how do we break out
of the rivalis game to The Cooperative
Dynamic all
theories are useful as long as we use
them in order to
explore those theories
limits so Game Theory like every other
Theory does throw some very interesting
insights the prison's dilemma is what
you just described
so this the story I won't narrate it in
terms of prisoners because it's not much
fun you go to a
concert um and you have a choice each
one of us has a choice it's an open air
concert on grass we can all sit down and
watch in Comfort the band
playing uh and the question is do you
stand or do you sit if everybody's sat
everybody would have a far more
comfortable gig and they would have the
same view because we're all sitting down
but the problem here and the Gundrum is
that if everybody else is sitting
sitting down you're better off standing
up because you have a much better view
than everybody else but then if that is
the case for you then it is the case for
everyone else so everybody stands and
everybody gets tired and nobody has gets
a better view so this is the the clash
between the private and the collective
interest maximizing your uh utility you
know doing that which is best for
you in that situation
uh ends up with everybody being worse
off including yourself now the moment
you've said that you realize that this
pertains as you implied in your question
role to our environmental catastrophe
because it would be fantastic would it
not be if everybody else cut down their
emissions to zero and we didn't have to
and you and I didn't have to because if
you and I you know continue to emit
without worrying about uh climate
catastrophe but everybody else around
the world looked after the planet then
it would matter you and me emitting you
know having a a 1960s Cadillac emitting
huge quantities of carbon dioxide and
other noxious gases in the atmosphere
wouldn't matter one Cadillac wouldn't
make a difference the world would be
saved so uh my dominant strategy if you
think in those terms in those economic
neoclassical terms my dominant strategy
is to Adit because yes I would prefer a
world in which nobody adits to one where
everybody emits but I have a dominant
strategy that is a strategy which I am
best off following independently of what
others do so if everybody else admits
why shouldn't I admit the world is
anyway excuse my
French uh and if everybody else doesn't
admit well I might as well admit because
it doesn't make any difference but if
everybody thinks that way we all Adit
and the world is doomed that is an
interesting inside from Game Theory
okay but that's the limit of if you try
to uh use Game Theory uh as a source of
insights uh concerning what needs to be
done then you will end up with nothing
because no theoretical construct is a
substitute for democracy for debating
for the conversation that would lead to
Collective action because the only way
we can all decide in the end not to
drive around Cadillacs and instead to
abstain from a meeting is if we have a
conversation that creates the political
institutions that will put an end to
emissions so that's it so the only way
out of these sort of multi-agent traps
if you like is collective action is to
find a way to act together for the
benefit of all and Central to that is
the sense making process that we're able
to make sense of reality
um in a way that allows us to
communicate with each other of course
we're not going to have identical views
but if as we're seeing now if we're
incredibly
polarized to the point where we can
barely communicate about reality it
makes it impossible to act
collectively um what are your thoughts
about the inreasing polarization of of
our
polies um we see it kind of EXT in an
extreme form in the US but I think it's
happening
everywhere the extreme polarization that
we observe all around us is a result of
the extreme concentration of capital and
property rights over means of production
distribution and
communication the those who own the
machines uh this immense power of
capital whether it's the capital or
Cloud Capital um have every reason to
use the power of that Capital especially
the power of the communication machinary
in order
to polarize
us you know the policies they really
care about are very unpopular and the
best way of ensuring that they are
imposed is by disorienting us so that we
turn against one another so you know
they're very happy to see workingclass
people in the north of England
um you
know taking it out on migration you know
one part of the working class against
another part of the working class that's
how racism was instituted in the South
the deep south of the United States the
Jim Crow uh legislation was all about
splitting the working class between
whites and blacks so that the L Lords
and the capitalist could stay in
power so you know we talked about before
the previous question about the
conversation I talked about the high
important conversation well that
conversation is not cannot take place in
our parliaments in congress not even in
our Municipal councils it should take
place there but it's really it's
necessary that it does but it's so
sufficient if it doesn't take place
inside the
workplace if we do not democratize the
world of work where things are being
made services are being produced and
where power grows because it doesn't
grow in Parliament power grows inside
the Machinery of economic activity so
that is why some of us are socialists
who do not believe that democracy is
possible unless it penetrates the
workplace unless we have one share one
person one
vote unless every Factory every office
every Supermarket becomes a mini
Parliament in which people co-own the
means of production and as co-owners
have the conversation amongst themselves
as to what they want to produce and how
they want to distribute the income that
is being
produced and in and in moving towards
that
world what can we as progressives do to
avoid deepening the polarization that
exists because I I think we need to be
self-critical and I think there are
there are friends and habits on the left
which contribute to this trap of of
deepening polarization in in the forms
of activism that we engage in so how do
you think about communication and
healing the very deep riffs which are
there because we need to bring we need
to bring many people along with us if
we're going to achieve anything
meaningful well certainly we we need to
be self critical to beware the lure of
power uh within us the little Nazi that
lives in every one of us as Phim used to
say but at the very same time we need to
work very hard against the logic of the
Lesser
evil today there is a process in Britain
for instance a political process which
will most likely lead to a Vic Victory
by K st's labor
party and those of us
who you know start ring ringing alarm
bells that K starm is is is a Tory
dressed in red or pale red uh we're
being told that hang on M he's better
than
sunk even this labor part is better than
the Tory party well this Theory logic of
the Lesser evil
is the best friend of those who use
normally use the Tories in order to
perpetuate
exploitation

deprivation
Devastation because effectively what it
says is uh there is no
alternative the tyranny of capital of
cloud capital of the oligarchy is a
given uh and uh we need to back the
Agents of that tyranny which promis us a
little bit more money for the National
Health Service you know a little bit
more money for the Hungary a few more
shelters for uh the um the homeless you
know a little less brutality with which
to treat the migrants and the refugees
and if we accept that logic of the
Lesser evil we're doomed we're doomed as
a as a species
and and what would you say to people who
I think in despair in despair at the
failures of the liberal so-called
liberal Center
ground have looked for Solutions and
looked for affirmation and a sense of
belonging on the far right um the people
who have looked at Donald Trump in the
US um perhaps farage in the UK and
across Europe we have many
examples I would say to them look learn
from
history because this is not new musolini
and
Hitler
addressed the devastated the middle
class the working class the betti Bui
and said to them trust me give me
authoritarian powers
or give your consent to my authoritarian
powers and I'm going to look after you
and inde did they looked after them you
know molini introduced the first public
pension in Europe and Hitler eliminated
unemployment within a year and a half of
uh acquiring his authoritarian Nazi
powers and what happened then they were
treated like
Vermin they were the working class the
middle class were effectively
surrendered to the great big capitalist
that supposedly the fascist were against
um in order to maximize The Profit rates
of those capitalists and also created
the circumstances for a World War in
which they
died Donald
Trump well he's been tried and tested he
was President of the United States for
four
years he appealed to the blue color
workers of the Midwest and said to them
things that resonated with them that
have been treated with contempt by the
Democrats and by the liberal
establishment for many many many years
or decades he was right in this he told
them the truth and he asked them to give
him a a vote so that he could drain the
swamp and what was the swamp wall
Street's influence on on Washington and
what was the first thing that Trump did
when he moved into the White House he
appointed the CE of Goldman Sachs to be
the Finance Minister the treasury
secretary this is what they do they
appeal to the um anger of the
devastated they cultivated it they make
them even more
angry they promise to use and to honor
this anger against the elites against
the ruling class if only their vote
voted in and the moment they voted
in they use the misanthropy which is
part and parcel of this anger let's say
the feelings against the foreigners the
refugees the Muslims the Jews
whatever in order to cover up on the
fact that in economic terms what they
are doing is they when once these
right-wing populists are in power they
are
again following the agenda of the
oligarchy of the very oligarchy that
they said they would drain of the swamp
the swamp rules okay even better with
Trump in the white in the white house so
in other
words I would if I addressed people in
the red wall or you know anyone who is
uh uh inclined to vote for Trump or for
brexit or for uh Leen or for urban I
would
say you know don't be a fool don't be
fooled by these people these people are
making you even
angrier at other devastated people like
the migrants in order to harness your
anger to get into power to keep the same
people who are responsible for your
Devastation more powerful than
ever it's a tough goal but that's the
call we have to respond
to yeah there are so many other things
I'd love to ask you but I I know you
have to go shortly um this is only the
first episode in a series so we're going
to cover many more
topics um but for today thank you very
much it it it's been it's been a
pleasure again to talk to you and I hope
our future conversations can contribute
to the sense making Commons in a
responsible and helpful way rul what can
I say thank you once more
if you enjoyed this podcast please like
And subscribe to our Channel


## Keywords:
