---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jypi7NDZ9Eo
---

# Video
What Systems Thinkers Can Learn From Historical Synthesis | Dr. Michael Bonner | ST-ON 20231113
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jypi7NDZ9Eo)

## Transcript:
welcome everyone to system thinking
Ontario another Edition uh today's topic
is what systems thinkers can learn from
historical synthesis and actually this
is almost totally organized by zad um
with uh Dr Michael Bonner um so I'm
going to be moderating um and but uh
I'll help zad do most of the driving in
terms of uh interviewing um to get you
started off we we're starting off with a
unusual map for system thinking Ontario
looking back at Iran in uh
620 um so um let's do um introductions
first we'll go around with the usual and
um the question of the day is how much
history have you done so zad if you
could take us off the screen share and
uh we'll go around and have everybody
say
hi Kelly say
hi I gotta get a mute first hi I'm Kelly
okamura uh I am uh I have a background
of 25 years in design intelligence so
I'm coming to uh David's systems changes
learning uh Circle uh from a change
perspective thanks
sangho hi everyone my name is sangho sir
I'm a postto at the University of trotto
uh and I'm coming from a computer
science background and uh yeah really
excited to join and learn from the
session thanks
Penelope oh penel you're on
mute hi I'm penny koville I'm a techno
clutz and my background is in
educational technology and specifically
um educational cybernet gentics and I've
worked corporate
and in universities and now I'm doing my
own um learning games
business thanks
Don who's also on
mute there we go yeah I've done a lot of
things but history was one of my first
loves uh I studied at into University
when um I became disgusted with the
approach they were taking at the time
which was to try to reduce it to
political economy which of course is BS
because it's it's far far more
complicated and messy than that and and
anyway I like the romance of History to
be quite blunt about it which was my
first uh first way of getting into it
and they had no use for that and I still
am engaged in I I I read a fair bit of
History well not as much as I think I do
but
um I look at things from a historical
context let's put it that
way thanks
Donia uh hello my name is nellia um I am
um a lawyer like I was trained as a
lawyer but um now I do uh a lot of
systems thinking and foresight work for
the CRA uh I also uh did the SFI program
at okad a few years ago and David was
one of my professors for um for systems
um uh and uh I also have a new puppy
that I just can't put down because he's
so cute gonna if I turn off my screen
it's because like he's getting into
something silly so okay hi uh I'm my
name is Ellie nellia invited me to come
and uh sit sit tonight with you all um
I'm an Industrial Engineer by training
and uh I'm presently um uh in financial
institutions in banking doing
transformation work in risk management
and financial crimes welcome thanks for
joining Elena um hi um I'm Alena Leonard
um my background is um mainly systems
and cybernetics I actually haven't
studied history in a formal sense since
I was an undergrad and we read Herodotus
and thus cities and plutar
ah and then I've also um mainly read
other things like Joseph tainer um that
delve into
history uh anyway I'm curious to see
what's
next thanks
Kimberly yes hello so Kimberly Peter
here I also come from the SFI program um
so some connections there um I'm
currently working in uh digital design
leading the research practice in a
financial services company um my focus
is largely um sort of peripheral to that
but also outside in foresight and
systems I read as much history as I can
could read more um really excited about
tonight thanks Griff hey everybody good
evening I'm Griff uh I'm part of system
sneaking Ontario for a number of years
uh and I guess as far as like history
with experience
or experience with history uh you could
say that I I have an interest in the use
and abuse of history for life for
purposes of Life uh and yeah that's
about all so thanks very much
thanks uh
matteline oh
madlin m's on mute
okay my camera is not
on okay we'll go to Crystal Crystal you
want to say hi um sorry my my video is
not on I'm actually on my commute
leaving work I'm an occupational
therapist working in mental health I'm
also part of the SFI program so hearing
a lot of the similar thoughts and
conversations have been very fascinating
for me I took some gr courses in my
undergrad um and kind of have been just
mostly in conversation with people from
then on and nice to be in this
St thanks
Salman hi everyone uh Salan here uh bit
of a history buff and a bit of a systems
buff so the combination might work
tonight it just might for a change all
right great thanks uh I'm gonna turn
over to zad you should introduce
yourself first zad awesome thank you
everyone uh my name is Zod KH uh I came
to systems through the SFI program at
okad University so my instructor was
Peter Jones and David ining was a guest
lecturer so I've been involved since
systems thinking ontarios uh for a while
for a number of years and um since that
time of joining I recall like having
exposure to systems and being into uh
from a history perspective really seeing
a lot of overlap and uh interest between
the historiography and systems but I
never really had a way to explore that
so that's what this session is this
session is an in maybe different session
uh perhaps the first in a series of what
can systems thinkers learn from blank
and the first one that I'm here to kind
of um enthusiastically welcome is Dr
Michael Bonner who's um I I'll I'll read
a bit of his uh background and his just
a brief bio so Dr Michael Bonner is a
Canadian political consultant and
historian of Iran he says that very
modestly I'm going to add historian of a
grand sweeping number of fields but uh
Iran is the specialty um he studied
classical and Oriental languages in
undergrad he took a master's degree and
doctorate in Iranian history from the
University of Oxford uh he has advised
members of cabinet in both Federal and
provincial Canadian governments and now
works at the firm Atlas strategic
adviser he lives in Port per Perry with
his family so welcome Dr Bonner super
excited to have you here and as you can
hear from the the bio that I just read
not only uh are you a historian but
you've also worked in actually like
applied fields or seemingly in in
advisory positions in in the government
and so kind of off the off the cuff like
what it like yeah how do you come to
History Dr boner and how does some of
the work that you do kind of overlap
with your with your field of
study well first thanks very much for
having me it's it's an honor and um it's
good to be you know talking to such
an obviously intelligent and critical
group of people um which you don't tend
to find in politics of course but um the
uh the way I got into history is
probably going to sound um surprising
because I grew up thinking that history
was nonsense and I mean that literally
my my earliest opinion was that unless
you could dig something out of the
ground um and you could actually go and
verify something
that by looking at material culture or
something like that that there was no
there was absolutely no reason
whatsoever to read anything that anybody
had ever written down and that might
sound I don't know like sort of
philistine is or something like that but
the fact is that um so much of
contemporary um historical debates um
could probably
be uh more easily settled with with a
sort of older technique of archaeology
than a sort of endless um debate about
the meanings of of texts uh and I
remember there was one strange debate
that cropped up when I was I think you
know a teenager some I forget exactly
how old I was but the question was you
know is Napoleon buried in Napoleon's
tomb well I mean I my reaction was why
don't you go check I mean like you're
you know you could solve this pretty
easily uh but instead you know some
historian wrote a 600 page book on it
which I thought you
know what is this added to anything you
anyway also the what it what it what it
calls to mind to me in retrospect is the
idea of sort of formulating the right
kind of
question right when historians go and
when they go about their business trying
to write about the past or sort of uh
you
know develop an opinion on on a
historical Source or something you you
you really have to try very hard to sort
of form the question that you want to uh
answer and unless you get it unless you
do a good job of that you won't really
um uh you know it won't really succeed
so questions like you know did
Shakespeare write Shakespeare's plays or
is Napoleon buried in Napoleon those I
don't think those are particularly good
questions for for a historian to be um
looking you know looking into however I
did come round uh obviously but uh it
was only when I
encountered um much more uh rigorous
methods of historical Source
criticism that um
you I mean many of you might reject this
idea but it certainly comes close to
something that you might call scientific
history that um you you you have to put
much more effort into determining
whether you can actually trust your
Source than uh I think a lot of
um you know a lot of people might
imagine having been exposed to that it
felt like a kind of natural Al um
transformation that I realized well
actually this isn't you know this isn't
quite as silly as I thought but the uh
you know comparison of his comparison of
histor uh written sources uh
archaeology um you know even in some
cases oral tradition and so forth that
you know sort of looking at
um looking at uh events or moments in
history sort of from multiple
perspectives and seeing how they uh
inform or contradict one another you
know that I I found that extraordinarily
interesting but I came to it um
ultimately through the study of language
I was originally um a classicist which
is sort of kind of remote from Iranian
history but
Iran Iran was the sort of the Soviet
Union to the to the um you know to to
the uh Roman Empire's NATO uh of the
sort of antique world and eventually I
formed the view that if I wanted to know
something about uh Rome or the you know
the world more generally at the time
that um it would be important to look at
the other great superpower of the day
and
um certainly when I
was an undergrad that was not
a part of any kind of classical
curriculum uh that that I had ever heard
of um someone mentioned Herodotus and
and fuses obviously the Persian Empire
uh of the day sort of is constantly
looming in the background of of those
two works even in FUSD is who barely
mentions it but certainly there um but
that was the case throughout all of
Antiquity right up to the to the very
end and we have the date uh 620 here
um round about that time you would have
the
Iranian the Persian Empire at its
absolute maximum height the Roman Empire
is sort of getting pinned back almost to
the to the to the environs of the
capital at
Constantinople this was definitely you
know a formative experience in in the
history of Eurasia formative moment and
um I I just found fascinating couldn't
resist it so that was the field that I
went
into so Dr boner you just said something
that I think clicked in for a lot of us
which is formulating the right kind of
questions that's really interesting from
a historical perspective mapping that to
a systems thinker perspective can you
maybe draw that out a little bit in
terms of the actual um overview of the
methods I know touched on like material
culture or oral tradition but if you
were to extend that idea of asking the
right questions how does that relate to
when you're working with multiple World
Views if that is the case in a
historical perspective where they have
different values or belief systems or
different histories and different
contexts um I I asked that just so you
can touch on this is that from a systems
thinking perspective or we're trying to
always sweep those in to try to form a
more comprehensive view knowing that we
may not we may not get there how do you
relate to that concept uh from a
historical perspective or in the field
of historical synthesis specifically
yeah well that's that's absolutely
critical the first most basic question
you have to ask is can you trust your
Source or even I mean even maybe before
you get there the basic question would
be do I have a
source um and then it would be you know
can I trust it how do I know I can trust
it well you know what were the
motivations of the author does it have
one author does it have several
did somebody revise it at some point is
it written with some particular bias in
mind that might reflect something going
on in the author's day which he wants to
sort of reflect onto a um a moment in
the past because he thinks that it's
relevant or something like that
um there are also questions you know
when you have contradictions as you
impli between multiple sources which
unfortunately in my field is not common
but because we have so few but when you
do have contradictions among sources you
know you will often be forced to choose
among them um the absolute worst thing
you could do would be to try to blend
them all together into some new
narrative or some new event um because
what you have done is you've just
created yet another source so uh
you will often be forced to
choose
um which you which is the narrative
you're going to follow or which is the
um piece of evidence that uh you think
is actually trustworthy and in in some
cases for example
FUSD um FUSD can very rarely be tested
fuses doesn't have any contemporaries
writing um to offer some sort of
different view um we have to take his
word for it when he says that he you
know he he tells us that he he invented
speeches he he invented sort of dramatic
uh monologues and and and speeches but
we have to take his word for it when he
says that they were that the words he
uses are definitely those that would
have been appropriate at the time well I
mean you as I say you you have to take
his you have to take his word for it um
as for uh Herodotus Herodotus creates
the appearance certainly from our
perspective of being much less
trustworthy he writes about ant you know
large ants that dig gold out of the
ground or um you know strange um
uh people who find sort of like gigantic
skeletons of of archaic heroes in the
ground you know all sorts of mysterious
and and and seemingly miraculous things
but when you actually probe beneath the
surface uh it often turns out that he's
actually onto something for instance
there's he talks about uh AR he talks
about the two arabas there's sort of one
Arabia near what we would call
Mesopotamia and another much further
south and that he he says that in in the
further Arabia there are trees that have
incense you know in sense bearing trees
and and and winged snakes well winged
snakes I mean what is he talking about
well it turns out that there
was um a rock formation along the old um
Assyrian road that goes south when you
pass by it there are all sorts of
fossils of uh of ancient sea animals
that look like snakes and that have the
sort of some sort of geological
formation that looks like wings there
and this is a this is a uh uh a kind of
uh point along the road that was
mentioned long before Herodotus in
ancient Assyrian uh
inscriptions so he's caught out he he's
captured some sort of rumor or report of
a very important
Landmark that is
somewhere far south along the way to a
place like Yemen or something so you
know uh we wouldn't know that unless we
had been able to look at um multiple
sources from you know widely Divergent
um uh traditions and and separated by
you know at least a
thousand uh years in in some cases but
there's often that kernel of Truth there
so when you test um Herodotus you find
it um and that that is I think that may
give you a little taste as to what sort
of you know what historiography is like
you will have to find some way of
subjecting the uh the source to the most
rigorous kind of criticism that uh that
you can that you can throw at it or
conversely if it's if you really can't
do that there's only one source there's
nothing else commenting on it there's
nothing contemporary there nothing else
you can bring to bear on it you're going
to have to find some way of making the
case why um why you should trust it um
that's obviously going to be hard in
many cases but when you do have sources
from say different Traditions that have
not influenced one another that are
commenting or commenting on or
describing the same events and when they
agree I think
I you know I think most people would
would agree that you you've hit upon the
truth of course that's extremely
rare and then there are also instances
where you find that the source has
omitted something which you know either
from some other tradition you know must
have occurred or say that other
tradition is absent but something very
obvious that Common Sense would suggest
must have been going on at the time or
would have attended the event that uh is
being described when that sort of
absence occurs and there's something
that you have to infer to uh make it
make sense you know that's another thing
and of course that that's the kind
of circumstance in which the most uh uh
the most aggressive and and acrimonious
historical debates will
occur so some you know some character
might fall out of a narrative or uh some
historian's explanation for what is
going on in the say the aftermath of a
particular battle or something just kind
of you know something appears to have
fallen out or the uh the um death toll
of some particular disaster is
abnormally high or seems too low or that
sort of thing you will have to bring to
bear some kind of infer inference to to
try to explain it and of course you know
that sounds like it could it could be
fodder for a great deal of fancy or or
just sort of sheer historical
imagination but unfortunately that uh
often has to happen I'm trying to think
of a good example um but
um something like um
in
uh in Persian
history perso Roman history there are
often sort of very violent clashes that
are described in both sources which then
suddenly end in an
Armistice and then it's only
when it's only when you when when you
look in some
other um Source often often in Chinese
dynastic uh histories that you find out
that there's been some nomadic
migration Westward right onto the border
of Iran and the uh the two parties have
to sue for peace to deal with Nomads you
know that's one where the the um if you
didn't have that Source you would have
to infer something like that or in infer
some kind of preoccupation or disaster
in some in some other uh in some other
part of the world but
um this I I would say
that you're ex as a historian you're
trying to exercise both the critical the
critical faculty in the same way that a
lawyer or
a or a maybe a doctor or pathologist
would look at the evidence before him as
well as the sort of creative more
inferential one where you're trying to
supply uh reasons or or infer uh causes
uh where you don't have the evidence so
I think that's really helpful in that
example of where you have commissioned
information and where where multiple
sources are lyed you have some form of
census that you can tap into and where
they don't align or when they both have
omissions at the same time you might
have to make inferences and I wanted to
extend perhaps that thought so that was
a really excellent overview of some of
these critical questions you're asking
in exercising those questionss I wonder
if as systems thinkers uh even in the
quote on the abstract here we reference
Russ aov between the difference between
analytical thinking kind of zooming in
unpacking things breaking them apart and
synthetic thinking kind of going up to
the context and piecing them together
and you you made an illusion to that
when you said that if the sources run
dry you might look to the Chinese Empire
and figure out that there was an
Armistice between the Romans and the
Persians and I wonder is there that
tension off that play between analytical
and synthetic thinking in the histor in
a historian's practice and how do you
operate between these two modes is there
a sequence is there a method and you
know but what type of um what does that
illuminate when you have to operate
between those two modes if at
all excellent question I would say those
two modes are absolutely essential um
there's
no I can't claim to have invented this
phrase but I don't know who did um
there's no synthesis without analysis
and no analysis without
synthesis um unfortunately the kind of
synthetic history the sort of big
history that that looks at long and deep
Trends sort of playing out on on a on a
large scale across time and across sort
of
multiple
um what you would call sort of multiple
historical Fields uh that's that's
that's been out of favor for some time
especially in academic history although
I think I I think it's coming back with
with um books like Peter Frank capens
the Silk Roads I strongly recommend it I
think that that kind of history is is is
making it
comeback um but for a very long time you
know from the mid 20th century onward
people historians would be preoccupied
with what I call a kind of point ISM
where you know some medieval
historian obsessively analyzes you know
a kind of like a sort of list of
Provisions found in a monastery or
something or like a receipt or a some
kind of very tiny detail in a in a
manuscript or something and uh you know
churns out article after article about
these things and there's sort of no
sense of how it fits into anything or
like what the context is or why this
would be significant or what bearing it
has on on on really anything
um conversely you might also find
historians who isolate one particular
artifact in found in some part of the
world and you know construct this sort
of vast and largely
imaginary story connected with its
significance or
why it would be so important you know an
an example of that kind of thing would
be something like the people who think
that the Stirrup you know the invention
of the Stirrup was just sort of the
explanation for absolutely every piece
of every event that that happened
afterward or the the uh the invention of
the heavy plow explains you know all of
human history afterwards or something
that you can sort of find you can sort
of wander into error in in both um
directions
um however uh in in my in my field I I
always wanted
to um I I wanted to show the history of
late antique Iran in
its proper context in in the sort of
scene of world history at the
time um that's often interpreted to mean
something like you're trying to I don't
know like it's just much the way I the
way I imply it it's much more than than
trying
to I don't know add add diversity or or
um diff sort of different viewpoints on
Iran that's not the point the point is
to show how it fits into what you might
call a system Iran has a GE graphy
obviously it has um a language that
certainly evolved over time it was a
also a religion that was rooted there
more than one in fact it's sort of
sandwiched between the Eurasian step and
the um sort of uh desert Frontage of
Arabia and the sort of
Mesopotamian river systems and then
onward into Rome and then further east
you have China so obviously bearing in
mind that Communications were much
slower and the world
was individual parts of the world were
much more isolated than they are now
there still must have been some way that
these
uh different uh Empires and and sort of
different geographical and linguistic
areas uh fitted together and I thought
that if I could somehow explain that or
put Iran in its proper context that that
that would be some kind of
contribution
so the way I thought of sort of telling
that story was that Iran is sort
of all Iranian foreign policy and its
sort of vision of the world the
religious uh vision of zoroastrian and
soth it is shaped
by the interaction with the world of the
step the desert and and uh sort of
grasslands that extend practically
unimpeded for you know miles and miles
and miles above them all between
basically what is now hungry and all the
way to the borders of Korea um and this
is of course where various sort of
nomadic
uh hordes and and Empires and what have
you had their uh base and Iran was
practically open if you look at that map
sort of the sort of Northeast area Iran
sort of opens up into the into the step
um
with practically no um borders no no
natural borders and of course much the
same happens in the uh
Caucasus where whereby on the sort of
the the the Caucasus obviously has very
high mountains in it but it along the
coasts you know it's basically wide open
so um this explains this explains why so
many resources were de devoted to trying
to fortify those areas why Iran was
constantly trying to get Roman
assistance to sort of keep the nomadic
world at Bay it also explains why uh
various
um
uh why conflict in in in the in the west
with Rome sort of follows the the rhythm
of of uh hostility from the step that
whenever the step lands were quiet that
that was the invitation to renew Warfare
in that in the west and so forth so I
think I I still think that that's a good
that's a good way of sort of
approaching um the history in question
uh and this naturally led into
investigating things like well what do
the Chinese sources have to say China
kept an eye on the step two um what uh
you know and and in fact arguably a
better eye than anybody else but the the
question was you know how does this have
any bearing can I bring these uh foreign
sources to bear on the history of Iran
so that's that's what I attempt to do in
in the book that was uh just on the
screen there um but the question you may
have in your minds is well why why was
this approach necessary the fundamental
problem with uh late antique Iranian
history is that there are basically no
sources no no indigenous sources and
that's not because people didn't write
things down they certainly did um it's
not because they didn't take an interest
in history they they certainly did but
when it comes to
the Viewpoint you know
things government documents or the
Viewpoint of the court and the
government uh the bureaucracy and so
forth we don't we don't have anything
what we do have are
later recyclings and
translations of some sort of demestic
indigenous tradition of
Iranian history that that then sort of
resurface in
Arabic hundreds of years later clearly a
lot of the indigenous zoroastrian that
was their religion a lot of the
indigenous zoroastrian stuff has been
removed from it um probably because it
wasn't well understood and and probably
struck people as either irrelevant or
weird or or
both
and there's heavy emphasis empis on
conflict with with
Rome not really very much about what's
going on in the
East
and again the fundamental question is is
any of this
trustworthy you have these Muslim
historians many of them
are I don't know what you might call
them they're not exactly historians as
we would understand it they're more like
literatur like someone like dinari or
tabary who is just up here tabary is
kind of like a a
jurist he he he's Mo he's famous for his
long history um it's a gigantic work he
he supposedly he supposedly wrote 40
folios a day which is is really an
extraordinary feat folios a huge piece
of paper and he apparently followed some
kind of strange very special diet so he
could write and eat at the same time he
didn't have to leave his desk but um he
wasn't a historian he was more like a
jurist or a
theologian and um apart from the history
that he wrote he's most famous for a
long sort of exegesis on the Quran it's
called the
tap um he uh as I say though his work
has embedded within it a a a sizable
treatment of pre-islamic Iran but that
isn't his main theme he's including it
incidentally because it's part of this
sort of part of the sort of genealogy of
the Contemporary caliphate and he's
writing in the
uh uh in the 10th Century um looking
back you know hundreds of years in the
past so again can any of this be trusted
because without it we don't really
have a narrative of cenan history uh
late antique Iranian history what we
have are sort of scattered references
the occasional prolonged narrative
mostly about Warfare from Roman history
and we have some Armenian historians who
are contemporary with the events in
question who
are entirely preoccupied with their own
sort of local Affairs except in so far
as Iranian
um except in so far as the Iranian
government sort of impinged on it so
that also naturally brings in things
like Warfare and uh ecclesiastical
Affairs so when you look at all these
sort of
pieces
uh separately they don't naturally
coales into what you might call a system
they don't naturally form a coherent
Narrative of of
anything it it's more like it's more
like a rough chronological outline with
these sort of points of events mostly
battles mostly uh
conflict uh in in in the west
and no explanation as to how they're all
how they should be United or made sense
of um various uh Persian kings seem to
just sort of wake up in the morning and
go off to battle against Rome and we
don't know why um
so and of course there's nothing about
any kind of bureaucratic system or
finances or anything anything like
anything that you would expect of of say
a government document or some sort of
indigenous uh indigenous uh record that
that would suggest self-image or policy
or something that so a historian has to
try to make sense of it all and sort of
somehow uh massage or torture it into a
in into something coherent um I thought
that was an interesting challenge um you
can if you if you read uh if you read my
book you can judge for yourself whether
you think it's successful or not but um
it certainly wasn't uh it certainly
wasn't uh easy but I thought that the
framework of this sort of step the sort
of relationship between sort of Iran
Rome and the step I thought that that
was the the sort of
General um approach that would help to
make the most uh help to make the most
sense of it yeah no thank you Dr Bonner
that was a really helpful explanation
about the the methods that you use uh
your field uses um as specifically
related to your field of study of about
the historical context of Iran in the
cenan Empire um one of the things as
systems thinkers that so one of the
challenges that this then brings up as
systems thinkers I think everyone on
this call faces that issue is one of
boundary definition we always run into
that Beast of a question about where to
draw and Define the boundary of a system
and so you were kind of explaining about
when you look at uh ancient Iran for
example there's geography there's
language religion culture political
fluence Etc um at a certain point even
in your own writings I'm sure you have
to have there has to be a judgment call
that I suppose is made about the type of
boundary a historian is defining or
working within and I just wonder for the
sake of the audience when we think about
systems boundaries and you think about
historical boundaries how does that come
about how do you draw the best or worst
I don't know boundary around what you're
trying to articulate in your work that's
a good question because there would also
be say
chronological boundaries and so forth
you know when does
the you know does the cenan Empire end
when its last
king uh flees the capital or when he
dies or when
his grandson you know like when when
that's an interesting question because
his grandson uh his his family um fled
after he was killed
and they ended up in China in uh in um
changan and and persisted for quite some
time there maintaining a sort of court
in Exon so how how sesanian was that
does is that part of cian History you
know that's I think that's a an
interesting question and of course
geographically and culturally when you
look at Western Iran and Eastern Rome
you have a very IL defined border that
runs north south and you have the the
same exactly the same groups of people
on either side of it um the same
religion same
language
languages and you know who whose border
is where and
um to what extent uh are the people on
either side of it either Iranian or
Roman you know and and of course that
kind of question would contribute to um
reasons for conflict also so it's that
that sort of question of boundaries is
definitely worth
um considering
um in my more recent
book the question
of what because it was it's meant to be
about
civilization and I wanted to have
something to say about Western
Civilization mostly but not
exclusively and I noticed that this is a
topic that's Now sort of come back with
a vengeance I keep hearing this phrase
civilization all the time which I didn't
before
um so what was Western Civilization
well does it have some kind of
chronological or
Geographic
um border to it well I wanted
to at least suggest you know I don't I
don't know how you can you can judge for
yourself how successfully I may or may
not have proved it but I wanted to
suggest that this you know the event
that we call the the Renaissance is
actually a kind
of epip phenomenon of developments that
began far away and long before that in
um the the Abid translation movement
centered in on 8th and 9th century
Baghdad why because that is the
rediscovery of not not necessarily
rediscovery but certainly the the uh um
reappearance the sort of revisiting of
uh Greco Roman um philosophical and
scientific
texts and it sort of has a as I as I try
to describe it it has a kind of KnockOn
effect with sort of various other people
are imitating this and that the the
Italian Renaissance comes at the end of
it through things like Charlemagne's um
attempt to sort of organize and and and
and
codify uh classical learning and Alfred
the Great and the sort of
Byzantine uh what's called the the uh
Byzantine Macedonian Renaissance and if
you think of it this is really you you
can think of it as one phenomenon in the
same way as
say a group of modern Scholars spread
out all over the world are uh affected
by and wish to imitate events that occur
in one University far off and then it
sort of spreads you know when you have a
sort of single School of thought or or
or a single sort of technique that
spreads all over the world that that's
one phenomenon not multiple unrelated
things that just sort of coincidentally
occur and the fact that they're
separated in time in the past you know
by many
centuries
um I that I think that
that's more of like an artifact or a
kind of epip phenomenon of the way we
see history that
charlamagne's uh approach to classical
learning had Deep Roots it must have had
Deep Roots because these things just
don't come out of nowhere but we see
only the sort of tip we we see only the
the the tip of the iceberg we don't see
the the uh the longer development um and
we don't see
its more distant uh
impetus in Arabic letters but I think
that we have to infer this we have to
infer this sort of thing and see uh
uh see a system of the of transmission
of uh technique attitude and um Revival
of uh of interest in philosophy and so
forth so
um I don't know how persuasive you find
that but I think that it looking at
these sort of seemingly disperate events
as one
phenomenon it suggests a couple of
different things one of which is that
Western Civilization should not be uh
closed off from uh influences that we
might think
are I don't know foreign to it because
the Baghdad translation movement wasn't
foreign to it it was in fact the impetus
for for what you would call the sort of
regrowth and you know think there are
other erroneous ways I think you can
think of it it should be debunked it it
wasn't an
exclusively um Muslim movement there
were all sorts of different people uh
involved in it uh and that that that
sort of uh openness and cooperation
amongst different sorts of people made
the Middle Ages um anything but the era
of sort of rigid dogmatism and narrow
minded
um Orthodoxy and that sort of thing it
was actually um from my
perspective a a a period of really
extraordinary academic and intellectual
uh
Freedom that um may not have been
paralleled since then uh when you
consider the resources that were that
were available then and which are
available to us now we should be capable
of far greater Feats but we aren't at
least not yet um
so I think that that's an example of how
sort of widening the the Border or or
sort of expanding where you draw the
line
um is actually beneficial it helps you
helps you see things I think more
clearly or at least I thought so uh and
you know one could push P it even
further back you could say well the
Baghdad movement is actually only the
latest one of several thousand years of
Mesopotamian rulers building their own
libraries and hiring Scholars to do
things um so you know maybe there's some
Merit in in looking at that sort of
thing too and and seeing the sort of um
a much more distant or sort of uh very
ancient germ of of of uh
uh sort of Royal patronage of learning
that would eventually flourish uh you
know through multiple uh uh cultures and
so forth and and and eventually
resurface in in in Europe but
again I think we can choose how we look
at these things where we draw the line
we eventually have to stop somewhere we
also have to choose where we're going to
start um but um you know you can I think
you can get a lot out of sort of
shifting those those uh borders around
or or expanding them and and uh and you
know looking sort of I don't know what
the right metaphor is looking from you
know high up from from the sort of
30,000 feet uh View and seeing and and
and and and seeing the sort of time
Horizon on a much on a on a on a on a
much greater
scale yeah I think I think that response
especially your choice of the time
variable being almost like a collapsing
of time or blurring of time especially
from The Human Experience allows you to
redefine the borders in a lot of more
interesting ways um and I think that
question might come up in the Q&A that's
for sure I know that relates to some
folks's uh areas of study um but I think
I think one of the I just know you know
there's a couple more questions to get
in before we open it up and I want to
give you a chance maybe
to extend what we chatted about in terms
of asking critical questions uh being
between different modes um as a result
of that you're playing with boundaries
to to to pursue lines of inquiry that
may not be readily
apparent uh certain point comes in your
work and perhaps this is your second
book where you are actually making a net
contribution you're you're you're adding
a narrative of your own and in your
latest book you arrive at three key
themes in in defense of civilization so
maybe I just want to give you the chance
to share this part of the historians
work where they extend from The Source
documents and their analysis of it to
actually adding a net a narrative
contribution to it and maybe you can
explain those three themes briefly and
how you arrived at those
three yes okay so this is an example of
me sort of reverting to my teenage self
and casting aside biases and uh you know
flimsy historical sources and looking
again at at archaeology and and art
history because I thought that I would
be on firmer ground trying to identify
what it is that um what civilization is
or or or how it manifests Itself by
looking at things people actually made
rather than things people said about
them
um so
the the three
um
principles if you like the three
principles of clarity Beauty and order I
felt that I needed those in order to
have some kind of framework to
discuss the
um to to discuss art history uh and um
material culture and to a certain extent
literature uh through you know multiple
Millennia of of History otherwise I
think that the the information would
sort of get out of control and become
sort of
unwieldy again you can debate whether
this was successful but you know
normally normally sort of boiling things
down to three principles that tends to
work I think I don't exactly know why
but it tends
to three three criteria seem to seem to
work well I deriv those from looking
at the contrast
between the art of the upper Paleolithic
period before people were living in
settled communities sort of cave
paintings so forth with what came after
and it's not just a question of what is
sort of attractive or not these
paintings are very attractive I mean
they're you could you could hang this on
your wall and it would be a a you know
very impressive uh work of art all the
more so for being
old there
was cave art there was um music there
there are flutes that have been
discovered there were obviously clothing
there was some sense of social
cooperation because people went hunting
together there must have been um
some sense of you know when to hunt and
how and watching the seasons and so
forth and yet there was no
civilization this comes later sort of at
the end of the Ice Age and then material
culture
changes and if you look at the art of
say very early dynastic Egypt it looks
as though everything has sort of reached
maturity that the sort of earlier um uh
forms and shades and Trends have sort of
solidified and and as I say reached
maturity looking at this I see Clarity
Beauty and Order Clarity the world is
intelligible it can be explained and
described through language through
through um visual representation of of
language in in hieroglyphics which
are which are not just um
representations of sound but they're
also images I think that's very they're
very critical Beauty in English we don't
really have a good word for this when I
use the word beauty I'm not referring to
things that are simply attractive to us
but that they are they are harmonious
and proportional you think of the way
Pythagoras um liked describing the world
through um ratios and mathematical
proportions he
saw um music mus like that as well as
visual art that's what I mean by Beauty
and the earliest the earliest civilized
art is always following Cannons of
proportion um and harmonious ratios of
of of of figures depicted and finally
order you have the idea of of a kind of
natural order natural organization to
the world to the universe that um um
human beings fit into and in the human
realm uh political
organization social organization is sort
of reflection of that and um in the sort
of uh metaphysical realm we call this
religion or uh sort of the idea that
there's
a an order that you cannot see but
nevertheless um
real so I traced I I use these uh
principles to sort of organize the the
information that that I present in the
book each one of them gets a chapter and
um I show
how our our expression of these
principles in mostly in art history and
and um material culture but also a
little bit in literature have sort of
changed over time and how certainly in
the 20th century they
deteriorated and I interpret that as a
sign of
Decline and the the sort of um if you
want a good example of what I mean here
you can look at Modern Art now my
criticism of Modern Art is not has
nothing to do with whether or not it's
ugly or because that's obviously a
matter of taste or whether it um
somehow represents a degeneration
from a more accurate depiction of the
world no that's not what I'm
saying the modern artists themselves
people like Kandinsky or Picasso and so
forth they they were extremely sensitive
to developments in um cuttingedge
physics at the time they were fascinated
by um things like the bore Rutherford
model of the atom and by Einstein's um
theories of general and and and special
relativity and what they took from these
things is that they they they they
determined that the Universe was
unintelligible incoherent chaotic random
and sought out to depict it
accordingly and you know we can debate
whether that's actually true or not and
certainly I would argue that their
understanding of phys physics was
actually deficient that they you know
people always want to run a little bit
too far
with Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
like it
doesn't really mean what they think it
means but the but the fact is that they
found what they thought they were
looking for and depicted a chaotic and
and sort of um unintelligible world and
this is very different from the way our
ancient ancestors would have looked at
things and it it actually brings it
actually
brings um material culture much closer
to what it was like in the upper
Paleolithic you think of those um images
of of animals sort of rushing forward
superimposed upon one another this sort
of um depiction of violent energy and
and and sort of directionless movement
and so forth that there's you know I
don't want to push that too far but I
think that there's there's some
something there and when you think about
the art of the futurists the the
futurist movement um it's all it's all
sort of really sort of tense um violent
movement forward and and sort of a love
of speed and and and and uh strength and
and and so
forth um so very very different from
from what the earliest um civilized art
was like and and and certainly when you
think of what was happening at the time
when this art was produced the first in
second world wars you know it's very
hard I think to consider it to be an
expression of a civilizing impulse that
it's it's really something quite
different and it it it represents a kind
of um deterioration if not something
close to a collapse in in um uh human
attitudes to what it means to be uh
civilized and and and human so um I
don't want to I don't want to spoil the
rest of the book if someone feels
inclined to read it but that's that's
the basic um that's the basic idea but
of course to get back to the original
question I don't think that this would
have made sense without those three
criteria to sort of order and and and
and and um organize the the information
so I mean people could quibble about
those three things you know should I
have chosen some other word or you but
having having those principles to
organize it I think was helpful and
those are Clarity Beauty and order
correct correct correct awesome um I
know I've been asking you a bunch of
questions and I still have more to go
but because you know systems thinking
Ontario you know we try to bring in uh
other voices and some conversations
David do we want to let others hop in
here and if I have any follow-ups I can
I can ceue up as well yeah sure um so
I'll welcome people to uh put their
questions in the chat or you can stick
your hand up but I'll kick one off
because um as you're talking about the
fall of the Roman Empire um and the
bantine Empire that rises after it uh
this reminds me of uh the work in syst
Community uh Timothy Allen had done work
with uh Joseph tainter um and so Joseph
tainter had said uh that in effect he's
defining complexity as part of modern
society or uh the the rise of society
and complexity um but then the uh the
answer came well after the fall of the
Roman Empire the Byzantine Empire lasted
a lot longer and it was
sustainable so um a a question I would
ask is um and I'm not sure how familiar
you are with that definition of
complexity but you know are today are we
anywhere near a sociopolitical collapse
or what simple or what what can we learn
from history about
that excellent question so the
archetypal collapse is something like
Rome I yes but the the absolute worst
one ever I think that we know about not
not just that we know about but that we
know the most about is the bronze the
late Bronze Age collapse when you have
not just one polity like Western Rome
collapse but you have an entire world
system go down basically all in all in
one go
and the the latest word on the collapse
of the Bronze Age is that it was a sort
of Perfect
Storm there there there were plagues
invasions there were sort of climb
climactic uh shifts
um breakdowns in trade
Warfare you name it but the collapse was
total um and and particularly bad in um
the area that we now call Greece it was
so bad that um all of the stuff that we
would associate with the idea of
complexity right down to you know the
organization of States and even writing
completely disappeared and had to be
reintroduced um some some um you know
800 years
later so
um the lesson from that to put it as um
I guess simply as possible is that the
collapse was so total because the world
was so closely integrated it was the
first if you like it was the first age
of
globalization um in the sense that you
have these disperate dynasties in Egypt
and and
uh Hittites Hittites yes sorry it's on
the tip of my tongue um Egyptians
Hittites you have ugarit you know
they're all very tightly related to one
another they
correspond
um uh all the time we still have a lot
of their correspondence uh on on
tablets we have also the
um trade networks are so carefully um uh
set up that you know the exact amount of
the precise ingredients to make bronze
are are being shifted around um and and
whatever is missing in one area is being
brought in in exactly the right uh
proportions and quantities and so forth
so um you know on a somewhat smaller
scale much the same kind of thing that
we have nowadays although we don't
depend you know so greatly on bronze we
have other things but it's the same kind
of principle that you're
you're care carefully integrated just in
time carefully integrated trade networks
with just in time delivery so that whole
system went down all in one go because
it was fragile it was it was it was good
enough to meet the needs of of of the
day for quite some time but it couldn't
withstand the the the the stress that
came upon it there it probably you might
say it lacked
redundancy and it was too reliant on one
particular um thing
bronze so you
know the
again the lesson for us would
be we would want to build in more
redundancy than we
have we certainly saw the the the
negative effects of that in covid when
all of a sudden there were shortages you
know quite quite
suddenly because we had been making a
lot of our stuff in
China and um you know my I I was working
in the government at that time and you
know the the the first order of business
was to try to set up a lot TR try to try
to get as much of the stuff that we made
in China sort of out and and you know
make as much as we possibly could either
here in Ontario or in some other
neighboring uh place and you know um
it's just surprising that this wasn't
thought of before but this is exactly
the kind of thing that people don't
think about for for some particular
reason so are we near a collapse um yes
and no part of what I wanted to say in
this in in my um in the in the book the
defense of civilization is that collapse
is always an option there there's
there's no civilization or society that
hasn't collapsed if if if uh you know if
if there were no collapses there would
still be a Sumeria or there would still
be the you know the third dynasty of UR
but we don't or or the Egyptian Old
Kingdom but given enough
time everything um disintegrates and
there's that you know there's that uh
famous opening line to the um Chinese
Romance of the Three Kingdoms you know
when the Empire is long um divided it
must unite and long United it must
divide that that's a trism of History
right um it's only in our time I would
say that especially or perhaps
exclusively in the west that we have
come to think of ourselves as sort of on
a kind
of historical trajectory towards a sort
of specific goal that's a sort of
doctrine of progress whe whether you
think of it as technological
or
um moral or in the case of Francis
fukuyama as sort of tending toward a
specific kind of social so
sociopolitical order
um that's a kind of new way of thinking
I'm not sure if there there's really
much Merit to it but it's certainly
popular and and
prevalent and um I I I wanted to show
that this is probably not a very good
way of thinking especially if you're
absolutely convinced that there's
nothing that uh
um there's nothing that can sort of
impede the the sort of continuous
progress of of of your civilization or
that there's nothing that could possibly
bring it down and of course the message
of fukuyama's famous book that basically
everybody missed was that he argues that
the um liberal you know contemporary
liberalism actually contains the seed of
its own destruction and then if it's
going to be successful that the sort of
internal problems that that undermine it
have to be managed and and and kept uh
at Bay and sort of his vision of the end
of History was one of not not sort of
continued success and and and
uh you know sort of uh exuberance but
rather boredom and and and and dullness
and that the enemies of of the system
would would be within because they would
have nothing to struggle against except
the system so you know people didn't
read their fukuyama carefully enough but
um especially also the last chapter
where he talks about Donald Trump
everybody missed that but
um maybe they you know maybe it would
have been better if they paid attention
the the idea that there's just this sort
of endless trajectory and that we've
sort of got everything settled and
figured out you know everybody believed
that before every collapse that has ever
happened so we shouldn't try to persuade
ourselves that we are immune from
that uh but is it actually
imminent you know I'm that I'm not
convinced of I'm not convinced that it's
sort of Round the Corner unless you know
something really quite quite
remarkable um happens but it's
hard I think
um I think I think that we have to
separate the idea of like the very
evident
technological advancement and
progress um from moral
progress and also
from a sort of healthy you know the
health of society and also from the sort
of Integrity of our Civilization now
I think though those are all not
necessarily
related um you think about the two sort
of two great examples of of of of evil
from the 20th century the the Nazis and
the Soviets they were certainly
technologically proficient um and they
had a kind of vision of
of of sort of future Utopia IA where
mankind would be perfected but I
wouldn't I wouldn't call them either
civilized or um um I would not associate
them with moral
progress right those are two extreme
examples but you know the fact that we
have nice computers or that we are all
talking to each other on this sort of
video screen that doesn't make us
morally good we might be morally good
but not because of this um so
um I say that because view that they all
go hand inand um is an old one it's uh
very much associated with early 20th
century Progressive movements and I
think that a lot of people still believe
in um I used to hear growing up that um
you know if only we could get a laptop
to every child in Africa we would solve
you know every problem you know and
that's that's nonsense but but people
used to talk that way they talk that way
less now but uh they they it it hasn't
gone entirely extinct and of course if
we remember the way people used to talk
about the internet in the '90s the
internet was supposed to usher in the
information age no one I mean I don't
know when the last time anybody said
information age but we don't really hear
it very much anymore it was and the
information age was also supposed to be
an age of progress and sort of uh um
greater understanding amongst all people
Harmony cooperation well I don't really
see very much of that now I see a lot of
Internet like the internet is sort of
everywhere it's omnipresent it's
involved in our lives more than I think
anybody ever imagined in the 90s but um
the the the harmonious world and the the
sort of um ever
closer
um human cooperation so that's not
really there and probably because people
realized when they got closer that they
um still had a lot of differences or you
know differences of opinion and so forth
of course this hasn't ushered in
necessarily an a time of conflict and so
forth
but um but uh the promise that
technology would bring about this
harmonious age I think has has just
simply uh simply failed and it was wrong
to um believe it in the first place but
this this brings up the idea again of
civilization and what I mean by it
civilization is
not associated with any kind of
um uh economic system or what marxists
call a mode of
production
but there is still a school of thought
that would that would like to believe
that it is the old idea we used to talk
about the Agricultural
Revolution that's an idea that comes out
of um
Marxist um
anthropology that the necessity for
farming um or the the you know people
decided that they were going to farm
they had to settle down to do it and
then all of the other amenities of
civilization you know art government all
that stuff sort of
comes out of that and that isn't true
the the archaeological
record refutes it um and we know much
more about it now than we did in the in
the early to mid 20th century that
people actually settled down before they
started farming there's a considerable
Gap uh between the two it comes um
settled life begins right after the Ice
Age and that raises an important
question as to why what what was it that
persuaded our ancestors to settle down
after so 40,000 years of hunting and
gathering in the Ice Age well
I don't have an answer to that question
but it's necessary to observe that
that's the case
that contrary to what marxists
say that it was actually a set of ideas
and an a change of Outlook that
persuaded people to settle
down not some kind of material uh
economic uh change so that implies or it
doesn't just imply it it it it shows I
think quite clearly that when we talk
about the things that we associate with
civilized life that they all depend on
very basic things like stability um a
sense of rootedness a sense that
people belong in a particular place and
have a sense of where they are in time
which is why the Earth earliest um the
earliest sort of civilized material
culture expresses this idea that people
have history there was a point at which
we discovered that we had history and
it's represented by things like the cult
of ancestors or the the um
um sort of
maintaining um identical
houses over the course of millennium
that people would build their house and
then a generation later they would tear
it down rebuild it exactly as it was and
do that and repeat it over the course of
uh uh in some cases almost a millennium
this is an idea that please I I just
like to get some more um more people in
the discussion so uh sanho had actually
sent something was this uh did you want
to um come and ask a
question uh sure yeah yeah thank you for
thank you
uh um so yeah I guess oh for for context
I guess I should first provide context
so uh my research is in uh human
computer interaction where I do a lot of
these like system building uh like
interactive systems where you know
people can use it and uh you know so uh
from from that point of view I guess you
know I've always
been I've always wanted to build like a
system where you know people can kind of
explore the history like you know in a
flexible manner so you can imagine like
you know these kind of interactive
systems you might find in I guess Museum
or something right um but I guess like
um having said that I guess my question
was um like I was wondering you if there
has been any attempt to extract these
larger patterns like and you said like
for instance like narratives right uh
which might be having a similar
structure to them in a in a way
um and then kind of visualize them right
and um and and you know I I think we we
always talk about these recurring themes
like such as war or things that happened
you know again and again over the course
of history so I I'm familiar with you
know how we ver ver verbally you know
discuss them but you know I'm not sure
I've I've seen been seen you know these
kind of visual representation or
interactive system you know that might
show you know these recurring
um historical events U or patterns and
like narratives right so um and I guess
I understand that this might be very
specific to like kind of system is uh
kind of thing so I guess another way um
to ask this might be you know like I'm
curious you know how historians when you
talked about you know uh when you have
multiple sources and narratives right uh
historians have to kind of Select you
know the source that they believe is the
right one um so in the process you have
to compare them and you know select it
and then like synthesize as well right
um I wonder what that kind of looks like
you know is it like do they have like a
table and you know do they just put in
these like you know different sources
and and then try to compare and contrast
uh and then try to select the one or you
know I guess that might be one kind of
type of representations that they rely
on to you know compare and contrast
these patterns or something I don't know
really good question the the the gold
standard of this sort of thing was the
the guy I'm not going to remember his
name but the guy who did the source
criticism of the four gospels and he had
Q cards and he wrote down on all the he
he went through each gospel and he wrote
down all the sayings attributed to Jesus
each on a a q card and then all the ones
that were the same he put in a pile
one and then that left some that were
unique and he had to
infer he had to infer um that those that
all sort of were repeated throughout the
gospels that they that those those
gospels um
must have shared a source but then there
was one that was unique so he said there
had to be another one and I think that's
it's actually a very convincing idea
that um he uh identified this sort of
mysterious thing that he had to infer
was there but there was no other
evidence of it apart from the fact that
there was a a unique
strand um Within within one gospel that
was that was not reflected in the others
so he's
discovered who knows what it was it
could have been a collection of sayings
or some sort of other narrative That Was
Then exerted and you know that's
something that Scholars can debate
um I have never done anything quite like
that with with Q cards and shoe boxes
but um
you know when when you're looking at
what is held in common by Source you
know held in common by multiple sources
something like that method um is is is
useful um and then the question comes
down to well what is you know what is
the nature of what you have identified
that doesn't fit in with the other
things and you know that could be um you
know you could have quite a lot of fun
with trying to explain um what that is
but when you're looking at say
constructing your own narrative out of
sort of disperate facts um you have to
start with
chronology uh otherwise you won't be
able to fit everything together right
which means that you have to find some
Source it could be something very simple
like um coins that show Regal years of
of Kings or something you have but
whatever it is that you you whatever it
is that you find and use that sort of
chronological
skeleton must be there before you start
fitting in the disperate facts otherwise
it will
get out of control and of course you can
debate as Scholars do you know the the
dates of events but
um unless you can develop your own sort
of coherent system of how it all fits
together it won't be uh um it won't be a
very cogent
narrative thank you thank
you um zad you want to um return onto
your next
question sure if if maybe we just do one
last pass if if if Penny Elena Don
anyone else wants if anyone else has any
questions
Kelly Elena does
Elena yeah was wondering if you could
speak a little about the relationship of
myth to history where as I understand it
mythology is trying to essentially
synthesize or maybe distill
lessons um for General use and the
actual facts behind them are you know if
not impossible pretty
sketchy yeah I think that's right I mean
the again the high the high watermark
for that would be something like the
Bronze Age
collapse which I believe is the ultimate
origin of all the myths out there about
a high civilization that comes crashing
down things like
Atlantis um the north myth of Ragnarok
or um even the the
zoroastrian and um uh Jewish and
ultimately Christian and and Islamic
vision of a sort of cycle to to time and
a sort of progression toward a um a a
future uh a future age sort of beyond
the present one that if you only had
those myths before you and of course
there's the Sumerian story of the
flood as well there's Noah's Arc and all
the rest of it if you only had those
stories you would want to infer I think
that there was some kind of historical
basis some kind of historical
inspiration for them not only because
they are so common practically Universal
throughout many cultures but also
because there seems to be something that
Accords with our own experience of of
human uh order even if we've not
experienced something as catastrophic as
say the Bronze Age collapse but when the
Bronze Age collapse was discovered or
evidence when evidence of it was
discovered through
archaeology a lot of those myths
suddenly began to make a a different
kind of
sense and that of
course the
myths often
lack sort of specificity about time and
place and persons and so forth but as
you say they seem to be communicating
some kind of
lesson and in the case of these
collapse Stories the lesson is that um
our civilizations are
fragile but they are also capable of
regeneration and that the end of the
story is not that there's just this huge
collapse and everything is awful from
then on but that
slowly
everything comes
back and um with this sort of thing in
mind and bearing and also thinking about
a writer like Herodotus or some other
very ancient texts that seemed to be
sort of more on the mythological side of
things that I think that we should be
open to the idea that there is at least
a kernel of Truth in them and that the
less
the lessons that they communicate will
always be um useful for us if they were
useful for our ancestors they must still
be useful for us we are still
fundamentally the same sorts of people
we are anatomically modern people and
have been you know for you know when I
was when I was a boy the figure was
880,000 years now now uh anthropologists
think it's 300,000 years so if we have
the same brain the same bodies the same
sort of um cognitive faculties as our
ancestors did 300,000 years ago what
they thought was relevant for them and
what they thought communicated
lessons probably still relevant and
there's probably still um a kernel of
Truth uh that we might be able to
find Penny looks like she has a
question
I read Franco pan Silk Roads and um
enjoyed it as a history he seemed very
optimistic about the immediate future of
that part of the world are
you about Central Asia and
well am I
optimistic as well
that's a very good question I'm not as
optimistic as he is and certainly
nowhere near as optimistic as he is
about China I'm not optimistic about
China and of course that was written at
a time
when
um the sort of upward trajectory of
China seemed um inexurable
and um that the belt and Road initiative
seemed to be I don't know a good idea it
doesn't seem like a good idea now um and
you know you have the sort of like China
China is arguably the sort of layman
Brothers on steroids uh to to an almost
unimaginable degree and and um other
parallels would be the J the Japanese
property bubble I think in the 80s or
90s uh have to double check the dates
there but I mean
where it's headed is not good um and
very obviously at this
point um I I I'm not really very bullish
on on China
however there are hints that um many
places in Central Asia are um of great
importance and strategic
significance um Kazakhstan appears in
the news a lot um
if Kazakhstan wanted to make a great
deal of trouble for Russia for instance
it could do that um it may um it may do
that soon um but is this really going to
be a kind of center of a of a sort of
great
Eurasian uh
Empire between you know Beijing and
Moscow I don't really think so uh
anymore and I there's there's an extent
to which I I never found it entirely
persuasive but nevertheless there there
are still I
mean a huge amount of fertilizer comes
out of Kazakhstan I believe there there
minerals and
uh rare earth I believe so it I think
that it will increase in importance but
um their principal challenge in that
part of the world uh I'm pretty sure is
always going to be geography it's going
to be hard to get things in and out of
there hard to sort of link it up with
with the rest of the world and if if
Russia continues this sort of descent
into madness and and
instability um it's going to make that
part of the world really
um unstable and you know if
China
if if China declines slowly or if it
falls apart
um spectacularly or something in
between uh or Iran is right there too
you know Iran is not exactly a model
of of uh you know good government and
stability you know there there there
will be significant problems there um
now that I could be wrong like things
could sort of settle down or there there
could be um soft Landings as they say
um but there will still be important
strategic and I think um you know GE
geostrategic and um economic uh concerns
there and um you know places like
Kazakhstan have
um much better demographics than than um
a lot of their neighbors certainly than
Russia and China there could be an
interesting ation boom um their you know
their tradition of having been involved
in Soviet technology and so forth
suggests a well
educated um populations so they will I
think that they will count for more but
I you know it's I I'm not sure that they
will be at the sort of center of a huge
Eurasian
Empire thank you um I wanted to say I'm
really enjoying your your your metaphors
your comparisons especially um
Persia Persia was to the Roman Empire
what Russia is to Nato things like that
thank
you thanks Don has his hand up
Don okay I'm unmuted yeah I made a
number I really was impressed with the
with what your the depth of your
understand the breadth of your
understanding of a lot of these issues
and how how your research has
contributed to that and continues to
contribute to uh uh the whole body of of
history in the 21st
century at the same time I I was I had a
number of of questions that arose that
that um made me uh look at certain
analogies perhaps that I had from time
to time looked at to to use to to
understand what I think is happening in
the world and I would like to hear your
opinion on some of these um one of them
is uh
this is a strange one but uh if you look
at the geological history of the planet
you'll notice that the um the continents
tend to go and at some certain times
they right right now moving further
apart right splitting off from one great
big one at one time but then they
usually reverse that for all kinds of uh
geological and physical reasons and
start moving back together but neither
situation is particularly
ideal uh from the point of view of just
about every living or non-living
entity H so they they it's never a
stable thing it's constantly moving one
way or the other and I'm wondering if
that's a way of looking at a lot of the
historical events especially when you're
looking at Empires and large
coalitions um one thing I I had always
thought you can disagree with me on this
one but it's how I saw and how my some
of my teachers saw it that the modern
artists in their um in their somewhat I
suppose more chaotic and disorganized
approach to a lot of things nevertheless
we coming up with a new
aesthetic that helped us understand that
we were undergoing some major shifts in
the way our civilization worked either
you know morally intellectually and
spiritually or
technologically and and and what we have
to rely on to produce the kind of world
we we've now
created um the third one is an
observation remember that mclan made a
long time ago one of your predecessors
at the University of
Toronto that any vast change in the
media landscape and we certainly are
seeing that
now all but destroys the civiliz Iz
ations that it's introduced
to and he had some reasons for that a
lot of good ones um though they were
very general which made him a suspect by
The
Specialist um but I always thought there
was something to
it another one is the role of science
which is a whole new way of creating a
civilization is it not it's not the same
as while using mythology or using uh the
Arts or using craftsmanship or using um
I suppose basic rudimentary
Technologies and I'm wondering if that
is going to make a change also are you
familiar with the theories in that book
The Dawn of everything that came out few
years ago yeah I figured you might be uh
they seem to think that things move back
and forth up and down sideways and every
according to what was practical at the
time so you had people who were Hunter
gathers and also sett in communities or
you had people that went back to Hunter
Gathering after the agriculture failed
or vice versa depending on on the
circumstances and I wonder if
that comes into your
calculation I guess that's about it okay
nothing okay so let's go in reverse yes
so it literally does come into the
calculation because I referenced that
book that that concept of a kind of um
you know you're nomadic for half the
year and for the other half you live in
a settled place that's
um that is an interesting idea it it it
clearly is the way
some um groups of people have done
it and it could have been the way we all
did it at some point it could have been
my criticism of that is that we don't
really know I mean what what is the
reason to think that we had differing
social orders
um as an entire species for half the
year and then for another I mean it it
is possible I won't say that it isn't
but I mean I just I think it's a
fascinating idea but I think that
they they they take it a little bit too
far and as they argue about the
possibility of it it sort of gradually
becomes a certainty in their View and I
think that
that's I think that that's too um uh
imaginative but supposing they're right
my view is still that it doesn't matter
what your vision of human order is we
have always had one with the coming of
civilization there has always been some
sense uh as to how we fit into the
environment around us and where that is
and how we interact with one another and
obviously there are Regional variations
there are seasonal variations of this
but there is no society that has that
has been without order because then it
would not be a society and of course
this obviously refutes the kind of weird
thought experiments of Russo and Hobs
there there has never there has never
been a time when we
were solitary right we've always had
some kind of social order I think
previously you said
science um so can you
make a
civilization from science my answer is a
a a almost unqualified
no um because because
it's to put it crudely in in my view
it's civilization that makes science
sence not the other way around and
that science will
never be able
to create it might it might persuade you
to create but it and of itself it will
not create the stability and the
rootedness and the sense of history that
that gave us settled civilized life in
the first place and as much as I like
science and and and technology for some
reason science and it's always Science
and Technology as though they're yeah
but the they might not be actually the
same thing but uh science science and
technology um we have shown in the 20th
century are very apt to disrupt our
sense of settledness and rootedness and
of course
um some people liked that the futurists
loved that the the whole idea that you
would sort of
sort of abolishing yourself and your
your civilization as you sort of hurtled
at full speed through time into the uh
fourth dimension that's the way they
talked and those are the people who
became um fascists Nazis and Bolsheviks
so I think that there's clearly
something wrong with that mode of
thought but uh
you know maybe in some kind of alternate
universe that it would it might have
worked out differently with slightly
different ingredients I don't know I
could say one thing if you look at some
of the work that's being done in the
social sciences and also in Neuroscience
we're beginning to find out things that
make us do stuff that we we never really
systematize the same way right and this
may change our education our morals um
our moral
education for the better it's possible I
I won't say it's impossible but um the
combination of
two scientific
ideas in the past produced two two
seemingly innocent ideas produced really
quite catastrophic results one was the
theory of
evolution and you know the other was the
idea of
hygiene right on their own
quite beneficial and and like you know
the theory of evolution is one of the
most successful ideas ever uh right it's
been um Vindicated not just as a as as
basically a fact but also as a way of
looking at the past yeah that that
uh forms of life um you know they
they've gone from very simple to more
complex and and each one is sort of
based on
a previous one and then hygiene you know
the germ Theory and so forth it's done
Untold amount of good to
uh alleviate human suffering and in many
cases to eliminate it entirely but you
put those two together and you have
basically Nazism from a from a certain
perspective right
Eugenics right and there's also a kind
of um uh kind of a bulvik Soviet angle
to that stuff too
so that's why I'm we you know when
people say things like I know that this
is a cliche at this point but when
people say things like well science says
like well I mean come on like we can do
better than this you know you you that's
an excuse to sort of cease to think
about
anything and and it has
led down some very unpleasant roads uh
in the past right um not just I mean I
say the past I mean this was this was
like with yeah it was in the lifetime of
my own grandparents so yeah it's like
it's still sort of here but
uh well was your other question I can't
remember I think David you're um mostly
comments at this point um
yeah mentioning M's comment that would
be about it so yeah so so we're running
in overtime here so I want to shot a
question to uh an opportunity to ask his
question and then sad will close and um
to call an evening
for uh hi um a part of it was already
reflected by dawn to be honest so I
don't think it will be much but um it
also comes from my MS project that I'm
doing on Digital Data and cognitive
Liberty which also reflects on how the
information is biased biased in which as
you said has been prevalent throughout
the years and the way we feel the
disruption right now with new technology
or new ideologies coming in I'm pretty
sure it would have been like that then
as well but we just view it as
statistics as data and as events that
have happened um as a reflection of the
past right and also like like you said
there are gaps in how we recollect this
data and remerge it reconstruct it it's
not a fact it these are events that have
been generalized over the years and have
being
summarized but the whole point of
digital technology was that oh we will
preserve the data and it will last for
as long as possible it won't get
destroyed but at the same time the
problem still exists data is only
getting recorded with a bias only and
with an intent
not uh it is not happening organically
or we can't put anything that we want
because of everything that that is there
around ads and monetization as well um
in interactive form other than text so
my question is if data is inherently
biased and the system around it is
around
monetization if in the future archivist
would have to look at what was life like
like if they see all of the media
content that has been
released um would the history they
create recreate the biased as well and
if it is would they just accept it like
yeah this was it there was no
other
uh so like things like indigenous
communities and everything while they
are getting covered
nowadays it wasn't until a long time ago
and there may not be so much relevance
in terms of that
um
so does it does it have to be in a way
that sorry I'm trying to form the
question
would would data be
uh would data misin from us because
right now it is doing that to us in a
way especially with the autogenerated AI
responses which are at times faulty and
we still take it at face value and be
like yeah it's true what gives it so
would that happen more in the future or
would we learn from this and try to
build resilience around it in a way
well that is a very good
question and I think it's very
unfortunate that our
culture talks on the one hand so much
about the idea of sort of digitizing
things and preserving them forever and
yet has such a I would say such a low
regard for the truth um in the sense
that postmodernist thought has been
almost entirely triumphant especially
within the humanities but I think now we
can see it
creeping sort of Elsewhere with the sort
of 2 + 2al 5 crowd and
the the idea that you know even
um
uh what I would call sort of uh
objective
mathematical knowledge is still entirely
conditioned by power which I find like a
kind of silly idea but it's nevertheless
prevalent
um so it seems as though there's a
there's an obvious contradiction in the
sense that data will just sort of speak
for itself and and yet all truth is
relative and and um knowledge is
conditioned by power
well again this is obviously false in
the sense that the people who make um
the people who make rockets and
satellites go up into the air
clearly have some sense of like what is
objectively true and like what is actual
um knowledge facts and and and um um
observable like
objective
uh phenomena like if they if they didn't
nothing they did would
succeed right so uh again this the
vision of of things that speak for
themselves and uh knowledge that is
conditioned by power and the relativity
of Truth like this is this is all just
unsustainable contradictions and you
know we are going to have to sort of
push through this as a as a people as a
as a civilization and um hopefully when
we come out on the other side of it we
will have
vanquished uh postmodernist conceits
about um uh about the world and that we
will hopefully also discover
that the sort of the Lesser claims that
postmodernism makes for itself do have
an element of Truth to that you do need
to understand contexts and and uh um um
you
know small what they call like the
smaller narratives micro narratives
about the world if you're going to get a
full sense
of how things are um not at the very
least future Generations are going to
want to know why we chose to preserve
what we chose to preserve what does it
tell us what does it tell them about us
and I'll give you an interesting fact
this is not like digitization but it's
similar um there there were seever
broadcasts for for years and years and
years in America um news broadcasts uh
television shows you know sort of daily
programming none of it was recorded and
preserved at all except apparently by
one uh lady I forget where she lived but
she she had a vcr and she just recorded
everything Round the Clock and then this
got sent off eventually it was
discovered somehow and then sent off to
um libraries but if you had missed the
Nightly News or
whatever that would be it it would just
it was just gone nobody thought to
preserve it at all and
um you think about that and you
think like why on Earth would that have
been anyone's attitude to anything like
the the the the aberration is not that
the lady was recording things because
that's I think a normal human impulse it
was the fact that wealthy Studios and
and and um
um
broadcasters didn't think for a moment
that what they had produced was worth
recording worth worth preserving and if
you want to know where I found this out
it's in a book called The
90s um by it's the same guy who wrote
the book Generation X but I I forget his
name um but it'll come to me anyway if
you want that that whole anecdote is is
explored very deeply um in in that
book and
um anyway when it comes to digitization
I'm of two minds about it I think it's
it's really peculiar what you will find
on things like archive.org
um I have found that a lot of very
ancient texts and and and not just the
ancient texts but also very old Editions
of them sometimes even 16th 17th century
editions of of of Greek texts or 19th
century ones you will find someone has
taken the trouble to scan them and put
them on archive.org
why did they choose those really old
versions of them I don't know but you
know they they did they don't have any
more modern ones um maybe that says
something about the condition in which
they found them um if so that would
raise questions about why libraries
allow books to deteriorate so
rapidly um but the you raised the point
about the idea that uh digital
archivists think that they're preserving
things
forever I'm very doubtful about that
because a lot of things that were held
on the
internet um in the 90s or early 2000s
they're just gone or they've been
preserved only in a kind of fragmentary
way on the Wayback
machine
um I don't think anybody foresaw that
they thought the internet was forever
and there's that expression internet was
forever which is not actually
true so um how long are these things
going to last and supposing they're all
held in the cloud somewhere or in a data
center well they're
all like you have
potentially Millions maybe even billions
of things that are all held in one
Center if that one thing goes down then
that's the end of millions of things
that would be very different from say
one medieval scriptorium burning
down right you would lose much
less in in that because there would be
redundancies elsewhere I don't know
whether that's the case with digital
archiving but I doubt it
so uh zad you want to ask the last
question and sure yeah so this will be
the closer question Dr Bonner and it'll
be a little bit of a challenge round
because we'll see see if you can answer
it briefly which makes it more
interesting um and I don't have time to
uh expand on it so a lot of assumptions
uh you'll see are going to be baked into
it but this is this is kind of the fun
closer and this wasn't planned but you
saw the way the last few questions came
up they were asking you questions about
the future they're asking you questions
about what potentially you might know so
let's say that in the climate we live in
today there's a preoccupation with a
sense of short-termism
urgency and if historians are the
custodians and the gatherers of long
form knowledge that can influence a
wider Horizon of decision making in real
terms what does it take to actually have
a
historian
influence uh decision making decision
making that
matters oh
my
uh so um polius says that the writing of
History will never be good unless um men
of action and who have experience in
political life do it but you're asking
the reverse it's basically how do you
get a torian
to uh
influence um political life and I I I
don't know I mean you would need a
fundamental cultural shift I don't think
that we have a tradition in the west
of uh say you know civil servants having
having to show that they um have
memorized all the Chinese
Classics and they they are sort of
deeply versed in
confusion um
thought uh I don't think we've ever had
anything like that but that that that at
the very least is a symbol of a
connection with
history as well as a kind of common
culture
to a culture common amongst bureaucrats
and and and and politicians
um I want to say that part of the
solution must be what um you would call
localism people will take a longer view
when they're when they have skin in the
game um as Nim talb would remind us and
that if you could dial down the
abstractions of sort of national and
international politics down to a level
where you know you're actually
immediately affected by it I think then
you take um then you take a much longer
view looking both to the past as you
would try to find institutional or
or I want to say institutional knowledge
but the the kind of knowledge that older
people who live in a community would
have it's not quite the same thing but
it's similar and you know some sense of
obligation to your ancestors and to your
children you know you find that at a
smaller level of
politics at a at a at a local level
rather than a much higher larger
abstract grou that's where I would start
um but um getting people to snap out of
the the the
short-term thinking I mean that's going
to
take that's that's going to take I want
to say a revolution no it's more like a
counterrevolution persuade P persuade
people to sort of slow down and and look
backward but um you know know I'm I'm
optimistic that I'm I'm optimistic that
it may happen I mean the the sort of the
globalization of the 90s um uh sort of
persuaded people to ignore in many cases
their uh their smaller local communities
in favor of um other concerns but I'd
like to think that people are sort of
Shifting back then nice that's beautiful
in some ways there's an undercurrent of
a theme of looking inward yet again and
perhaps that that is a a wider theme
that connects to a lot of aspects of
revolutionary thinking today let's hope
so um I have to say thank you so much Dr
boner I think this was like a wonderful
discussion a bunch of us are still on
now I think that's a testament to how
engaged we were in the conversation
we'll definitely have to even continue
perhaps part two uh in the new year
sometime and and do this
again it was very kind of you and
generous of you to invite me and I'm
sorry to have pontificated for so
long no problem at all so I think for
systems thinkers here uh in December we
don't we usually take that month off
correct David that's right and then
we'll be back in January so yeah thank
you very much everyone have a wonderful
end of the year thank you again Dr
Bonner for joining us tonight and hope
everyone has a great
night thank you take care everyone
but


## Keywords:
