---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xehsy_g6aoc
---

# Video
What Happened to our Revolution? ft. Vincent Bevins
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xehsy_g6aoc)

## Transcript:


oh


good morning to most good afternoon to
others and good evening to the viewing
audience across the pond I am your host
Jason Miles and welcome to another
episode of this is Revolution podcast
quickly before we start if you haven't
done it already hit that like button
please hit the Subscribe button and
don't forget to hit that notification B
you loaded whenever we go live as
sometimes run a little
late just sometimes not all the time
okay maybe more often than I'd like to
more often than we'd like to as you know
know this is the Saturday free show
there is no bonus champagne room it is
our way of allowing you guys to get a
glimpse of what goes on
Beyond The Velvet Rope here at ti so if
you're enjoying what we do here and you
have the means to support us think about
becoming a patron for his little $ a
month or $30 for the year you can have
access to past and present champagne
rooms movie night and
more all of us here at TI would like to
send a big thank you to all the
subscribers on all platforms without you
we couldn't do this the holiday season
is here and the ti website has some new
items perfect to start a funfilled
conversation with your conservative or
liberal family members that's
right what is going to start the
conversation up at the
Christmas chica
SL Quanza table like an Anglo pessimism
shirt speaking of Anglo
pessimism let me bring in my favorite
female Asian friend and the voice and
the faceless voice of reason on the show
please welcome M2
song Hello
hello so good to see you Jason good to
be
here you didn't see me
yesterday uh yeah I did see you
yesterday see you every day that's why
you're so frustrated you're like yeah
yeah good to see you
again
thanks um did you get a chance to crack
open our guest book I definitely did it
was a good read it is it's an exciting
read isn't it yeah you you want to know
what's gonna happen next I do he's a
he's a hell of a writer he's he writes
in a very exciting way he also talks in
a very exciting
way like now I want to go hang out with
Vincent Evans I don't know where he is
in the world right now but I feel
like um like we we we made the
connection through Alex hoaky and I feel
like if the three of us hung
out High Jinx would be
had well when he comes on the screen
you'll see he is in
heaven is where he
is maybe that was the end of his
(Laughter)
hijinks well our guest today has a new
book and it is something that we've been
talking about on this show it is
something that friends of our show have
been talking about um actually at the
live uh book launch for I was a teenage
Anarchist uh Scott
Parkin Sparky came up to me at show was
like you know I just finished Bon's book
and I was like did you like it he goes I
did I
did because you know we always bring up
Mass protest and why these things aren't
happening and I have my feelings and
then I'm listening to the Bunga cast and
they have bevans
on and he's answering a lot of my
questions so I was like I need to get
this book so I can get these questions
answered in 300 Pages uh we are
currently in a moment of mass protest
all over the Western World to sto the
murderous bombing campaign in Israel not
every mass action we see is filled with
Pro Palestinian voices there are many
pro-israel people that also want to see
the violence end and for a short moment
many felt as if the outside pressure was
starting to influence the powerful in
Washington Israel to call for not just
to ceasefire but for Israel to stop
altogether The Assault on for the most
part a defenseless
population
oh bless you thank you right there on
the mic three years
earlier protest exploded on a glal scale
during the peak covid shelter in place
summer of 2020 the murder of George
Floyd was a Tipping Point for
politically frustrated populace that was
witnessing a rise in far-right
leadership in the US Philippines Brazil
just name a few people came out in Mass
to call out the murder of unarmed
civilians by militarized law enforcement
cities burned promises to reallocate
funds into what people felt were less
punitive measures defund law enforcement
was a unifying call but rarely was it
done movements to abolish and to fund
have quieted down and we ask the
question where did all the protests go
what did they accomplish Our Guest today
asked that question on a global scale
with his latest work if we burn the mass
protest decade and the missing
Revolution Wherever You Are watching or
listening to the show there are links in
in the description to the book our guest
Vincent bevans writes of course people
always had
always people always had ways to react
against ruling Elites these
interventions were sometimes violent or
impose direct costs on the targets
people got killed property got destroyed
brain was seized by the population and
so on the academic terminology for the
wide set of practices people use in
these moment moments from the ancient
world to the 21st century is contention
or contentious
Politics the US soci sociologist Charles
Tilly noticed that across history when
people protested they tended to
reproduce practices that already existed
around them they drew upon an existing
repertoire of contention the metaphor is
fittingly theatrical and musical there
are a set of instruments and routines
that a community has a selection of
performances everybody knows and they
use them in an improvised way in moments
of rebellion people turn to what is
familiar even if something unfamiliar
might work much better in 16th century
France Tilly shows through an analysis
of early National media that people
would have never thought of
demonstrating or organizing a rally or
strike in the way we do today they did
however know how to run a tax collector
out of town Force down the price of
bread or put on a
sh the performance of a group belittling
offensive songs or belting offensive
songs outside the home of a local
offender demanding retribution before
they will shut Up Overtime Innovation
occurs and new routines of contention
emerge as cultures change but this
process is relatively autonomous from
the underlying causes of the revolts
that is from the book If you burn by
Vincent bans again wherever you are
watching and listening to the show
there's links in the description of the
book please welcome coming live from a
secret location Vincent
beans hello yeah thank you thank you for
having me yeah thank you for joining us
uh I really appreciate you taking the
time to talk with us of course uh
honestly really admire your work uh and
not just this but also the Jakarta
method um you said you conducted over
200 interviews
yeah um that's some damn good reporting
uh this book is such a brilliant well-
researched piece of work what prompted
you to go on this journey and
interrogate the
2010s thank you first of all um for the
introduction that question um I've been
on this for about 10 years really um it
all started in sou Paulo the largest
city in South America in 2013 when I was
was working as a foreign
correspondent um when a small group of
leftists and
anarchists set off a a wave of protests
that grew very very
large and then ultimately in the short
term and then in the long term allowed
for right-wing elements to take control
of what was at least the narrative as to
what was happening on the streets and
then to take control the country so
there's not a direct line from the
protests of June 2013 to the the
election of gy bolsonaro in
2018 but living through those years I
like many many people in Brazil that had
lived through the
strange phenomenon of June 2013 I think
I think all of us became concerned with
this question how is it possible that
apparently the country can come out in
defense of better social services and
less police violence and then soon
afterwards seemingly as a result of
those very protests M the country is
handed over to a man that decimates
social services and celebrates police
violence so from 2013 to 2020 every time
that this happened somewhere else I was
always paying attention to be like uh um
I hope this doesn't go the way things
did in Brazil sometimes it did go that
way sometimes it didn't and then I also
started to Look Backwards on the things
that had happened before 2013 because I
believed that the media the media's
decision to interpret what was happening
in Brazil as if it was like the called
Arab Spring and other uprisings around
the world contributed to the final
outcome so I was in the middle of an
explosion that sort of literally arrived
um outside my bedroom in Sal Paulo 10
years ago uh there was no way around it
it
changed my life and made the lives of
much you know what came afterwards made
the lives of many of my friends much
much worse until 2019 2020 when the
pandemic is hitting uh Brazil and I
decide to pitch this book so it's it's
really that long strange mystery that
began in June 2013 in uh in in in sou
Paulo and you were living there doing
reporting at the time and the book kind
of starts off you're talking about um
the police
repression and and how the protest
started um about the the raising of aair
I was in Brazil in
2019 and bolaro was cutting
pensions they were doing pension reform
probably you you would have been yeah
yep um and the city like while we were
out I think we
had we missed a driving day because like
everything shut down and I had never
seen anything like that before you know
they were like lighting tires on fire in
South Paulo yep it gets it gets Rowdy
out there they're they're really serious
about it and I don't even remember did
did the pension reform actually go
through
yeah yes yes yes it did
uh quite controversially I
mean the government that was installed
after the Parliamentary coup in 2016
both Michelle Tamer and then ultimately
gy bolsonaro delivered quite a lot of
what the business class wanted um and
then by the time the pandemic started
right after I guess your last visit
bolsonaro demonstrated himself to be
quite bad at governing the the country
in almost every other way so after
delivering a set of goodies to the
ruling class the business class from 201
to 2020 um parts of like I know what do
you want the national bis the local
business Elites um Capital slowly sort
of abandoned bonaro because I think kind
of they got quite a lot from him and
then he was bad at Administration
afterwards and then like the ways in
which he was bad at administration
were incredibly visible you know if you
zoom forward from 2013 when I'm living
in downtown sou Paulo to uh 2020 when
the pandemic arrives in in downtown sou
Paulo it's like a different Universe
it's like it's like a movie about the
end of the world where it's like you
know relatively normal urban center in
the middle of a large South American
country and then in 2020 it's like kids
huddled around trash cans on fire
cooking noodles trying to stay
alive um literally like roving gangs in
the streets like carrying torches trying
like because like trying to find anyone
to Rob to get some kind of um um um
access to finance things got quite bad
um but yeah that would have been one
year after I suppose last time you
came and it's it's also interesting that
a lot of this stuff and you know and
they talk about this a lot in the uh end
of end of history and of the fact that
you also in the book you bring up the
fall of the Soviet Union because I think
it's a very important Point later but
um the idea of corruption can be a
unifying force for people to come out in
mass and protest and in the South
America context you always hear the term
corruption when it comes to politicians
so there's almost kind of a natural uh
mistrust uh of politicians regardless of
their their the politics they may be
presenting and one thing I found
fascinating about Lula and and maybe it
was just the people that I was around um
are tour manager uh his parents were
part of PT in the early
days and so he he actually had like an
autograph copy of of Lula's book from
like the early 90s that he wrote
um so I we were in some leftie circles
in the Heavy Music Scene um but as we
were saying off air we definitely found
ourselves in some in some fashy in some
fashy territory but there was one thing
that that I that I found surprising was
that this there's this kind of we all
hate corruption all politicians are
corrupt um and Lula kind of skirted that
for some time while he was in office
until you know sadly he couldn't because
when we were there he was actually in
prison
um you talk about how these protests
kind of got
co-opted by a right-wing element and a
nation well a nationalist element as
well why do you think that's so easy for
that to happen yeah that's good and I
think anti-corruption is really
interesting because anti-corruption is
something that everybody everybody by
definition is against like it's built
into the phrase like it's tautologically
true like every like you cannot be Pro
corruption it's like it's it's it's um
by definition something that's bad um um
but then always in the real world the
ways in which you actually do an
anti-corruption Crusade the ways in
which you actually decide to look at uh
the way that a state is functioning or
try to use traditional or punitive or
political uh solutions to the problem of
corruption always like means something
concrete so like anti-corruption is
something that is perfectly suited that
fits right into the kind of vacuum the
kind of confusion that was created by
June 2013 which is the same kind of
vacuum and confusion which allows for
cooptation so I'll try to explain what
that is because I think hopefully I can
connect the two things if I can keep my
concentration the original set of
protests in June 2013 was organized by a
group called The Free Fair movement who
all came from basically the anarco punk
scene uh they were committed
horizontalists they had been working for
eight years studying ways to to push the
country towards ultimately free public
transportation in all instances but what
they would actually do is that every
time there was a price rise they would
organize very contentious uh very
visible very uh uh uh uh um
prefigurative direct action oriented
demonstrations against the price rise so
he do this four times in June
2013 the mayor of Sal Paulo is from the
Workers Party from Lula's party he's um
somebody who himself has come up as
dissonant fighting the dictatorship that
was the power that he faced off against
when he was younger after the first four
uh uh uh on the morning of the fourth
protest Brazil's mainstream media which
is controlled by
oligarchs and populated by the types of
journalists that come from the parts of
Brazilian society that never have any
experiences with the Brazilian police
they never have they have no this is a
class of Brazilians that have no direct
experience of what military police
repression actually is this class of
mainstream media Outlets calls for a
Crackdown on this movement on the the
morning of June 13th now again if they
had known what the military police are
actually like in Brazil and the military
police in Brazil are a legacy of the us
back dictatorship um that took over 1964
then perhaps they should have understood
what was going to come after they asked
for a police Crackdown but what happens
is the Crackdown comes shocks the
country not only hits the punks and the
anarchists that they believe to be
legitimate Target targets of police
repression um the Crackdown hits
journalists it hits me but my case
doesn't matter who I'm fine but it hits
other journalists whose cases go viral
and convince the main the same exact
media Outlets that called for a
Crackdown to switch their narrative to
say actually this is instead of a group
of anarchist and Punks on the streets
that we need to clear off the roads this
is a patriotic uprising in defense of
the right to rise up in defense of
something but in that moment when
they're trying to explain why it's good
now that is a vacuum of meaning there's
like a there's like there's a moment
where it's up for grab is what this
thing is going to mean because they're
not going to take the position of the
horizontalist anarco punks that demand
the decommodification of public
transportation that's obviously not
going to be the reason that they Supply
so there's this kind of battle that that
happens social media but also in
traditional media over the next few days
as to what actually this thing is about
and so the people the new people that
show up into in on the streets four days
later three days later 13 to the 17th
four days later have new different ideas
and competing ideas about what this is
all about now anti-corruption is one of
them and as I said I think this is one
that fits right in there because you
can't say you're against it you know in
practice in Brazil anti-corruption
ultimately became a
corrupt far right Crusade that broke the
laws in a very corrupt way with the
ultimate goal of putting lul in jail but
yeah lavat laaj which has now been
discredited um one of the major figures
just was stripped of his congressional
seat uh the other has been uh declared
uh to have you know badly abused as
Authority by the Supreme Court but in
this moment in when millions of people
come to the streets they come to the
streets with a different idea of what
the thing is about than the original
organizers
and then they enter into conflict with
the original organizers and their idea
of what the thing is about often comes
from mainstream medium so that has a
center right veillance and then the new
arrivals enter into initial initially
verbal conflict with the the original
organizers and you said like there's
kind of a national ting to it and I see
like on the first the first time I see
these two groups come into into contact
there's a groups of like there's a group
of like young skinny punks and they see
these like
bulkier obviously more middle class guys
wearing like waving flags and wearing
yellow uh Brazil football shirts now in
2023 we would very easily recognize
these guys as the pre bolsonaro Movement
Like Proto bolsar eases right but at the
time these young punks and anarchists
are saying like oh no no no guys like
that's not how this works they're trying
to like explain how how the how the
protest is supposed to be not about
ntion like vague nationalism they say no
vague nationalism can lead to Fascism
you don't want to just show wave a flag
we need to have like unite behind like
this particular demand and the new
arrivals were like you I'm not
listening to you I don't care about your
and the new arrivals eventually
actually physically throw many of the
original organizers off the street by
the end of the month that's that's so
insane um that that happens because
that's literally kind of like the
definition of how you know fascism
starts right like we don't want to
listen to you got us all fired up not to
listen listen and throw our middle
finger to the government we're throwing
our middle finger to you too um there is
something interesting that to me about
those protests where they're protesting
the fair hike and they're doing like you
know blockages and I think I can't
remember the country was it Chile or
Argentina where something similar
happened to Chile Chile Chile has a the
2019 esta social is also begun by a
protest against a fair rise that is
carried out through the blockages of
turn Styles yeah and that gets the
support of the people lots of people and
then you see something mildly similar in
the
UK I don't think it had anything to do
with the fair hike it was more of just a
protest by I can't remember the name of
the movement it's an environmental
movement where they like glued
themselves to the
train um do you remember that one tuon I
don't well there's very recently the
would Extinction rebellion was maybe a
couple years ago that was quite quite
horizontal yeah yeah yeah yeah and then
now you have just upop oil which is a
little bit more mainstream and and I it
just it feels like one is
really so people focused that you're
going to get more people to want to be a
part of your movement and the other is
almost so bgea it's almost
antithetical you know we're going to
shut down all you know public
transportation it's like yeah but I need
to get to work well the idea and this is
the thing that the the the the movie met
Li the this this this really dedicated
disciplined um idealistic horizontalist
group they had a theory that they had
been developing since 2005 that they
will intensely
plan the kind of interventions and
demonstrations and uh direct action that
will ignite a popular
revolt and in ways which I think are
often like not really
held too consciously or not analyzed too
carefully it is always assumed that a
popular Revolt will somehow be good but
it happens and it's not good um it
doesn't go the way that they want
doesn't go the way that they want at all
because as you say the people come out
in support of this thing that they have
started but the people is always a
concrete configuration of persons it's
it's the it's it's not and it's not the
persons that they expect to come into
the streets that they actually see um
part part of this could have been the
fact that center right media really
takes their uh demonstrations and runs
with it so the people that hear about it
the people that are watching that media
part of it could be that they've chosen
the streets as a side of contention
they've they've believed that downtown
South Paulo the center of the the
largest city is where like the struggle
should happen but then they also really
realize they realize very quickly oh
this is like the center of the the
economic capital the people that live
right here aren't really the
workingclass Brazilians that we believe
to be like real people there's all these
other people and these are not the
people that I expected to come out and
these new people are yelling at us or
attacking our friends or or or ripping
Flags down or or saying that this is
actually a movement against the left
when we all know that just two weeks ago
it was only left it was actually here
and so they were quite skilled at
putting together a plan that would cause
the people to come into the streets but
it just turned out that when the people
come into the streets that doesn't
necessarily push history forward in the
way that you expect you often no one and
no one no one knew what to do with this
explosion of energy with this explosion
of Humanity on the streets the original
organizers didn't know what to do the
mayor of Sal Pao didn't know what to do
dma Rusev the president of the country
didn't know what to do but some you know
a lot of people realize especially
right-leaning libertarian kids realize
oh this is the meaning of this thing is
up for grabs this is this is right for
contestation we can try to resignify
what this is actually all about and a
group of kids that are funded by think
tanks in the United States uh intent on
pushing the country to the right one of
them is trained under the Cook Brothers
Jesus um they make a bid to resignify
what this is all about and I think that
they ultimately in the longterm win uh
they create a group that is meant to
trick people into thinking that they're
the same group as the original
organizers to steal the Thunder to steal
the sympathy has been generated by the
original uh uh punks and leftists and it
works they end up leading protest
movements into 2015 2016 that call for
impeachment that support lavat and then
they're elected into Congress and now
they're major political players whereas
the original punks and anarchists are
not really on the scene anymore in
Brazilian
politics Tucson I know you wrote some
questions you want to ask the second
question
sure one moment while this loads okay
why do you think this is sort of taking
a zooming kind of long why do you think
it's important to take the global
approach in comparing and contrasting
protests
worldwide yeah absolutely
so it is I make the point at in the
introduction that it is essential to
okay when this happens just because
we're in this story when this
happens other parts of the global media
other correspondents other journalists
that work for the most powerful and
loudest outlets in the global system I
think it's I think it's a big problem
that are the loudest outlets in the
global system but the Us corporate media
the English language corporate media um
other people in my
class that understand even less than I
do of what is happening on the streets
they say oh well Brazil's
doing a spring this is the Brazilian
spring so the media begins to interpret
this thing as if it is talk your Square
as if it is the the type of Uprising
that has started in North Africa a few
years earlier and then in GUI Park and
this happens weirdly through my Twitter
account is that I do a tweet that goes
viral in GUI Park and then in Turkey
people are sending me all these messages
saying like the whole world is gazi the
whole world is Sal Paulo so in this
decade if you want to tell this the true
story of how this decade evolves you see
not only some movements on the ground
self-consciously copying something that
they saw elsewhere so Occupy Wall Street
is adbusters magazine saying we're going
to do talker Square in America um Hong
Kong 2014 is Hong Kong saying we're
going to do Occupy Wall Street which was
a copy of Egypt which was inspired by
Tunisia and you know fascinating to me I
think is that by 2014 when they do this
new copy it's already become clear that
talk Square didn't really work out so on
the one hand to tell the story you have
to look at the ways that the movements
copied other movements even when the the
contexts were widely different but you
also have to look at the ways in which
the way the thing predes is affected by
the way that the media interprets it and
the media often interpreted it in a very
one-dimensional stupid way MH as if it's
like that other thing that looks kind of
the same oh look there's lots of people
in the streets uh it looks like the fall
of the Berlin Wall it's so it's like the
same as the fall of the Berlin wall or
like oh look there's a bunch of people
on the streets in Brazil they're doing
Arab Spring even though that started
as
dedicated attempts to overthrow
dictators who' been in power for decades
whereas Brazil was governed by a
popularly a popular democratically
elected left of center president so it
like this kind of strange s short
circuiting happens everywhere so to tell
this story I think you have to both
point out the ways in which they shared
things because they tried to
share um uh uh they had commonalities
because they were trying to reproduce
things that they saw elsewhere but also
the ways in which their very very real
differences were flattened or erased by
media coverage and just to finish the
answer that first thing of the
two that first half of the of that first
part of the dynamic um is related to
what you read in your introduction right
when
people respond something very bad
happens they know that there's been a
government abuse they know that there's
been a horrible case of police brutality
this is this shocks me this is something
we must take action against I think this
process of copying or doing something
that you
know has been
accelerated in the age of you know
intense mediatization it's not just
social media it's just Med everything's
media we're always on the media we're
always we're always interacting with
each other in in mediated ways rather
than face to face and so a lot of
the the the the
repertoire the package of contention the
very specific recipe of rebellion that
people reach for is one that has become
kind of globally hegemonic because we
all live on the same internet and so
people are grabbing that thing and so
often the book is really about I think
the unexpected success of a particular
repertoire of contention and then what
happens when it accidentally or
unexpectedly gets way way more people on
the streets than anybody had ever
imagined um I was talking to Cedric
Johnson I don't know if you're familiar
with Professor Cedric Johnson and we
were talking about your book neither one
of us had had read it at the time um but
he wrote uh I don't know if you read his
after black lives matter or Panthers
can't save us now um but but book's kind
of about the domestic protests and what
ended up happening and how those get
co-opted so and so on in your book you
talk about the medial ecosystem we exist
in and how it affects the way we look at
protest how it affects the way we
understand uh what protest is and mass
action with social media being the
dominant form of media most people
digest is the instagrammable moment
infiltrating movements and turning mass
action into more of a collective
catharsis so turning it into a
collective catharsis I think
is I think that Collective catharsis has
always been there I think that there are
a lot of things that protests do um
protests I think are fundamentally a
communicative action they're like that's
it's right there in the word especially
in Spanish or Portuguese they you know
manifestations or demonstrations you're
trying to send a message to somebody so
it's fundamentally communicative actions
but also they're
about recognizing a shared Humanity with
other people that are trying to build
the same kind of role that you are and
this kind of the the the effect on the
the participant is often really
important and and and you know that can
be a really important thing and part of
a larger story of movement building or
even successful
Revolution
what is new compared to a lot of the
cathartic Revolution uary sorry the
cathartic Mass protest movements of the
20th century or like 2003 like you know
I protested against the war in Iraq and
Berkeley in 2003 that was you know I
felt like I was doing something it felt
very meaningful but the government just
ignored it you know the George Bush
Administration decided that he knew
about the anti-war minority and he
decided you know no no matter how noisy
we were he decided he didn't care what's
really strange about the 2010s is when
it actually works
um and often so the cases that I choose
to analyze in my book I I tell 13
stories but 10 of them really I think
count as the particular type of
phenomenon that I'm
analyzing in order to be included I
don't it's not that I agree with them
they're all over the map ideologically
it's that they actually get so big that
they uh overthrow or fundamentally
destabilize existing governments and I
think in any case when that happens you
have to have multiple causal there's
always many many reasons that a protest
can can get so many people on the
streets that it actually overthrows a
government or or fundamentally
destabilizes one and I think that social
media is one of the things that gets you
over the line it's one of the things
that gets quite a lot of people into the
streets and in a lot of the cases that I
analyze it is
a shocking image of police repression
that goes viral and it's usually police
repression against somebody that
is considered
innocent compared to the usual type like
you know in Brazil if they had just C
like cracked the heads of the punks and
Anarchist and shot up the favellas
middle class Brazil ignores that but the
the protest hits um you know photogenic
white journalists in the mainstream
journalist in the mainstream media so I
think that what social media contributes
to along with aot along with structural
fact factors along with the the 2008
crisis is making it easier for a whole
lot of people to get into to the streets
all at once but then often in the decade
as I analyze it at least or around the
particular phenomenon that I choose to
build the
story
that cocktail social media being one of
the ingredients creates a situation that
the protest doesn't know how to deal
with cannot cannot cannot respond to
they cannot either form a new government
which would be like properly a
revolutionary movement or even often to
elaborate a set of Demands that would
allow ruling Elites to be like okay you
want you asked for ABC d and e I'll give
you ABC and then the streets say okay
we'll take ABC uh but we've raised
Consciousness about D and we're going to
go back and rebuild often there's just
like this strange I I thought that was
so sorry to sorry to stop you I I was
close to done I was done I was I thought
that was such an important part of your
book when you bring that up that when
you have like the kind of more
traditional communist Marxist leninist
party um coming in making the
negotiations and you have the anarchist
going see this is what
happens they they uh just work with
power and we're not getting what we want
um is that the problem when you have the
horizontal
movements
that you can't take the small victories
and try to build from there you're
constantly no if we don't get what we
want exactly the way we want it then
tear it all down
so when a movement is fully horizontal
so in the book I I try to distinguish
between horizontalist movements like the
group in Brazil that really believe that
this is the best form of organizing a
social movement or just concrete
horizontality which is often what you
got in other cases where they would have
maybe perhaps liked to
have a a labor union or a Communist
party that was strong enough to sort of
be at the front but they just didn't
like in Egypt they just didn't like
Civil Society had been decimated under
the dictatorship so I think
you know as a mental experiment well not
maybe not a mental experiment when you
have near near complete horizontality
when there is um when it is really
really quite difficult for anybody to
speak for the movement in any credible
way like you people will will make bids
to speak for the movement but like it
there's no if you are so for example in
Brazil dma Rusev sits in her office dma
Rusev has come up as a
dissident
she would love to give the streets what
they want she thinks that they're asking
for basically things that she wants
to but she can't figure out what is the
things that they are asking for that if
she were to deliver that would credibly
lead to some kind of a victory that
everybody could go home you know okay I
gave you what you want so she like
spends her days studying the television
screen in her office turn she turns off
the sound because she doesn't want to be
influenced by people like me that are
telling her what's happening on the
streets she turns off the the sound to
study the signs in the
streets and she kind of comes up with
her own idea of what it is and then and
then at the same time in the streets you
have these competing forces to supply
actually what the demands are and no
there is no way there no one wins no one
wins the narrative the battle over the
narrative I mean in the book like this
is like a cute story that uh I know
quite well because I I end up tracking
down the guy that made it one guy just
put on a V for Vendetta mask in Brazil
made a video on YouTube said Anonymous
I'm Anonymous these are the five demands
and everybody kind of thought it like it
it took off and I found the guy later I
was like oh well how did Anonymous
decide on these demands like no I just
made them up I got them from Facebook so
damn and he didn't even know that was
weird like to him he's like yeah there's
no such thing as Anonymous like you know
I was just you know and his thing went
viral uh and something similar happens
in in in Hong Kong like if we burn is a
post that is made by
one guy outside of the country that that
probably has different
political views and goals than the
majority of Hong kongers but he makes a
post on a Reddit like their version of
Reddit essentially with a a gif or a JP
I forget uh from Hunger Games and that
goes viral it gets like a million up
votes and then people are standing in
the streets saying if we burn you burn
with us and he comes to the the
conclusion later oh well that actually
isn't true
in the case of Beijing like Hong Kong
can just burn and then they just wait
which is what happened so when you have
concrete or like near complete
horizontality where everybody's in like
you know at the extreme end of this um
uh uh like Spectrum which you got pretty
close to in June 2013 everybody in on
the streets is on the street as an
individual with their own ideas as to
what the thing is about and with their
own ideas as to what the government
should do it becomes not only very hard
to like form a new government if you
accidentally or intentionally overthrow
the the the existing government because
how is like a protest of individuals
with different ideas about the future
going to form a new government you also
have a very hard time elaborating the
demands like a union would in a union
organization or like civil rights
organizations in the 50s and 60s would
have um in a way that allows the the
state to believe okay well if I give
them ABC then they're going to go home
because I have no idea if they're
actually going to give them go home if I
give them ABC so it's not in anyone's
interest it's not in my interest as the
as the ruling party to give them AB
orc T you want to follow
up with the next
question
sure okay um this end of History moment
is it hard for Western leftists to
imagine an alternative to capitalism
when un when and understand the long
game
so many people quote Lenin there are
decades where nothing happens and there
are weeks when decades happen
ifs and decades don't happen what
usually happens to the movement in
question
so if so part one of the question is if
if it's hard for the Western left to
imagine what what is what what could
actually come after capitalism is that
right yeah I think so I think that I
think that we're pretty
good at imagining I think that we are
um the the Western left the first world
left is not
worse than the global South left than at
at at theorizing possible futures or
ways that things can go poorly but what
a lot of these 225 250 interviewees told
me at the end of the
book is that for the Western left it's
not
urgent they're kind of you know compared
to us at least so this is what some you
know the most famous quotes um came from
Egyptians like for
us if we
lose all my friends die or go to jail if
we are stuck with this dictatorship like
in in right now in Cairo you can't even
talk about politics in a coffee shop
without going being arrested or in
Brazil you know the bolsonaro government
and I said this is what I saw in front
of my house when bolsonaro gets power
people are
starving in front people are dying in
front of my house right and so I think
that what the difference
between
the horizon or imagination of struggle
between uh you know like on both sides
of this very you know I think it's a a
coherent line I think it's a good line
to maintain but it's kind of a uh a um a
fuzzy line
between Global North and Global South is
that
um if nothing happens you know if no
weeks come if no month if no if no uh if
if if if decades just Happ keep coming
without anything happening in you know
the part of suburban California where I
grew up that's kind of okay it's boring
you're
alienated uh you're watching labor you
know uh you're watching labor be
decimated or or becoming more precarious
but you can kind of hold on and and and
wait for the next um um rupture at least
in comparison to you
know uh mosque or or Brazil or Egypt
where um they often don't need to
imagine something very otherworldly and
and and uh utopian they know what they
need right now they just they just need
this particular repression to stop or
they just need food tomorrow or they
need healthare right now so I think that
that um that is a division which I think
is that I come down to seeing slightly
more
important
cool um to sort of piggyback on that one
um and dealing with that quote uh you
also mentioned right after you mentioned
that quote but in cities in the 21st
century things move even more quickly
than that what do you think is causing
the speed up
worldwide yeah mediatization so I I put
myself in this book even though I don't
really want to be in my books I don't
really want to be in my work I I'm more
I'm in this book more than I want to be
because I think media plays a bigger
role in this story than I wish it did
like my deep
instincts um my deep political instincts
are to look at you know structure and
material conditions and
long-term shifts in in in the Deep more
invisible um um um substructures of
society but in this particular case and
again just to be clear this is it is a
book really about a built around a
specific phenomenon which is this
particular package of tactics works
better than expected to tell that story
there's quite a lot of media in it it's
quite a lot of mediatization it's qu
like I don't think you can really
explain why Brazil goes the way it does
without people in the media accidentally
or in a in a subconscious way
reconfiguring not only
the interpretation of June 2013 does not
just change the way that people in you
know the United States and China
understand what's happening on the
streets it changes what's happening on
the streets and so and this thing you
know this process that this weird back
and forth that happens between me and
gzy park um in June 2013 would not
happen without technology and intense
mediatization of our lives and in some
ways it's really
cool it's I think it is something that
can be celebrated and built upon um for
movements that want to work on on
creating Global solidarity links but
there was this other strange slippage
where you got the copying of
tactics that you had seen somewhere else
because it looked great there or because
it got good media representation
somewhere else or because you started
doing it in your country and then you
immediately got a positive feedback loop
like you realize and you know like I'm
I'm not trying to call people out
because I'm I'm I I recognized them that
I was starting to be guilty of this
myself in June 2013 you start to realize
that if I do this thing or say this
thing I get a thousand retweets instead
of two and so like this you have you
have like an immediate feedback loop
with mediatization in the largest sense
of uh of interaction with with like um
both social and traditional media I
think that that's was I miss I was
trying to ask in the earlier question
about the instagramable moment about
yeah um just being there whatever there
means makes you some sort of radical
yeah in the new sense of radical like
you just have to kind of show up to
things whether these
things have a purpose or not and if
you're there then you're radical there's
an ecosystem for Radicals in the in the
spaces we exist in on the internet and
you can become a bit of a celebrity uh
in that space so you don't even need
corporate co-optation at that point it's
just the yeah that's really that's
really interesting like um yeah you've
done you've pre- coopted yourself right
like you've uh well that's that's that
book I sent you that I the little mini
yeah it's yeah looks really interesting
yeah um that was kind of my my thing
when I was and you talk about the
situationist as well in your book so
that's why I sent that to you I was like
oh wow two people that came to the same
conclusion about sex pistols and I find
them interesting because in Malcolm
McLaren you have this guy that is a
leftist for all intents of purposes
and has a way that he wants to bring
about the fall of capitalism whether or
not it's quirky whether or not it's
really going to
work he gets the spectacle part right
you
know and you talk about it with the New
York Dolls they were're going to put a
hammer and sickle behind the New York
Dolls who are already a fringe act and
that didn't work people did not like
that did not like that but San says in
the in the really memorably in the
United States you can be gay or a drug
addict you can't be a
communist that you crossed the line that
crossed the line for them
and what I found interesting with the
sex
pistols and again with studying a little
bit about the situationists is that he
goes okay we're going to go the
anarchist route with these guys and that
just resonates so hard in the western
world that it kind of becomes the
foundation for what we look at as punk
music and
the Animus that I get from people that
actually listen to a little bit of what
I have to say is that wasn't the goal of
everybody involved some people are at
best anti- over consumerist maybe they
were anti-conservative
and conservative in that like we don't
like the jocks kind of way of the 80s
right
and a lot of them wanted the planes that
Led Zeppelin had
they wanted the laser light show they
wanted the free gear they wanted the
women after the shows there was nothing
that they wanted that was antithetical
to their Rockstar
counterparts and it almost feels
similar in in these circles especially
when you well I don't want to go one for
too
long get myself in trouble
which what do you well you see the same
thing kind of in
BLM oh you know
um
where there's
a no one likes seeing anybody get
murdered by law enforcement no
one
um there's a small group of people that
probably think it's cool but
ultimately children getting harmed
innocent people getting killed everybody
goes out in mass and they hate it
right
and that movement to
me started a
conversation I
think there's something to it from that
standpoint
but what was the end
goal and who really wins in 2020
hundreds of millions of dollars gets
dumped into black
capitalism all in the name of George
Floyd a lot of these programs lot these
grants people got was never going to
help out George
Floyd it wasn't for
him but his
death was the Catalyst
for a large segment of the bgea
population to get set asdes
Nixon was a proponent of black
capitalism you know what I
mean so when you see some of these these
big movements and everybody gets on
social media and they're saying all the
right things this is wrong this is bad
of course this is wrong this is bad this
is horrible to see who likes watching
snuff films on news I hate it I hate it
I lived in I lived in West Oakland you
know the East Bay I lived on Wood
Street in a warehouse cross from the
encampment um so I saw I saw daily
people in around the garbage on fire
like a Mad Max movie cooking and burning
things they shouldn't be burning we're
all inhaling just toxic
hair
um it
sucks but who kind of wins at the end of
the day City's burned in
2020 who who is
Victorious what is what is moving
forward what are we what are we talking
about right now moving forward we're
going into 2024 and we're talking about
larger police
budgets more people that aren't even
homeowners are complaining about
property crime like it's the 90s and
you're talking about murders and crack
it isn't the same thing at
all and everybody's calling for heavier
sentences for property
crime that's my frustration
with a lot of what happened domestically
2020 is the is
the mark Fischer calls it the
ideological blackmail co-optation in
capitalist
realism I don't know if so that yeah no
there was there's three things that I
would like uh there was I started like
thinking of all the things that I wanted
to respond to but uh maybe I can go back
in order because um I think there's a
way that the first the old question
maybe I didn't answer that directly
about Instagram like uh the Instagram
post uh is maybe related to that second
uh history of punk
music
um ASF bot who I quote at the end of the
book he's an Iranian American
Scholar looking really closely and like
you know carefully and sympathetically
at the the uprisings in North Africa
so-called Arab Springs
he thinks well you know not only did
neoliberal structures not only did
neoliberal economics decimate these
societies it also reshaped subjectivity
in a way in
which the
neoliberalized North African subject
Egyptian um middle class person pointing
into the
square had a hard time not necessarily
imagining what they wanting what they
wanted but imagining what it takes to do
a revolution imagining and they have a
hard time um um

um reconstructing or arriving at the
properly Collective action that is
needed to push things over the line um
and there's a long quote I could find if
you like it's it's it's quite powerful
about the ways that neol neoliberal
subjectivity makes it difficult for us
for for for us to not only recognize the
structures that are oppressing us but to
collect you know effectively push back
against them and like weirdly from like
you know much less radical Direction
Naomi Klein like talk you know she she
like kind of looked at the same thing in
the in like the same years and she's
like oh well you know we're all all
we're really do like personal branding
has been so deeply ingrained into the
way that we're supposed to live our
lives is that we don't even really
recognize anymore that we are thinking
first yeah thinking first about our
individual projection and then only
distantly second or third if ever about
the kind of collective struggle which is
required to be our enemies because our
enemies are are are organized our
enemies are operating as a
class and so to try to make that bridge
from the first thing to the second thing
in like the history of punk rock I mean
I grew up in the suburbs of Southern
California in the 90s I grew up more you
know as individual you know absolutely
materially taken care
of in a incredibly indiv ided
anatomized
um type of living like wait like you
know you're in a you got to drive
everywhere and then it was like for
better or worse and you know and I think
it's neither For Better or Worse it's
just like the way you know you can't you
can't snap your fingers and changed the
way that this works I often got my first
like the first time that I heard about
like more complex political ideas other
than just like the Democrats and the
Republicans was through music right was
through either punk music or through I
remember like La weekly being like a big
part of my political Awakening because I
would go to the Mexican restaurant with
my parents on you know every Friday
night or whatever and I would grab the
LA weekly and there would these be
people these people talking about these
bands or these movements that that I had
never had you know I would have never
known
about living in the suburbs and then you
like you know you read about them and
you read about the ideas that they're
into and then like that gets you to
finally maybe like reconnects this very
atomized neoliberalized subject that I
was at 14 years old with this body of
like thought of like political
philosophy or or Theory or just like the
body of of of of of the humanity is
going back to whatever Greece and this
is what a lot of the Brazilians said I
mean they said this quite explicitly 20
years ago now when you say it people
kind of think that maybe you're like
trying to be um you're trying to be
slightly insulting but they're very
proud of this in the early 2000s is that
oh there was no anarchism in Brazil
until Punk brought it back like there
was Anarchist in Brazil like in like the
early early 20th century but then they
all reorganized into like they were from
Italy they all reorganized into the the
Brazilian Communist party and then like
The Rebirth of anarchism or the like the
way that we decided that we needed to
learn about anarchism was that we were
pretending we were anarchist because we
were in bands that were like supposed to
be a punk anarco punk and then we like
decided to actually go get the books and
figure it out so like I think that it is
um symptomatic IC of like this broader
very very IND individualized consumer
society that we live in that it was for
better or worse like often like the
consequence of Malcolm McLaren's a
sensual kind like basic like stunt you
know it's just a spectacle but like it
is a marketing you know as much as it is
a spec you know also a marketing tactic
yeah that this one particular strand of
political thought gets reintroduced
especially in the first world or the the
sections of Brazilian Society where like
very much listening to to music from
California and things and of course if
this is the structure of the glob Global
media um environment then only the like
at least at that first you know the
first steps on the bridge the first
thing that you're going to identify as a
way a path out of the sort of wilderness
intellectually that you're in are always
going to be things that kind of more or
less are tolerable
to consumer culture to like to re you
know there you can imagine you know not
only just the hammer and sickle but you
can imagine other kind of radical
messages that Malcolm McLaren could have
chosen that would not really have gotten
you know people would have not put up
with it right but it just happened to be
that one that really served as a um I
mean he brings stick
back
well does he put it on Sid Vicious or
Sid Vicious just decides to wear it
Johnny Rotten wore one as well I I think
those those dudes were just so f
everything that seems taboo and that is
kind of what you end up getting you know
the deconstruction which I call the
culture of no that's ultimately what you
get you get a lot of people that are
just like no yeah and granted there are
people that come after the fact like I
like propagandhi they seem like
righteous dudes but they don't have the
cultural significance of the Sex Pistols
Black Flag Bad Religion you know insert
very large punk band here there's a lot
of punk bands that may have good
politics but they're so
small and just they're not designed to
be any bigger than you know their small
little Mill and I think that what you
just said there's an overlap between
what you just said the politics of no
because like in this this book lip
lipstick PR Li Lipstick Traces which is
like probably the most serious attempt
to trace Punk's um ideology back to
situation International and dataism he
does talk about like the negate like the
power of negation like the ways in which
the negation of what is presently
existing allows for the imagining of
something different and allows it to
denaturalize um you know allows it to
make it clear that what appears to be
natural is not really natural or
whatever like the politics of negation
um serve a function in this kind of very
Art School way you know nothing against
art school but this is what Malcolm
McLaren comes from but this idea of
saying no no no to everything everything
everything maybe isn't um I think
there's an overlap between that attitude
and what ends up happening in an
accidental way in these Mass prot Ms
when there comes to a moment when
actually someone's trying to give you
someone's trying to someone's trying to
give you what you've you know it seems
that you you're asking for but there's
this insistence on negation forever and
this is what really causes this split
between the mayor of Sal Pao Fernando
Hadad and the original punks and
Anarchist is that Hadad believes that he
truly believes that the government is
set up to listen to people like these
kids he truly believes that his
government is responsive to their
demands but they act as if they don't
they want nothing to do with that
process of mediation they they want to
negate the state as it exist and then
that will somehow you know cause an
uprising which will somehow be good but
actually the uprising came and it wasn't
what they wanted at all and and they
ended up in this strange battle where
nobody knew really exactly what they
were supposed to be
doing it's it's so sad because that kind
of is how I felt about heavy music and
the left the current iteration of maybe
the Western left will say is that
there's so much no saying there's not a
lot of what do we want how do we get
people into the movement if we're saying
what we don't like and yeah yeah the
culture of deconstruction and the
culture of authenticity those two things
definitely work uh against you to uh to
build any real realid movement yeah
everyone's auth you know everyone's
authentic right every single human being
that's the thing like it's like uh the
you know the people you know like well
everyone the people but includ you know
the the turns out that the people
included the far right in Brazil the
people you know and everyone's authentic
um but yeah that the idea of constantly
this is I think a quite a North American
thing and
um the idea that the more radical you
are the more that you distance yourself
from the state uh in every case because
in Brazil I mean this is my next thing
I'm working on so I'm thinking about
this all time but I spent the summer
with Brazil's landless workers movement
which is a very radical
group that pushes
for ultimately they would love a
socialist Revolution but they also want
but they really they their their reason
for existing is to push for radical Land
Reform Distributing land from uh feudal
or large land owners to um Regular
Brazilians and they have like you know
in the long term their vision is very
radical they read Lenin they read Mao
they're very good friends with the
Cubans they bring in social movements
from all over the world but dayto day
they have no problem
extracting concessions from the state
when they can get something when they
can get the local education commissioner
to agree to provide funding and uh uh uh
uh like State infrastructure to their
the school that they've built they will
take that they extract that and by
extracting that they don't stop they
don't give up on their longterm radical
goals they don't become the local
Administration but they are very they
have no problems whatsoever with getting
something now and then not
only that act of getting something Now
does not mean you stop it is actually
used to get people into the movement
because now you're able to give
working-class Brazilians like look
here's money here's food being part of
this movement not only is a long-term
strategy a
long-term attempt to revolutionize
Brazilian and ultimately all South
American society but right now we're
putting food on your table um and I
found anyways that's what I've been
thinking about because I spent the
summer with them but I was often in the
and I grew up with this sort of deep
assumption myself growing up you know
very indiv individualized atomized in
the 90s listening to bands in Suburban
California the idea that the more
radical you were the more that you just
never had anything to do with the
existing
world uh that's the movies we saw I mean
look I'm assuming we're around the same
age I might be a little older than you
46 um no yeah no no no you're not
older you know that was how hold on how
old did you say you were sorry 4 46 yeah
you are a little bit old me sorry said
36 yeah
uh and those were the the outcast that's
supposed to be a leftist is alone the
punk music turns into Fu Mom right I
think yeah I mean that's really I think
it's a lot of it was about right I mean
it's made for the think about this it
was it's made for it's you know pop
music is sold to teenagers that's the
biggest market and teenagers are having
a really tough time you know being a
teenager is you know you're kind of
you are kind of mad at everyone when
you're a te for good
reason and listening to 40y old men say
FU mom is one thing but yeah if you
think about 90s and right if you think
about Warp Tour and oh if you think
about the 90s and deregulation
financially and this explosion of
suburbs um you also get explosion of
malls yeah you explosion of cheap credit
right and you get an explosion of
something that we never really had in
the United States which is Hell
festivals yeah you get two wood stocks
in the 90s you get laipo a traveling
tour the 90s and so much other stuff
Lilith Fair Lilith oh there you go we
let the ladies do it too the ladies can
do
it and you know whether we like it or
not those are all consumer products
right just like just like punk music
just like the sex pits were and now we
can look like Punk we can look like Sex
Pistols we can have lit remember when
you're probably old enough to remember
if you had a a facial piercing oh yeah
that was wild yeah you didn't have a
regular job no you had a facial piercing
you either went to prison you were into
some weird sex stuff you were a real
deal out you were like one of those like
hobo kids yeah now in 1994 95 96 if you
don't have an eyebrow
piercing you just ain't cool brother
yeah and that's all in the suburbs
you're getting it done at the mall and
and this is a thing that comes up also I
think in
the the mass protest in the moment of
unexpected success this is actually
something I'm stealing I'm not stealing
but this came out of because both Alex
and I Alex from Boa yeah uh uh Alaba boa
we're both South paa based most of the
time
um if you make demands upon a ruling
class if you present a bunch of
demands in a moment where you even maybe
have leverage you've shut down the city
you're making things very difficult
making it difficult to reproduce
capitalism in a given Nation if you make
a much of Demands and some of them are
purely cultural and some of them
actually require taking money away from
Elites they're going to give you the
cultural ones that's fine they don't
care they can make it they can change
the rules where it's okay to have where
it's okay to have uh phase piercings if
you're actually asking for a
restructuring of the economy now you're
GNA get actual opposition now you're
going to actually have to go to war with
a class that is itself
organized and acting collectively always
like this is Mark Pier thing says just
because you you quoted them earlier the
ruling class is already organized ruling
class is already doing class war at all
times so if you ask
for cult easy to deliver cultural
shifts and
material gains you're going to get the
cultural stuff and this happens a lot
this happens a lot in the 2010s where in
the moments when the government wants to
appear like the giving the streets what
they want because they want to appear
like they are the inter the they are
responding to the people that they are
the they are the they are the answer to
the question being asked by the streets
um you often get a a a
cultural concession which might matter
to some people even as it alienates
other people I think in Ukraine I think
you get a you do get a a cultural or a
shift on the question of nationalism but
you don't get any restructuring of the
economy that many many people would have
liked
um because it doesn't cost anybody
doesn't cost anybody anything to let you
to work at Starbucks with a face
piercing oh yeah
fine my mouse just exploded so I'm gonna
need you to be
the producer person that makes people
big and small okay that didn't sound
right but you know what I
mean
yes hopefully
my
computer will allow me to do just that
yeah you can you can make Vin Vincent
like regular size right I hope so it
takes a lot of a lot of CPU oh my God to
run R stream for me can you ask the the
the next question that you wrote so
eloquently while I try to put my mouse
back together
okay
loed um so piggybacking on the piggyback
of the Lenin
quote yeah um people have an idea of
Revolution being quick yet at this
moment although things are moving fast I
don't sense that Revolution is around
the corner so that's a contradiction I
see and those two ideas go together is
that just because I'm in the US where's
our Revolution Vincent okay where's our
Revolution I think is a question I know
more quickly how to answer when you say
that you think that re what was the the
the the claim that Revolution is
supposed to be quick can you explain
that a little bit people have an idea
that Revolution should be quick um they
don't see it as being slow I think see
it as being quick and hopefully not
violent yeah so I think quick is gonna
be wrong sort of by definition yeah
hopefully not violent I also hope so but
here but what happened and so um often
it becomes violent um yeah whether or
not you're interested in in in that
happening and this is this is something
that became so I'll start I'll go first
at once if you actually believe so
there's different you know what what's a
revolution there's there's different
definitions as to what it is if if you
believe that it's simply just a rupture
like a big big break and just the break
itself is a revolution then um then I
guess it can be considered quick but if
you but I mean but then what actually
happens in the real world is that
there's always a next day after the
break so the way that the world the
world the way that life is lived after
the the day of the the light the
lightning bolt which is usually not even
how it works it's often kind of a
Hollywood perception but even if there
is a lightning B what really matters is
the way that life is lived afterwards
and the restructuring of society in a
way that actually changes life hopefully
improving it I think that definitionally
is going to take a while and I think
that that process is
longer the more complex the society is
so you know back in the age of
the medieval Town Square that was
described in the beginning of the book
you might just you know the king gets
killed and then there's a new order and
they change the rules and that you know
that doesn't take very long I think that
the actual process
of what would truly be called social
revolution in the 21st century is going
to take a while so then
which is related to part two which is
that
historically Revolution means
counterrevolutionary uh backlash there
is a if you are actually taking
privileges away from somebody or or or
making somebody believe that they are
losing their privileges there's a
counterrevolution and so this is the
thing that
was tragic and shocking and horrifying
in much of what uh uh was understood
initially as the Arabs sprank
which is that this particular form
of contention the Apparently spontaneous
leaderless social media driven or
digitally coordinated horizontally
structured Mass protest in the streets
of you know in chakir
square was not nonviolent because they
you know on on the night of De on
January 28th they burned down 90 police
stations but it was not it was about
just it was about creating uh dislodging
the existing
government and then throughout the rest
of the North Africa and and uh the
Middle East what you often saw is that
when the rupture you know when the
people did create the rupture when there
was a a power vacuum created or a a
national system was destabilized often
the answer was just imperialist
violence that was someone in the
neighborhood the biggest baddest guy
around just came and crushed you um
because they didn't like the way that
things were going this is you know so a
lot of people that say you know that I
whose whose accounts I find very
credible say that the so-called Arab
Spring its fate was written on the wall
when two things happened number one when
NATO
used some legitimate concerns of course
you know Gaddafi of course uh uh uh uh
there were reasons to to to be upset
with the way that he ran Libya but NATO
using those the legitimate concerns of
libyans as an excuse to launch a regime
change operation after that there's no
more after that it's pretty clear that
this particular form is not going to be
um effective uh if if if if NATO is
coming in to just to to decide the way
that your Uprising goes then it's not
going to be decided in a mass protest
and then in Bahrain um Saudi Arabia of
course you know very close us Ally in
the region since the Cold War
uh just drives over the bridge and
crushes the uprising in burain uh
crushes a very
very an uprising which is like asking
for basic rights for the Shia PO for the
Shia majority and the world just kind of
goes oh well that's fine and so the
violence often comes to you um that's
that that was a lesson that a lot of
people in the early 20th century thought
was axiomatic you know you may not be
interested in war war is interested in
you I'm you know changing the context a
little bit um so so that is one thing
though I think that is different you
asked about the the the the United
States this book is not about any of the
uprisings that happen in the United
States and one of the things that I do
think that is different about
um Brazil or Libya or
mosambique um from the United States is
by
definition a mass protest event or
reprising the United States cannot be
responded to by a more powerful country
there is a more powerful country but
everyone in South America knows that you
actually have to play this insane game
this has been the way that things have
gone for 100 years you have to play this
insane game of achieving progress but
not so much that you you provoke the
United States into carrying out a coup
or an invasion um so I think that that
was something that was forgotten even
though it was established pretty well
established knowledge in Long
revolutionary history in the 20th
century um in this era that we all kind
of thought so again this is Berlin the
Berlin Wall idea which is an an idea
that was handed to us which is which is
very misleading that things just got
better for everyone in the postcommunist
world um that's not actually what
happened but the idea that oh people
came to the streets of East Berlin David
Hassel half sang a song Happ everyone's
happy ever after that the belief in that
kind of I mean almost magical
narrative
is crashing up against the reality of an
imperialist global system the reality of
lots of armies that are that are
constituted precisely to stop
configurations of power and uh changing
in ways that they don't want them
to it's it's interesting we were we were
talking there's always someone because
the name of the show right there's
always someone that you know wants a
violent revolution
tomorrow um
and the friend said
once okay he said let's say you take a
city block let's say you take a city
block what are you gonna do when they
shut off the
water how are you going to treat your
wounded what are you gonna do they shut
off the power what are you gon do they
shut off the
internet
cry it's really that
internet I mean that again this all this
theorizing happened back with Carlos
marel and black panthers the idea of of
urban gorilla Warfare turns out Urban
Guerilla Warfare is really quite
difficult to
do difficult to do yeah Carlos Mar got
Carlos M look great you know watch the
movie about him like a hero a martyr of
you know Brazilian democracy but uh or
like the Brazilian resistance to the
dictatorship but like Gilla Urban
gorilla Warfare is very very difficult
especially in the advanced capitalist
first world so like I just realized now
I didn't answer you the the third party
question like where's the revolution
where's our Revolution um I've seen some
people come with this book book before
they read it thinking that it is somehow
at the end going or you know along the
way going to provide some kind of a
program for uh First World Revolution
like how to do revolution in the United
States tomorrow uh that's not what it is
at all it is it is a it is a history
of um the world built around a very
specific phenomenon that has become uh
important in many countries in that
decade especially in the global South
but along the way way if you want to try
to answer that question while reading
the book you can see where there's sort
of let's say weak spots in the global
system or or or or places where things
are
interesting I think Egypt is really
interesting I think Egypt the case of
Egypt 2011 to 2013 was really is really
fascinating because you could really see
it going a different
way um I think that South South
cooperation you know and again what's
Revolution South South cooperation if
effective if you
had you know the kind of thing that Lula
wants to do which is like to prop like
it's very very difficult but to use
South South cooperation to restructure
the global system in a way which allows
the formerly colonized peoples to take
their rightful place as equals along the
first world is that a revolution at the
global scale I me is that a revolution
um I don't know if you would call it a
revolution but I think it's you know it
would be a fantastic outcome for a lot
of people that don't have food or or um
uh medicine right now but yeah I mean I
think I think Egypt I know I I I uh I I
like the one that I I would love to
rerun in my head is Egypt and the one
air you know and Egypt is also a very
very important country the you know by
far the most populous Arab country uh
right on the border with Israel a
population that is vigorously and
uncompromisingly opposed to what the way
that Israel is acting right now but yet
is governed by somebody that must be in
some kind of a collaboration with yeah
Israel in the United States so the
possibility of what a democratic Egypt
would mean even if you don't have like
the revolution that establishes you
know uh uh uh libertarian communism
tomorrow or or that establishes like
Utopia tomorrow just even
like a like so
like a re a restructuring of Egypt in a
way that in which the government would
actually have to demands to the have to
respond to the demands of the most
populous Arab country would mean a lot
for a lot of people so uh so I think
that along the way in the book you could
see like I what I found interesting is
to hear from readers the ways that they
all different people liked different
different people came like grabbed
different parts of it um came came to
different conclusions different
different different stories from around
the world jumped out to different people
and I think that that's like the that's
the point that's why I decided to write
like a global history which is really
structured as a story rather than a book
of like you should do this here's my
argument because I as you said I
interviewed 225 people it would be quite
like disingenuous and unfair to them to
be like this is what I think if if I'm
trying to let their story if I'm trying
to Center their you know um struggles
and sacrifices and the things that they
that they've took took away from it
you're like you Serge I ran for
class

president
about I got homework banned on Thursdays
uh do we have you for a few
more minutes Vincent do we have as you
like well I mean look this is the
Saturday free show so uh tucon question
number nine which I know you wrote is
so beautiful did you want to ask that
one okay question number nine which you
know I wrote um we know the MLK quote
The Arc of the moral universe is long
but bends towards Justice based on your
studies of the
2010s what do you say to that is this
just another example of
prefiguration so that one is really
interesting because Obama loved to say
it

(Laughter)
um and what I think that is a a more
like I don't know I quote a different
uh passage from Martin Luther King um in
the book in his letter from Birmingham
Jail
because he let me just read it uh back
in the 60s Martin Luther King had
criticized the taking aim at the white
liberals who seem to believe that things
would simply improve on their own he
attacked the quote strangely irrational
notion that there is something in the
very flow of time that will inevitably
cure all ills actually time is neutral
it can be used either destructively or
constructively and that is like a bit of
pre you know that's a little bit of
prefiguration in my book because what
what you see in many many cases that it
is possible for things to go quote
unquote backwards for things to get
worse and I think
that um so finishing the quote we must
come to see that human progress never
rolls
on no never rolls in on Wheels of
inevitability it comes to the tireless
efforts and persistent work of men
willing to be co-workers with god um
and I think that
the uh the distinction he makes between
his movement there and white liberals is
quite interesting because if you are
from if you grew up in the ideological
milu that I did if you were a particular
type of American if you grew up if you
for a particular class of First
World um subject like the the the like
privileged subject in in especially in
the United States it is kind of true
that everything just got better for 250
like the like the The Arc like things
for white middle class and and ruling
class Americans in a way which is very
strange in the history of like Global
Society really did just like get better
seemingly on their own for 250 years now
if you take a big step back that's not
how things work for most people most of
the time other parts of the world have
very different experiences of of of
historical The Arc of history but I kind
of did grow up sort of thinking I sort
of if I like interrogate what I believed
when I was 14 I probably did believe
that things just get better and you know
you can see this kind of belief popping
up in like online discourse like if you
think about the the phrase like uh it's
it's it's 2023 and this is still
happening right as if as if the size of
that number somehow
indicated how good things were supposed
to be right just because it's bigger
than the last number means that we're
supposed to be living in a world which
is more liberal or feminist or an
anything whatever it is that you you're
talking about and so I think that that
was an assumption that was deeply held
and important
to a lot of these Mass protest events
they kind of just there was just this
assumption if you get everyone on the
streets yeah then you're making history
move forward and history only moves
forward it doesn't move backward but if
you if you step outside of the you
know the experiences of the United
States and you know specifically the
like um settler and immigrant classes in
the United States uh in the last 200
years that's just not how things work a
lot of you know there's you know Latin
America has a l decade so you can talk
about L centries you can tell you the
century of humiliation in China so um I
think that a lot of people in the 2010s
kind of are came around to more of the
conclusion that um is put forward in
that quote that oh actually you do if
you want things to get better you
actually have to do you know we can
absolutely but you do have to do it you
do have to make things
better does that answer your question it
does it does answer my
question if we have time
for another one from me sure sure okay
this kind of you wrote a lot of
questions so shout out
to some of the shows we get nervous
we're like oh no do we have enough
questions is he gonna get mad at our
questions and I thought I had like a
good handful of questions and Mt was
like I'll show you so I'm G to move out
of the way and let you go ahead and
take well after reading your book last
night I woke up this morning with this
question um and so I'm like I got to get
it in um if the people's will continues
to be frustrated do we get more gavo
prips get more what sorry gavo
prps assassinator of uh Arch two oh
Jesus oh yeah the uh of course
um
so that type of
thing um I think that in
the when
constructing the story of this
particular set of tactics because you
know that the his tactic was
assassination right so this was early
20th century kind of like Terror in the
like the classic Terror version of
Terror that his his when you say his
name I think you're talking about a
tactic and in my book is about tactics I
think that tactics to explain why a
certain tactic becomes hegemonic why it
becomes
chosen you have to look at the range of
number one the the the ideological
background like what people think is a
good thing to do and that's kind of that
quote that was read that he read at the
very beginning about you know what
people reach for what people the the the
kind of responses people know about um
is half of the story but then the other
half of the story is like what is
possible Right like what are the actual
what are the actual range of things that
are available as options
to to
people so in the decade that I look at I
think that the type of apparently
spontaneous leaderless Mass protest is
something that is there relatively easy
to put together and also combines you
know it also overlaps with this
pre-existing set of ideological
assumptions that some people have that
this thing will will will necessarily or
probably leave to something lead to
something uh better but if you really
really close the range of options
available to
people then you get you get people
responding in the only way that is
possible um and often you get people
responding the only way is possible even
if if it ends up being kind of like a a
cry for uh a CRA I mean there was back
in then I don't know what his particular
ideological formation was but there was
like you know there was the idea back in
the late 19th century of like the
propaganda of the deed that like there'
be the one big piece of violence that
would get everybody to that didn't work
out so well usually but but when you but
I do I think what I think the way that I
I think agree with
the um basis of your question is that
like
if you foreclose the range of options
available to people
es especially under conditions of
extreme exploitation or or or
desperation they will reach for what is
available um and and then and then and
then everyone afterwards uh sees where
the where the pieces land but often I
think as the last question demonstrates
it's possible that they land in a worse
place depending on uh the choice the
choice that is given but that choice is
always conditioned by the
possibilities uh presented materially to
to to
people and for those that don't know
garv Prince snip is the person that shot
uh France fand yeah I I I knew I had to
I had to like remember really quickly uh
yeah the assassination that led to World
War I the
Serbian and and now for no one that
knows who France ferand is tocon has to
sing that single oh no yeah in 1914 he
killed he killed the lead singer of a
Scottish
uh post post punk band uh it was it set
off World War I because the austr
Hungarian Empire was in an alliance with
Scotland and the US took the other side
because The Strokes uh was The
Strokes The Strokes were at
war
with they had for yeah they they had
been at war with France fent for many
years stealing their thing and doing it
in a cooler accent so that's the story
of world War one and that's how you get
block party
so that's yeah that well block party is
the yeah what is the were the community
the world Community come to coming
together to put together a post-war
system after World War I of course it it
falls apart very quickly and then that's
how we got World War II is the thought
party is ultimately unstable and
insulting to the
Germans and then and then you what you
get for after that you get the uh the
Revolutionary power of TV on the radio
so uh someone was asking the question
and I think it's in Portuguese and I was
afraid they wanted us to ask you
something that was naughty but
apparently it's not um a a coina am I
saying it right what is
AOS I saw the question okay what is a
Kos uh a Kos is two things it actually
is a body part but that's not what I'm
want to talk about it is a
food that is like it looks like a it's
like egg shaped but it's fried on the
outside and the inside there is uh
Shredded chicken and it's quite good but
it is also a slur that can be lodged
against and this is a slur that many
many Latin am it's not a slur exactly it
is an insult that many many Latin
American countries have for kind of like
reactionary bgea like um like
we don't really know how to pronoun like
translate it but it's like preppy scum
or what I don't that's not even right
but
kosa would be like you go to a party and
it's like you know oh yeah like you know
how was that party it's like ah you know
it was pretty good but it was like Kos
you know there was It was kind a little
bit Kos um that is a word that is used
to deride or
identify like annoying shitty Rich Kids
uh in Spanish it's like fessa there's
like this this word exists in in a lot
of Latin American countries I don't
think we really we don't really have one
right in the US for for this I guess you
you talked about like the in the 80s
movie there was like the the like the
ski like the jader yeah yeah but uh yeah
Kos is both a delicious fried snack
and and a tool of verbal class war in
the Brazilian context if you want like
if you say kosa you're Center you're
left of center probably because you're
you're calling out like the the spoiled
Children of the bisi for being both evil
and having bad taste basically greatest
80s movie villain in my opinion has to
be Roy Stalin from better off dead Roy
Stalin from better off dead yeah there
you go yeah yeah that's this kind of a
it's in yeah the kushia in the Brazilian
context imply like uh and again this is
common in Latin America um Cino would be
the the Venezuelan it implies a kind of
decrepit like the like they are the
they're not strong they're not jocks
they're it means that they're kind of
like weak they are the symptom of a a
decadent bisi that cannot you know but
definitionally a koshia would have grown
up with like a maid and doesn't know how
to do anything and has no like they're
not strong so that's the difference I
suppose interesting
interesting I was afraid it was like
have him say dick in
Portuguese very esteemed guest
say like it's not what we do here at
least on the main
show in the champagne room is where
everybody says words like damn I didn't
know you knew that many curse
words how many languages do you speak
Vincent
uh English really well Portuguese basic
like I could do a podcast in Portuguese
the Portuguese almost as well as uh
English Spanish not quite as well like I
can give talks in Spanish but I couldn't
like riff in Span I probably wouldn't do
I don't I don't tend to do like Spanish
language um like podcasts but yeah I
know Spanish for sure and then indon I
did all of the interviews for the
Jakarta method in Indonesian although I
definitely couldn't like shoot the
in Indonesian like I really had to be
like in the 1960s kushev took this
decision what was your opinion as a
member of the Indonesian com I had to
really kind of like structure the
sentences uh and then German I could do
all basic transactions so it's I don't
know four and a half something like this
depending on how you count them four you
know 4.2 I don't know English I don't
know English something of this I don't
know yeah when you wrote that in the
book I was like I was a little jealous
because here I am struggling to say the
most simple things in Spanish and you
know Vince and bevans is going around
the world like you know talking to
everybody in the
hood in the hood
well am I doing wrong with my life the
yeah SP I mean I got a I got I got a I
got a jump start on Spanish because I
have I have cousins in Mexico City so I
would spend quite a bit time oh okay
okay I'd spend some time you know it was
available to me like my family didn't
like learn like we didn't you know
wasn't like in the house but if we
wanted to we could hang out with the
Mexican cousins and and and I wanted to
like go to Mexico and learn things so
when you get it when you get it young I
think that helps to to form the basis
for all the other languages too are you
okay this is question are you using the
apps or are you going old school like I
got a book and I just put my head nose
in it learned it oh no no what do you
mean do like for for for dating oh no
for for Jes I was like using the
apps
uh I
don't I have a girlfriend and
the for languages the apps don't work
the apps don't work I thought you were
trying to like really take the
conversation like all right I'm I'm
going to get
are you on the apps are really getting
in your business
now the apps don't work that's the
answer to your question like do that
doesn't work do a linga doesn't work
it's a waste of time I uh I I perfected
a language learning method a long time
ago and it's it's book you like learn
all the grammar on your own in a book
and then you start consuming lots of
actual language like you start reading
real books or watching real movies and
then you filter all that raw material
into the structure you've built with the
book
so you're saying like learn all the
different um conjugations right I went I
saw I visited I would create that
structure well this is what I do I
create that structure in my brain and
then I pour into it real Spanish so like
once I have the basic structure I start
reading like an actual book even if it's
like a children's book um and then I use
this structure over here to sort all of
this material into the right places and
then I figure out slowly how to
understand real language and then you
start to reproduce that's how I did
that's what I've been trying to do but
very very very very very very very very
slowly but you made me feel like I
just want you to know that no and then
or and then and then ultimately what you
do is you go like and then you start
hanging out with lots of people that
don't know English and so like this is
what I what I invent as well in Brazil I
would just go out all the
time um be very social stay out
talking with that's the most important
thing that's what I was always taught
that's what jean told me to do Jean
bajon he when I first moved here I was
afraid to leave my house because I my
Spanish was so bad and people would like
you know they tell you the price of
things like you go to the grocery store
and you're not dealing with numbers in
the states it's not five doll it's like
you know
8,000 know AI or something like that
you're like what number did you just say
why did it take you so long to say that
number I got two things yeah so I would
get like panic attacks and Jean bajon
yelled at me and he's like look man
you're never going to learn language
unless you go out so I make it a point
to go out into the city you have to be
okay with and this is something that
because like a lot of times people like
oh you know a bunch of languages you
must have like that magic type of a
brain where you just learn whereas like
every language that I learned took like
hundreds of hours of me trying very hard
but one of the thing that stops people
is that you have to spend like at the
very beginning you're like oh I know
some things and at the very end now
you're fluent in the middle there's a
big bit where you kind of are making a
fool of yourself all the time you have
to be okay with being kind of
embarrassed to like to get through this
middle bit you have to be okay with and
that's why like you know when I was
younger I would go out and like having a
few drinks would often make it easier to
like get through that like testing out
stuff when you know you're G to kind of
look stupid but a lot of I know I find
that a lot of people stop at that level
they stop where they don't want to ever
be in a position of embarrassed yeah or
be have less power in the transaction
because they're clearly somebody that's
trying to like fumble through a new
language but if you just like get but
that's like part of it and it's like a
few months and then you come out the
other side that's what I that's why I've
always approach it but yeah some people
especially because especially if you
grow up an English speaking country you
don't ever have to oh yeah you don't you
don't ever have to actually put yourself
in a weaker position you know what
shocking living here is meeting
Americans that are mad people don't
speak
English hey you know we created this
Global
Empire we' killed all of these millions
of people I thought that I could just
show up and just you know just be a dick
no that's kind of awesome um Vincent
thank you so much for hanging out with
us thank you for having me I'm
glad no I'm all right I'm good I'm good
uh someone rang my doorbell I think it's
probably not for me but I'll uh figure
that out in a
second um
there's a part of me that wants to to
have Vincent watch videos with us for
like five minutes there's another part
of me that wants him to keep his
journalistic
Integrity I
got I think I get hold on to whatever I
got but uh is this is this a normal
amount of 1 hour 50 minutes that's
pretty good for a video huh it's pretty
good for oh no we we we we definitely
went over we usually try to do an hour
and then we have a thing called the
champagne room where sometimes take the
conversation into the champagne room
sometimes we open up phone lines but one
thing we always do is we have fun
because whenever you go into a VIP area
it's supposed to be fun yeah and so
although in real life it's often just
like you've paid money to sit in a
different little corner you paid money
to be like hey I have money look at me
and there's no women here what is this
they're like well this is a shitty club
VIP there you
go someone's actually knocking now uh oh
is it the government I don't know it
could be
it could be uh is right say goodbye then
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah that's fine all
right well uh yeah thank you so much for
for having me and and thank you truly
for the questions thank you truly for
the interest in the book I uh that it
was really nice to think about think
through those issues with both of you
hey wherever you guys are watching or
listening to the show there's links in
the description to Vincent's
book um and I don't think we answered
the question what happened to the
revolution but no what happened to the
revolution uh yeah you know the power
vacuums were formed and then organized
or cynical elements took the place took
entered the vacuums instead of the
original organizers and then the
question of where the revolution is they
I said Egypt but uh that's just because
I
like I'm into I'm just like thinking
about the recent Egyptian history so
that's what I one word answer I enjoyed
the uh the Egypt chapter so thank you
very much Vincent have a very both you
Take Care thank you thank you both I'm
going to go to pick up this answer the
door now thank you chly thank you very
much peace
byebye we got through it tucon we did
it Where'd you go did you mute
yourself you didn't mute yourself
where'd you go I can't hear
you you muted yourself oh you're the
worst
tant did you mute
yourself you're just you're I can hear
you typing but you're not
talking you can hear me breathing I can
hear you doing a lot of things but I
couldn't hear you
talking now I can hear you okay now now
I'm back Jesus I it
happened did you did you
disappear no but I got a thing a warning
saying that that I have no
sound yeah I I don't think I've ever
seen Ram do that before
what that was so weird that was very
weird we did it that what did you think
of bevan's book I loved
it I loved it I like the
highlevel approach to history
and analyzing different events and
strategies you got to know a lot to do
that the way he skips around you know oh
man well he said took 10 years and it
felt like it it's it's a great book if
you guys like the Jakarta method
definitely check out if we
burn
um I really really liked it I haven't
seen him doing too many too much press
on it um have
you uh um a little bit a little bit but
not that much like I said I heard him on
the Bunga cast which was great um
someone says M2 had a lot of great
questions today you did shout out what
you guys don't
know and I'll be I'll say this again a
lot of the questions that you hear on
this show are M2 so
questions more than you think more than
you think more than you think our M2 Sun
question so I I was blown I was so
confident when I went to sleep last
night because usually I wake up in the
morning
frantic frantic stress but and I was
like nope I'm gonna I'm GNA write out
all these good things I think talking
points and I woke up and I I open the
computer and I see you I was like oh
damn she had a hella
(Laughter)
question she I can tell when you like a
book I guess that's
true I guess I can tell when you hate a
book I can tell when you're like this
this negro's got me reading again
that's why I've been taking on all the
authors by
myself you and Marcus made me feel so
bad it's not it's not easy it's
definitely not
easy you guys are like Jason there's
just too much reading I was like don't
you guys like reading like no one likes
reading this don't you guys like
reading no no one wants to read 95
articles
um I've seen this movie
probably a 100 times I'm not saying that
in that way no I've probably seen 100
times have you seen the movie Lean on Me
I have seen the movie Lean on Me has
anyone watching the show right now in
the chat seen the movie Lean on
Me with Morgan Freeman did I ever tell
you like remember this they remade the
song Lean On Me Right remember Club
newvo redid it which was pretty good the
first time I rehear curs at the studio I
end up living in club newvo was next
door of
course they're from they're from the bay
they were they were next door and I and
I didn't I was like oh that sounds like
they're playing that song Lean On
Me knocked on the door hella rudely just
like hey that sounds pretty good what's
the name of your band he goes club newvo
we did that song Lean On Me Back in the
day and he like hummed a little bit for
me
wow
look at all these Ras remember that that
was them
too I believe so um this is the movie
about the most reactionary black man of
all time that is still the underclass
story that everybody needs to hear um
what's so cool about Lean on Me is
somebody made a video about the opening
scene of the
movie and if again if you've ever all
these movies in the 80s and the 90s that
depicted the inner city was an inner
city that I've never lived in and I
lived in the
hood and all hoods look the
same like I know when I'm in a
ghetto you just know you start driving
around you're like man the bank sure did
leave oh sure are no uh Fresh Food
grocery stores around here sure is a lot
of check cashing places
everybody's got bulletproof
glass right yeah all hoods look the
same raggedy ass cars got big ass rims
all of a
sudden all hoods look the same all bad
schools are very similar but Lean on Me
was just
this ah they perfected the not real bad
place yeah because they have to justify
what the actual principal Joe Clark did
by trying to lock out lock in his
students he basically made the students
prisoners in their own
school and he's the hero of the story so
the movie starts
out where these girls are bullying a
girl in the
bathroom maybe this has happened before
somewhere I'm sure somewhere kids are
mean kids do some mean but what
happens after the fact I never noticed
this until this dude brought it
up and he made this movie an entirely
new
experience Stand and Deliver was better
than lean on me yes yes it was it was a
little more
real thinking to Stand By
Me Stand By Me is a little different
want to
see
Joe
Clark Joe Clark and River Phoenix no no
those are very different
movies y'all remember the movie Leen on
me about the most ghetto high school in
America in the
1980s like the opening scene to this is
just pure chaos but I found
something funny check it
out

now what I want you to pay attention
to is this young
man now in the short time given to this
young man wearing this
leather I know civil war soldier hat he
does so much just
watch boom step one he saw some titties
I don't blame him I get
it step two get a bite scene
wins
boom and what does he do to top it
off hits on the
this man
(Laughter)
Legend
what in the world was that
movie so stupid makes guy talk like Bill
what in the
(Laughter)
(Laughter)
world
he whooped a dude's ass he got you fight
in
one what's funny is like no one stopped
this girl is topless in screaming in
what high school in the world does a
topless screaming girl run out of the
bathroom and everyone's like bro I got
to get to class like if the high
school's so bad why is anyone even there
that's
true oh my
God he whoop
to remember that's that's the class
president that gets the one girl
pregnant it's gonna show her
how you
go good call back Dusty s it's just
Rachel so
typical Jason makes me want to watch all
these trash 80s straight to video movies
then I'm doing something right
yeah let's watch class of Nukem high for
movie Nights we gota you know what we
gotta watch a Christmas movie and the
greatest Christmas we we this we have to
do a vote it's going to be
either Gremlins KN of the Comet or
Lethal Weapon or or or or what's the one
with Bruce Willis die hard those are the
choices the weapon Lethal
Weapon Die Hard Night of the Comet or
Gremlins I don't think I've ever
experienced a situation where these
movies were up against each
other especially Le the weapon and die
hards they're Christmas movies then you
throw in Gremlins and it's like whoa
what what am I going to choose here they
are all Christmas movies Night of the
comet is one is my favorite Christmas
movie when Burgess lived here he was
writing one of his articles and I was
watching
it and he's like I don't know what
you're watching but when I'm done I W to
watch
it I wan to watch it too night of the
comet is like the perfect lowbudget
horror
movie it's creepy it's fun it's
funny it's
scary it's awesome but yeah lean on me
is is
problematic it is a problematic um I
want to stay
on black people for a
minute J MJ you never saw night of the
Comet it's on YouTube right now I love
night of the Comet I would love to watch
it with you guys again one of my
favorite 80s horror movies it's one of
my favorite Christmas movies
um rare Imports I I saw for the first
time maybe three four years ago awesome
Christmas movie that would probably be
perfect for the show because it really
is about capitalist
production where these people find these
um
elves and they they ended up taking over
this population of
elves they send them off to America as M
Santas oh my gosh
yeah you have to it's it's s it's if you
really it's a great Riff on capitalist
production does it sound like a double
feature to you oh if Jeremy is
down that you know that's the thing you
gotta ask
Jay he's the man in charge Sizzle is the
Man In Charge lean on me as Larry Elder
oh Eric very right for those that
haven't seen the Larry Elder clip can we
make that go viral because the gooning
thing going viral does kind of hurt my
feelings
no I think that our ripping apart of
Larry Elder is way
funnier but but this right
here is this a rapper that maybe you
know I don't know who this rapper is
let's see and it's some black woman
making her feel bad about her
lyrics so she's she's in like this room
full of pictures of like historical
black figures she goes you look at
sojurn of truth and you tell her to clap
that
thing this is the most Lean on Me boys
in the hood John Singleton
I've ever seen in my goddamn
life and I just I had no words and I was
like I have to show this to two son not
because I want to hear what she has to
say
so I don't you know who this rapper is I
don't know who the rapper is yourself an
Entertainer no ma'am I want you to come
over here and I want you to read these
lyrics to darthy dandr go ahead read
those to her oh man they would be
embarrassing read them to her pop my
butt pop pop my butt pop my butt pop pop
my butt do you know
what I don't know who that rapper is I
mean I mean I don't think Dorothy
danders have that much of a problem with
it hey that's what the kids are doing
now they're butt popping
hey you know I a director for a
part in a
movie
nice nice Dy Dand
impersonation that's how she's gonna I
mean she'd have to come back from the
dead it's a whole thing it's a whole
thing it's a whole thing um so you don't
know who this rapper is or the black
woman no the the black woman is Ayan
vanan that's what her name
is you made it sound like that's one of
your AES she's a professional
(Laughter)
Auntie she's doing some anti ass atie
right now she sure is this is what
happens when your middle class parents
find out that you have been listening to
two Live Crew in
1992 hey hey and more
hey oh you want a hey hey and mohy huh
well why don't you hey hey in front of
Martin Luther King
huh Martin Luther the
King like he would have a problem with
that oh I like the two Live Crew yes I
do oh my

(Laughter)
God you think POG Chaser MLK is gonna
have a problem with two life crew
God hey hey and mo is what I have to
say um so she goes on will pop my butt
met to Harriet Tubman why does Harriet
(Laughter)
Tubman why did this air and no one's
laughing
this should be a laugh track
to wait I'm gonna add the laugh track
all right I'm gonna add the right I'll
add the laugh track do you know what
that meant it meant a

whip meant a whip to

her Rosa Parks sat on the bus read that
to her go ahead
everything I want I have really
everything I want I have you know what
she wanted a seat on a damn bus sit down
she
(Laughter)
was she wanted a little more than a seat
on you know she wanted she just wanted
to sit down cuz her feet hurt her feet
you know why her feet hurt from butt
popping
poing that may not be right darkg skin
(Laughter)
sister
W call them out
okay
damn
like and does this woman have a dick
tattooed on her
hand oh I hope
not I hope so go for it Lady T yeah and
you sing that and what are you talking
about go ahead tell what you talking
about when you say it that I turn I turn
up where I'm at CZ I'm a frost
right there is that a dick on her hand
what is
that that's a shitty dude so many
rappers have the worst T so many
people I agree Jesus this is
that a dick on her hand
stop that's what I would have said if I
was a ion Presley what's This
Woman's name Ayan vanen that's what I
said don't confuse me too
son
Presley oh that's a very different lady
I see so much thick chocolate I just
lose my
mind
God
lord if it's not a dick on your
hand like that's what I would have been
saying I would been like your
lyrics did you have a dick tattooed on
your hand like that's weird why is it
there why would a dick be on your hand
what can you do with that do you do some
sort of reverse hand job that you're
known for what is the deal probably a
crucifix that's even worse because they
made the cruci it's a crued oh
God I'd be mad at the blaspheme that
just happened with dickan crucifix
lady you tell you tell Rosa Parks what
you want
(Laughter)
Rosa Parks just a lonely seamstress
that's all she did she seamstress
dized
eyes well actually Rosa Parks uh
actually investigated the rapes of black
women that went unreported I don't know
about any of that I just know
that she didn't have a tattoo dick on
her
hand
Jesus I'm a frost I pay the cause
to be the boss oh you telling
sojourn the truth you the boss um
sure why not it's it's a picture yeah
she going to do about it right
now tell her a lot of
things like I get what she's trying to
do yes and uh a this woman seems a
little old for
that like the rapper yeah you know
yeah and you know what do
you how do you want her to react there
gonna get you're gonna get two
reactions right you're G to get the
sukiana reaction which is yeah I said it
I'll say it again the child's reac yeah
just the kids reaction you caught me
stealing I wasn't you you know um
or you're G to get
shame because you're trying you're
shaming her there's a camera there she
knows this is gonna be on the internet
she goes maybe some in Mexico are
gonna make fun of
me n Mexico
( __ )
mexo and she just doesn't stop like come
on man
like what do you want do you want this
woman to stop doing what she's doing
right now the only way this woman is in
front of you right now is because she
says pop my ass pop pop pop pop my
ass what do you want her to say you want
her to say sojourn Your Truth wouldn't
pop her
ass and then what you wanted to break
down crying yeah and then
what move back in with her
abusive boyfriend like you get the
ratings the money then you get the power
then you get the power next I'll be
working
fries oh God I was like
this working Fri okay last one because
it's been too long um and thank you for
rewatching lean on me with me
tant that was fun this is just for you
because you're a raw vegan people don't
know that about you oh
man you eat a salad all of a
(Laughter)
sudden you you should have ate a burger
that night in New York and I wouldn't
give you so much but you wanted to
be wasn't it your food that took extra
long that was because Kuba stole my
food blame the white man you people
always blame the white blame the white
man oh
god um this
woman first of all is not the part-time
yoga teacher that I'm looking
for because the part-time yoga
teacher totally eats meat this woman I
need you to explain and you can say it
livetime why this diet is horrible she's
talking about what she eats in a day I
eat in a day no meat Dairy eggs or
gluten for breakfast I'm having about
four pounds of watermelon which is God
damn four
pounds right
there H she says most of the time you're
not wrong when you blaming a white man
(Laughter)
you got a point you definitely have a
point somebody said for breakfast I
don't want to hear about
watermelon she is that up
she just
went four pounds of it four pounds of
it there almost a third of this
watermelon here for lunch I'm having
five Envy apples these have been so good
lately for a snack I'm having having one
pomegranate with a little bit of maple
syrup along with one banana and for
dinner I'm having just over 2 lbs of
golden potatoes along with a big leafy
green salad these are just regular
steamed potatoes with a little bit of
pepper on top and potatoes go really
great with leafy greens and for dessert
I had four dates like and follow for
more weight loss
content uh there wasn't a vegetable in
there in
where her in her thing in her in her
meal of the
day Kush says she's going to literally
a
break Dusty says and at night I free
base
(Laughter)
B12 Charles Miller says that woman must
shatter
toilet
man secret ancient dances hate your life
and lose weight follow for more follow
for more recipes on how to hate your
life and hate
yourself and be angry and hungry all
day this woman spend a quarter of her
waking hours chewing and
eating yeah oh my God she
does tant can you explain this diet to
me is this
healthy
um healthy is a funny
word
uh I would say no I went to a lecture
once and this guy was like the reason
why you see all well he was just like
you see these
um these
fratar they only eat fruit and these raw
vegans and he's like they're always 24
years old it's funny how they're always
24 years old and it's true because no
older person is gonna eat like Mick C
says her teeth enamel is under
threat I repeat her teeth enamel is
under
threat it's all black and skeleton frame
oh the comments were hilarious people
was like dude your body is eating itself
with this
diet I'm shocked about the steamed
potatoes that's very
unor where's the protein that she's
getting she's getting it from the leafy
greens
really leafy greens have protein
enough I mean what is she doing all day
she's eating warm
melon she is enough to function if
that's all she's doing can we just yell
at
her eating off the system mil watermelon
eating ass
watermelon eating ass
micronutrients from the air you
know why these videos are fun to me
because this is the time that everybody
gets together and we just clown
people
we just get
together um so this woman actually is
popular on the internet and that one
comedian guy that you don't like was
spoofing her comedian guy that I don't
like he's the guy that goes watch this
watch this watch
this my stomach is
bubbling oh God I'm not a big fan of
that guy but it was more about the video
because I need you to explain to me what
this woman was making because again you
live in New York all the food that's
supposed to be great in the world is in
New York right sure is I mean it's not
true it is true isn't true it is not so
he said so that's why you're afraid to
come here because you know once you come
here and you see the
sun I see the sun and you don't have to
talk in a battle rap just to you know
cross the
street D David says yeah she's getting
like five grams of protein a
day it's
true Oh that's oh okay well I won't play
this now they said this the stomach
bubbling guy is transphobic I don't know
anything about
that oh I don't know anything about that
I'm not GNA say watches comedy I just
thought this video
about SE
v d says her stomach is definitely
buing it is four pounds of
watermelon by herself it's about a third
of this
watermelon
who
who where like what do you do for for a
living you're just that is what she does
eat four pounds of watermelon a day
that's a job you can pay your rent with
that she does it on
video I don't think it had that many
views follow her for more
recipes I don't want her recipent
in my
house
recipent Jesus
Christ four pounds of watermelon how big
is her bladder exactly she got nothing
to do with pee all
day Charles says she works at a toilet
store she sells bed
days she sells
bed um can you just explain to me again
this is not an endorsement of this
gentleman this is just this is more of a
kind of commentary on the food that's
being
made where'd it go lowly pour these into
here in our castal dish okay I see the
grapes but what's them white circles in
there and you're going to want to evenly
distribute these making sure there's
none on top of the cheese grapes and
cheese okay this must be some kind of
Shak cuder walnuts grapes and cheese now
what do you think she's gonna do with
that
Tucson is She Gonna Bake that oh yeah oh
yeah like what
what is this supposed to be does anyone
know what this is supposed to
be because this person making this dish
is also a professional toilet
salesman like what's funny if you've
ever been around
cookbooks post World War II
cookbooks especially when
like uh maybe like 50s era
cookbooks when get out of the factory
lady and get back in the house you
pretty
Dame look at all these new fangled
gadgets we have for to cook
with
um there's a lot of stuff like this
there's so many
casseres that when you look at the the
recipe you're like that looks like
and it's just like marketing a
product you know you get the better
homes it's like what can you do with
craft
mayonnaise have you ever tried a
( __ )
casserole and
so
um there's if you go back there's a lot
of stuff like that and living with that
family they had some old some old
cookbooks and and going in some of those
old cookbooks I was like oh wow this
sounds this sounds not
good sound so not good but
um I was interested in this because like
okay grapes are good and there's cheese
so I thought the same thing as a guys
just some sort of Shak cuder thing and
then when I saw the nuts I was like Oh
She Gonna Bake
this so yeah yeah yeah just wait till
you see what I do with
this yeah like what the are you
going to do with that what you about to
do that should be it shouldn't it next
I'm going to take some olive oil and a
little bit of salt and some black pepper
okay now we're going to take this and
we're going to put it in our pre oven in
the oven what what's happening in here
at 400 for 25 minutes
oh why would you bake
grapes I guess to make them turn into
(Laughter)
raisins I
guess
what is someone watching the show right
so Tucson's been messing with me because
when you know me and you're part of the
T IR
team when everybody wasn't so freaking
busy we would have these group calls and
we were having a group call I was always
cooking and tant would like yell at me
and i' like I have to go out and get
food she goes no you probably have food
at home just cook at home and then we're
having our you know show meeting and I'm
cooking in front of her she goes you
need to do a cook thing you need to cook
so I finally did like a cooking thing
kind of sort of kind of sort
of kind of sort
of um
and it's kind of embarrassing because
I'm like I know how to cook I've done it
professionally but still I don't like
people seeing me do it you know what I
mean and I don't think I make crazy
stuff like you watch me make a burger
and fries like bam yeah right it looked
good didn't it you tell the
truth it did
see why would you bake raisins or B
grapes right make grapes yeah there's no
I don't understand the purpose of this
this is one of those things where you're
you don't know what you're doing you've
never worked in a real kitchen and you
just throw in the pot and I don't
even think she's one of those people
that like I'm gonna do gross stuff like
the guy that cooks in the hotel the
methy Hotel bathroom like I don't even
think she's like that I think she really
thinks this is
delicious just like you ease that pan
into that oven we about to ease you into
your jail sell time to take this out yum
who going to eat hot
grapes that's kind of
funny it doesn't make any sense I can't
lie I don't understand the purpose of
the hot grapes and nuts
like how did
you hot grapes in the
olive oil I'm curious
now
yeah who sits around it's like man I got
all these delicious fat ass Factory
farmed grapes that are just taste like
cotton candy each
one we make a great
pie let's put with some cheese that
sounds amazing

and this is the part that's up
tant she's not
done oh my gosh the hot grapes is just
the beginning hot grapes in the DI dish
now we're gonna mix it all up I'm just
not sure what is this great casserole oh
yeah that's perfect look at that oh just
look at the che oh my stomach bubbling
that looks good for now no it don't okay
now I got some cooked pasta here wow
that's actually starting to look
good it looked like for husband
yeah thanks still looks like hey
hey now it doesn't look like
what do you know the name's all right oh
God MJ says oh gross Sean Moon just has
to throw up emoji Tucson what you're
from New York what is
this that is not nothing to do with New
York that is not a New York
cuisine
not at all Eric said I was expecting
some
Doritos
right you some Doritos on top you know
what's great with this
Jiffy oh
God it'll look better in the trash okay
now I'm going to top this off with some
Parmesan cheese more cheese that looks
great oh yeah I'm not going to make it
okay now we're going to put this back in
the oven for just about two or three
minutes on Royal yeah is she Canadian
because I not like she said a
boat kind
right H great
past we should I wish for the ti winter
party the winter
formal the winter formal the winter
formal we had a hot grape
casserole
jeez I don't
understand hot
grapes like what about
this is is this like okay Dusty is this
a dish in a foreign
land doesn't Dusty live in
Israel I think
so
I wanna I want to know is this like
something casserole is a terrible word
it can be right casserole can be a
horrible word I'm really into this baked
French toast that I get at this um this
place down here in Rosarito it's so good
and I try I replicated it yesterday or
did my best to try to replicate it and I
loved it I love it it's my new favorite
go-to thing this other place I ate
breakfast at I'm going to try to go to
when we're done with the
show has this really good lche con cream
cheese like frosting with syrup and
bacon that's hella good I put that on
top of the French toast it was like it
was it was decadent and
delicious okay but I didn't you know
it's just not baked grapes it's not
baked grapes I would never think to
baked grapes your favorite a so let's
just see just make sure your bathroom
got some toilet tissue time to take it
out here we go oh she making a plate and
they about to eat it watch this watch
this watch this watch this watch all
right Cheers Cheers oh you heard that oh
what when she tries to pull out some of
it oh my
gosh that soupy mess Schley says grape
tomatoes yes exact dude there's pasta
dishes you can make with grape tomatoes
that would have made way more
sense this
don't you know when kids cook for the
first time and they're in the kitchen
and they want to make you breakfast you
ever do that for your parents you and
your siblings got together like little
kebler elves and you guys are G to make
breakfast for your parents and all you
made was a goddamn
mess yeah
um that's what this was to me an adult
cooking like a
5-year-old fivey
old
so Windex plus pears equals
(Laughter)
cookies see MJ says evil white Cuisine
this woman is not white
she is some sort of
ethnic should we make up uh ethnicity
for her to make it more fun oh my gosh
already the ra the racism cancellation
train let's make up an
(Laughter)
ethnicity and the final clip of the day
is someone that you've been doing some
Recon
on uh
and I don't like this guy I think he's
full of poo I think everything he says
is not
true
okay um you don't like him
either who's do you want to give people
a quick rundown on who Charleston white
is oh
Char
D um Charleston white is a former
gang banger
gang
leader who went straight after going to
jail or
something and became a community
leader and now he sits on the internet
and calls out rappers for glorifying
violence he also is a part-time
part time
cooning
he's a part time who goes too

far oh
God tant your neighborhood is the Lean
on Me neighborhood I just want you to
know
that it's just
busy
you totally live in the Leo me
neighborhood right now busy busy with
what crime
no your neighborhood is what Eric Adams
is complaining
about we're not against
rap we're against those neighborhoods
we're against
those let's just say it so
Charleston white I didn't realize was
cockey uh he he lost one of his so one
of his his
glass
ah you did a bunch of Recon on him why
does he cut his hair this
way why does he cut his
ha because it's
respectable this is Charleston white tap
dancing for Cam
Newton I wasn't talking like that
wearing the bow TI y'all wasn't paying
me no attention and I was going to the
Supreme Court changing laws and
legislations in this country what law
did he
change couldn't tell you I don't think
he can either I was working with over 50
US Congressional members from Ted Cruz
to Mark ruo Senator John por and I was
telling on
everybody all the
all the poto
(Laughter)
Ricans if you sitting there bragging
about you worked with Marco Rubio and
you Chang
legisl I feel very confident that
whatever legislation you got change was
longer sensing requirements for skin
color
probably he
literally hit you with the Uncle
Ruckus might as well been throwing
bricks at
MLK I was on the front page of the
American Association drone I don't trust
this man with a big circle and AC cross
through
(Laughter)
it or or was the was the picture of him
with the bow tie and his said
conservative America's black
savior had done a study with News 21
Walter kite School of
Journalism I'm not going to make fun of
the mispronunciation of kronite it's
just Southern
Twain but what was the study
on that
snitch y'all wasn't paying attention
then so I gave y'all what y'all
want a ignorant that
talk like them
rappers now y'all
listen need Rubio is listening why give
a what I'm listening
to if you have the ear of power
Charleston white doesn't really matter
what Cam Newton
thinks uh oh Tucson are you
gone uh
oh yep she lost her sound once again I I
wanted her to comment on this because
she had hit me up the other
day because she had done a bunch of
research Tucson did a bunch of research
on Charleston
white Dy said I took Ted Cruz to Cancun
in my
spaceship like he named the most
staunchly
conservative members of
Congress
it's this dude is is a is a I don't
understand why he's as famous as he
is I mean I know he does a lot of
coonery Tucson again did the
reconnaissance on the coonery she hit me
up she goes I had no idea the levels of
coonery
um giano says
kronite sounds like one of the minerals
that has no industrial
applications you're sound is
back yes okay can you hear
me yeah now I can can you explain who he
is real quick before we
go uh Charleston white yeah like why is
he even famous because he just says
rappers
lie he's a professional
snitch I mean uh he t-shirts say nanny
nanny boo
(Laughter)
he really
does grew up a snitch oh my God he was
raised by
snitches you know Grandma was looking
out the window and snitching on people
he said that's a that's that's the way
to
be some people call him a comedian
because they think he's
funny so he leaned into
that but then you know when you're not a
comedian and you're called a comedian it
things could get a little
crazy do you think like all jokes aside
do you think he's offended by the
comments and that's why he makes those
statements like that like no I'm a
serious person and I've done serious
person stuff
probably probably he didn't realize that
he went too far
what are you looking at the chat what is
the chat in the chat oh my God a veg a
vegan can eat six pounds of Peel
(Laughter)
crunk really clears the
bow right
you read what he said Cam Newton other
guy looks like if Andre 3000 and willly
Wonka got their bags mixed up in the
airport it's true Cam Newton looks crazy
he's wearing white JLo
(Laughter)
pants wa have you ever seen the video
that comedian Ryan Davis did about Cam
Newton he did I gotta let me see if I
can find it if I can find it we have to
show it it's the funniest thing I've
ever seen he is from North
Carolina and he did this thing on Cam
Newton and why Cam Newton can't
dress oh I found it it's
called he said Can needs an intervention
he basically blames it on Michael
Jordan blam it on Michael
(Laughter)
Jordan because you know Michael Jordan
is like the worst dresser of all
time
yeah and what's with the Hitler mustache
Michael Jordan that
too Hitler stash
Dusty says Charles DWI seems like one of
those guys that doesn't wash his ass
because he thinks it's
gay when I heard was you the one that
told me that
what about dudes not washing their ass
because it's gay I have heard of it I
refuse to believe it's real I do too I
just don't want to believe it's real
that's same o that's a special level of
ignorance right there so this is back
when Cam Newton was still playing pretty
decent this is pretty funny football
season is back which means that Superman
is Back I love Superman giving balls to
kids every time he scores a touchdown
autographing his cleats and giving it to
children and disabled folks and dabbing
on the

competition Superman is a allaround
great role model I've been waiting all
season 4 is return but although I love
Superman boy I hate Clark Kent you with
this outfit on why are you dressed like
a rich man's wife in the Kentucky Derby
the sweater that you have tied around
your neck don't even fit your body it's
like he literally bought it just to tie
it around his neck my where do you
find a burgundy Arby's hat I don't
understand it I don't understand it and
why do you have on so many bracelets it
was like he went shopping with his woman
one day
I don't know which bracelet to choose
babe I like all of them and then she was
like
got but I knew your accessory game was
suspect when I saw you with this
rabbit's foot that's the biggest
rabbit's foot I've ever seen in my life
this real life cut the foot off
Peter Cotton Tail the Easter Bunny is
the only rabbit that damn big and what
do this deal with you not getting your
pants finished man I'm tired of
looking at your ankles but I know what
it is your pants game has been up
ever since you start hanging out with
Michael Jordan and we all know that
got the worst dress game do not
let that man influence you Cam you
should be looking like Superman on and
off the field instead of looking like a
ghetto ass
(Laughter)
Genie where do you get a burgundy Arby's
hat oh
oh
boy why do you look like a rich man's
wife at the
Kentucky the point about the sweater
around his neck was good though because
it doesn't look like it fits
him he just bought it to wear around his
neck
like that's a
waste
y says options are limited to Big and
Tall that's true none he has is off the
rack that's true that's number one
overall draft pick Cam Newton nothing is
is off the
rack I could dude when I first saw that
I fell the hell
out
because when he showed Michael Jordan in
then baggy
ass it's a lot of
pants it's a lot of
f say you look like a ghetto ass
Genie he said look like Andre 3000 and
Willie Walker got their bags missed
(Laughter)
oh my God thank you guys for hanging out
with us on this
Saturday we haven't been on a live
Saturday in a while it's a busy month
you have a lot
planned the ti holiday Christmas party
is coming
up
yay
also it's the holiday
season a few people have gotten some
presents for their for their loved ones
again if if you enjoy what we do here
you have the means feel so inclined
think about becoming a patron and for
the holiday
season think about I don't
know bu we buying this shirt and then
giving it to your
dad whatever your dad is I don't care
what your dad
is D is
just like here Dad what the is this
is this from that stupid show you
(Laughter)
watch well yes Father it
is and if your dad is really racist then
get
this bam nice bam black panther shirt
black panther shirt
and if you want to you
know at work want to support TI the
daily
bam TI mug I want one of those I don't
have one me to a patron
that he's he's a higher tier Patron and
he had like went down and then went back
up so you know there's certain things
you get at different levels of patr like
$10 you get a sticker I think and $15
you get a tote bag or a shirt I forget
what it is um or a mug you get the mug
so he was like well I got all the stuff
again and he was nice and he sent it to
me isn't that nice that is
nice so that's how I have the mug yes
The Smiling Pascal shirt we do have a
smiling Pascal shirt because
Pascal is part
of
dunun what was he part of to
the ti Central

Committee TI Central I don't have one of
these I want one of these
two yeah two SS on it you see
her can we get a Rosie the river Tucson
shirt see the tucs shirt would it just
be the Timberland as
a I guess so

right cause I'm from New York CA you're
from New
York and you know what in all honesty
for the live show she showed up in temp
once I had
to very very
important POG Chaser MLK
merch
while my mother is still breathing air I
don't know if I can do
that my mother does not contact me very
often and usually when she does it it's
with this tone in her voice where it's
you like oh God I'm so old and you're
still yelling at me like
that right
like I don't even I don't even deal with
you like you're not
like and um it was when we put
uh Harriet tubbin on the black card
that's
right the disappointment in my mother's
voice made me bad there's two well
three five people that can make me feel
bad when there disappointment in their
voice and my mom was like
Jason and when she called calls me that
my my name yeah she said
Jason that wasn't
good like that was it that's all she
said and she didn't she didn't harp on
it I was like oh man I was like but it
was funny she goes like this she just
shook her head and then she you know
changed the
subject Jason's mom makes him rra to
pictures of civil rights leaders
no my late stepmom read my lyrics When I
was a upand cominging artist at 15 and
she was like what are you talking about
you've never seen a woman

naked Crash and Burn oh yeah you know
she was an old school feminist she
definitely let me have it rightfully so
um
so that made me feel bad yeah so
maybe maybe at some point we can do POG
Chaser
am
maybe but I just o
o she gave me that look I like oh
man is there anyone that can make you
feel bad too son
no I'm
Invincible I'm
Invincible there's that one voice that
makes you go oh
no maybe my
dad but he can't do it
anymore just made me
sad oh sometimes I can tell you're
disappointed in me
I was disappointed in you yesterday you
were disappointed in me yesterday so
mad you didn't even
respond well in all fairness I was
responding to something else but I was
like when I'm done with this I'm gonna
call this woman and be like what did you
just do and
why did that happen yesterday was
so
outrageous oh my gosh yeah you are very
disappointed in me yes
today I locked I did that one
time one time and then I found out how
easy it is to break into my house
no I went I was leaving to go up north
to go help my dad recently everything's
in my
car cuz I don't lock my car door and I
was like like I left the keys in and the
only time I lock my front door is when I
leave the
country so I was like
broke in my
house it's good to
know well tucon thank you very
much for your beautiful questions and
your beautiful voice
a thank you sir and thank New York for
all the god
Sirens
yeah sorry about that don't be you
didn't do it you weren't causing
havoc in them
streets did you did you wake up like you
went to Central High and lean on
me were you part of that gaggle of black
girls that sexually harassed that young
lady in the
bathroom
you know another thing I think we did
this year that was one of the funniest
things ever I'm so sad it didn't go
viral is when we made Doug Lane play the
game are you a white
Ally that was
funny boning I don't get it all right
guys thank you guys so much we'll be
back or the show will be back but tucon
and I will be gone con and neutron will
be guest hosting I right now I don't
know
what uh he has in store as the guest
hosts are putting together their own
show they're bringing in their guests so
the guest host thing we've we've upped
the guest hosting yep so I'm excited for
that and on that note we on that note
are
out



## Keywords:
