---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kgCHqyq4LHA
---

# Video
What is the Metacrisis?  Why is it Hopeful?
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kgCHqyq4LHA)

## Transcript:
what is the metac crisis and why is it
hopeful given that it kind of sounds
like just the opposite of hopeful so
basically the issue is if you look at
all of these different societal issues
where each issue has a community of
people that's looking at that issue and
looking at the evidence and shouting
from the rooftops about that issue if
you zoom back and look at the entire
landscape of issues we're facing as a
society right now now there are
connections between all of them and and
there are common patterns between all of
them even though these different
communities looking at different issues
are essentially at odds with each other
and like fighting each other and
dismissing each other's
evidence and here when I'm talking about
issues I mean things like environmental
degradation fragilities in the Global
Financial system breakdown in family
structure escalating inequality
surveillance risks decline in Mental
Health social media manipulation
military and geopolitical risks issues
with the educational system with the
justice system decline in friendship and
Community healthc Care System
fragilities Corruption of various sorts
oil depletion and of course all of these
issues have subcategories for example
under environmental degradation we have
pesticides microplastics insect
population collaps etc etc in which case
where I want to go in this video is to
first talk about why is this hopeful and
then how exactly are these things
connected and is there a zero sum battle
between these or should there be a zero
some battle it or perhaps it's not as
zero some as it seems to understand why
this is hopeful we first want to think
about the experience from somebody
inside one of these communities who's
looking at one of these problems
and looking at all of the research and
the evidence and the journalism and
whatnot that is telling us actually
there's something real and deep and
important and profound going on with
this problem these groups however are
experiencing almost like the Cassandra
syndrome where Cassandra of course is in
some mythology she's the one who foresaw
events she had the ability to see the
future but nobody would listen to her
and that's kind of like The Experience
from inside these groups and often times
these groups have some ideas about real
and valuable solutions to address their
problem but the problem is they can't do
that with with everybody ignoring them
and so instead of putting their problem
toward solving that issue they're
putting their problem toward uh morally
uh morally shaming or morally going
after people who are dism missing them
and that of course is fueling this
battle this what some people call
polarization but I think it's it's way
more multi-polar than um than it seems
but from that inside It seems impossible
and it feels impossible based on their
experience so why is it hopeful to think
about the metac crisis well that's
because if these people Zoom back and
see the connection between their issues
and the issues that other people in
different parts of the societal issue
landscape see if they look at the bigger
landscape the set of solutions looks
different from inside one of these
groups like the solution set from the
whole landscape is more about the system
more about how economic resources flow
more about how we figure out what's true
and what evidence is just trying to get
people red up and uh and that is the
space from which we can actually
collaborate across groups and come up
with real and viable Solutions rather
than behaving as if all of these
problems are zero sum and also I do want
to say that not all of these groups have
100% accuracy in fact I would probably
say none of the groups have uh are
completely free from false information
or false facts that many people in the
group believe
and I think it's most helpful to start
out by thinking okay my group is looking
at 90% correct evidence and maybe 10% of
my group's issues are sort of false or
just designed to get under people's skin
and rile people in my group up whereas
that other group uh has 10% truth and
90% just uh false facts or inaccurate
misleading facts that are just designed
to get them riled up I think that's a
good starting place because of course we
need this humility about epistemics
about knowledge systems and just
acknowledging that your group has a
little wrong and their group has a
little right is like one step toward
being able to collaborate I think that's
a good starting point and it's
absolutely true that the information
environment is going to favor things
that rile people up based on just the
fact that social media
uh gets clicks and likes and engagement
out of that outrage so it's going to
come up with the facts that we get that
and the the
misleading spins that will get that
that's true in every group oh and I want
to give you my favorite John Stewart mil
quote that relates to this because it
indicates this is not just a modern
problem back in the mid 1800s John
Stewart Mill saw something that was
similar so here it is the besetting
danger is not so much of embracing
falsehood for truth as of mistaking part
of the truth for the whole it might be
plausibly maintained that in almost
every one of the leading controversies
past or present both sides were in the
right in what they affirmed though wrong
in what they denied and that if either
could have been made to take the other's
view in addition to its own little more
would have been needed to make its
Doctrine correct in which case if groups
are wrong in what they deny about the
other group's truths how is that such a
pervasive thing how is it true across so
many groups across history such that
even John Stewart Mill was seeing the
same thing and I answer this question
with this what I'm calling the straw man
mythology which is really robust and
it's definitely fed by social media
algorithms which is basically where if
you have like a gut negative reaction to
another group and perhaps that reaction
is coming from something accurate that
you're seeing or sensing or intuiting
which I'll explain in a second but if
you're if you're getting that you have
this like need to dismiss them and your
group will latch on to anything that
feels psychologically valid that will
dismiss them oh they're just you know
all hyped up they're just being
manipulated by social social media
algorithms they're just they have a
psychological need for that now of
course there there's truth in each of
these groups that sees something some of
these people do have a psychological
need to project their personal
experiences onto the issues that they're
they're riled up about like it's not
that the modes of dismissing are
entirely false the 10% 90% thing a
portion of what why you're dismissing
them is totally ACC accurate it's just
that you you sort of throw that entire
blanket over that group when there
actually is something even if only 10%
of what they're saying that is right now
what's my case that all of these
different issues are actually connected
in some underlying system
structure and of course this relates to
my channel because I'm thinking through
Paradigm shifts in economics governance
and knowledge systems like the incentive
structures that shape how we as a
society Channel resources how we Channel
attention how we decide what is true and
valid and that of course is going to
lead to which problems uh get big and
escalate which problems actually get
resources and attention devoted to them
and if you look at all of these
different issues some of them are a
little bit more foundational like can
you solve issues with environmental
degradation without solving some of the
issues with the banking system and of
course I would say no but even if you
haven't yet made connections between
these different issues that are more
direct connections like that uh I think
it is possible for everybody in all of
these groups to start to recognize
patterns like patterns about when we
look at the checks and balances that our
society has put in place are those
checks and Balan is serving power or are
they actually uh actually addressing
issues that collectively we would want
to address now what about the Zero Sum
problem like are people intuiting
something real when they feel as zero
some battle between their issue and
those other people looking that at that
other issue and I contend that yes
there's something real they are
something and figuring this out making
it no longer such as zero some problem
is really the task so we might ask the
question are there enough resources in
the world to address all of these
problems and if the answer is oh you're
trying to address all of them such that
the world has no problems anymore then
the answer is definitely no there's not
enough resources to do that but if the
question is are there a lot of resources
that are currently wrapped up in these
battles where there's a ton of energy
resources going into that battle but
very little movement if you could free
up that energy that's going into the
battle about who gets to decide where
resources flow and instead say okay all
of this energy is instead going to solve
these two issues or these 17
issues would there be enough to actually
make some decent Headway at least slowly
over time as you start to channel those
resources differently could you do that
and I think the answer is yes now of
course both groups are going to be like
wait a second if I take my hand away
they're going to come in and punch me
and come in and just sort of take
overpower so I can't remove my hand from
this battle this zero some battle and so
the question is are there are there ways
of collaborating do we have ways of
using digital tools to get ourselves out
of this battle and I think the answer is
yeah what


## Keywords:
