---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vY-GnWgS4xo
---

# Video
Why Avoid Psychologizing “The Other”? | Ideas Tainted by the Pathologies of People Who Believe Them
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vY-GnWgS4xo)

## Transcript:
the group of people who is attracted to
a set of ideas is not random like
there's going to be certain things that
attract people to certain idea clusters
and some of those might actually tap
into the person's frustrations in their
own life their pathologies like their
dark side and other reasons people might
be attracted to a set of ideas are are
much more generous and good and like
coming from a good place of trying to
solve real problems in the world and
these are sort of mixed together like
the wheat and the chef so if you look at
any group of people attracted to a
certain set of ideas it's like a mixture
like for some people it's like 50
pathological and 50 percent good for
other people it's my zero percent
pathological or five percent
pathological and I know this is going to
sound contradictory given the title of
the video and what I'm talking about
here but I actually think part of the
problem we're having with sense making
and understanding across difference
is the fact that people are
psychologizing the other they're sort of
looking at the group of people attracted
to an idea and they're like oh look at
that pathology and that's stopping
people from actually delving deep into
the set of ideas that these people are
touting I think that's that's one
problem going on but I don't think this
is contradictory because I'm going to
flesh out what I think is going on
including talking a little bit about the
pathologies that attract people to ideas
but I'm not doing this to shut down
listening to them I'm doing this to sort
of show what's going on in the landscape
of sense making and to try to solve a
particular problem that I'm seeing as
I'm delving into the the philosophy and
the literature behind different groups
who are perhaps at odds with each other
and the way I'm sort of thinking about
this is we have these pyramids of ideas
we're at the top of the pyramid is
symbols and slogans that are sort of
watered down simplistic versions of the
ideas deeper in the pyramid where the
bottom of the pyramid is like the most
complex ideas in that idea set
and what I'm finding as I'm delving into
different pyramids is that there's some
actual ideas at the bottoms of some of
these pyramids that are in common with
each other where I can say actually
these people and these people even
though they're at odds with each other
if they took the time to go deep inside
the pyramid they would discover there
are actual major points of potential
collaboration
but they're not collaborating because
they're sort of each only seeing that
the tip of the iceberg might be a good
analogy of the other group which is
slogans and symbols and some of those
actually are valid symbols of things
that have more depth than others or not
but then they see these and they attach
these to these people and they only see
the the negative parts of why these
people are attracted to these ideas and
it just stops the conversation from
connecting ideas across pyramids where
it's like actually there is Major
commonality in these groups so where I'm
going with this I'd like to talk a
little bit about why pathologies might
be part of the story that attracts
people to idea clusters
and then I want to talk about the nature
of the pyramid and the ideas and the
connection perhaps between the slogans
and symbols and the deeper ideas and I
want to explain why there can be both
Good and Bad actors both at the top of
the pyramid and at the bottom of the
pyramid and then I want to flesh out the
problem of psychologizing the other and
why that's causing so much chaos and
then I went to sketch out what are some
solutions to this problem so first what
do I mean when I say pathologies can
attract people to ideas
and maybe pathology seems a little bit
overly dramatic but I couldn't come up
with a better word for this this is sort
of the situation where people have their
own issues that might be related to
their Shadow side or their dark side or
their character flaws and sometimes
people will project their frustrations
with their own life and their own
interpersonal reactions and their own
failed hopes and dreams they'll project
those onto a more societal structure of
ideas because there's something about
the way the human brain works such that
people can't always see their own issues
like they're blind to their own issues
but they can sometimes see their own
issues in other people or they can
sometimes take what's resentment in
their own hearts and sort of project it
where it doesn't belong or maybe where
it does belong like that's just a
natural thing and if you look at
Jonathan Heights framework of the brain
where you have an elephant and a writer
and the Elephant is just attracted to
things and it has its own desires which
might be kernel or might be there might
be all kinds of reasons for the elephant
to want what it wants and the writer is
the critical thinking part of the brain
but one of the writer's main tasks in
Jonathan Heights framework is to be the
pr person for the elephant to justify
what the elephant wants like the
elephant walks around being attracted to
things and and wanting things and the
writer has to use its brain to come up
with reasons why that's actually an
appropriate thing to be attracted to and
I think that Maps pretty well under this
situation where it is absolutely true
that in almost every idea cluster that
the group attracted is not
representative in fact the types of
people overly represented in this group
will be the types of people whose
elephants are attracted to this idea set
for reasons that may have nothing to do
with the validity of the ideas so let's
think about the nature of an idea
cluster and the difference between the
top and the bottom and I think the
bottom is sort of the fully fleshed out
philosophers and thinkers who are really
wrestling carefully and deeply with this
idea they don't all agree with each
other but they might be sort of in the
same cluster and at the top they're
going to be symbols and words and
slogans and sometimes even people who
represent the ideas at the bottom
and I think if you look at somebody
who's using some of the slogeneering
language at the top that's not always a
bad thing I think for some of those
people actually the slogan or the word
is just a really fast way of referring
to a really deep idea that that person
actually does understand and by by
boiling that whole concept down to a
slogan or a word they can just talk
about that idea more easily
so I'm not going to say that slogans or
symbols are necessarily bad things like
slogans and words in this category
include things like free speech or
capitalism or socialized medicine they
include things like Bitcoin and degrowth
and the Constitution like that word or
phrase refers to a really complex idea
set in all of those cases like all of
those ideas are our slogans that
represent something that has a much
bigger base of a background if you want
to understand what people mean when they
use that language and when we consider
the whole pyramid we have to acknowledge
that ideas are tools and are often used
as tools and if they're used against
other people those tools can feel like
weapons like weapons to shut them down
and weapons to stop hearing the good
points that those other people have who
may have critiques of some of these
ideas and I want to make the case that
there can be good people and bad people
both at the top and at the bottom of one
of these pyramids
now of course to be a deep thinker you
can't just stay at the top and use the
samoles without going deeper into the
ideas so I think any any clear thinker
on these issues is going to have gone a
little bit deep into this pyramid but
just because someone mainly uses the
slogans and symbols doesn't necessarily
mean they're pathological it could be
that they have a surface understanding
they're not engaging deeply with this
set of ideas but maybe they're sort of
they view their role as being like
someone who's a worker bee in some cause
where they can contribute by coding or
by building communities and bringing
people together and that's their
contribution they're not like a
philosopher by nature but they can have
a really positive role and to do the
work they need to do they may need some
language that is vetted by people who
are thinking more deeply about the ideas
so there can be good people who are
sloganering no I I think we all know
that there can be really bad people who
just sort of lob onto the slogan earring
to use it as weapons to sort of you know
get get out whatever animosity and
hatred they have in their hearts like
that's something that I think is true at
the top of many pyramids but there can
also be people who are at the bottom of
the pyramids who understand the depth of
the philosophy but the reason they went
down to the bottom is for a pathological
reason and they haven't sifted through
the resentment and the the projection
that's in their own Hearts leading them
to the bottom of this idea set so there
can be bad people at the top and bottom
and just to be clear I don't believe in
good people and bad people I believe
everyone's sort of a mixture but
sometimes I talk like that to simplify
ideas
and of course there can be really good
thinkers who are at the bottom of the
pyramid I think usually when that
happens the good thinkers are engaging
meaningfully with idea pyramids that are
not their own and one more weird thing
about the top of the pyramid is
sometimes I think people like this
includes philosophers or it includes
public figures can get lumped in as
symbols at the top of a pyramid where
people are referring to that person in a
way that doesn't actually capture the
depth of their ideas but it's just sort
of like oh that's a slogan that we use
to sort of represent a bigger set of
ideas
and that's kind of a weird thing because
people people are not characters people
are real and some of the people who have
become symbols and slogans are dead but
I can't imagine being a live person and
kind of having the experience of
becoming a symbol rather than having
people actually engage with the depth of
your ideas that sounds horrible to me
now what's wrong with psychologizing
about people in your out group
and I think what's wrong with it is not
that it's false it's not that there are
no people with pathological reasons to
be attracted to this idea because that's
going to be true in many many of these
clusters like if you look at the people
attracted the loudest and certainly the
ones who are going to sort of rise to
the top of social media algorithms may
actually have really pathological
reasons behind that attraction the
problem with it has to do with the
needless animosity that it creates
between groups because people in one
idea cluster are going to experience
people in other idea clusters saying no
that's completely wrong because you have
that person where 50 of their attraction
is due to their pathology
and they sort of paint everybody who's
who's looking into this idea set with
that pathology they assume if you're
attracted to this idea or if you're
using certain slogans and symbols that
you must have that pathology and that
just shuts conversations down like
essentially people in other groups are
projecting the pathology unfairly onto a
lot of people in the group and most
people will not engage at that point
they'll just be like okay you just
painted my character according to
someone who happens to like the same
ideas or use the same language as me I'm
not going to engage with somebody who
does that
and to a large degree I think that is
the correct response when someone
psychologizes an entire group of people
around an entire idea cluster like that
person is not acting in good faith even
if they are correct about a subset of
these people that is bad faith so what
is the solution here
and I actually do think we need sense
making spaces that are way healthier
than current social media and I don't
see enough of those popping up and those
sense making spaces are going to have to
have structure Like rules about what's
okay and not okay they're going to have
to have you know institutions like roles
rules expectations enforcement
mechanisms I do think some of those may
need to be digital since making spaces
but I also think there has to be an
in-person element for some of these
conversations to happen I think a lot of
the the ideas you can't get unless
you've kind of marinated with someone
you care about who thinks about those
ideas so some combination of in-person
and digital and then to participate in
some of those spaces I think it's
important to be aware of what are the
symbols and slogans and how are those
understood how are those reacted to by
people in different clusters because to
develop the kind of trust where you're
actually going to learn to understand
someone else
you have to avoid the stereotypes that
get constantly flung at those people
based on their understanding of their
own symbols and slogans based on their
experience with your symbols and slogans
and one of the goals of that sense
making would be to recognize actually
this idea is really important and it is
worth sifting through the ugliness up
here to get to this idea like that's an
idea that more people need to understand
and more people need to wrestle with but
a lot of times if you were to bring up
this idea to someone in a different idea
pyramid their reaction is going to be
every time that word or slogan or idea
is used it is used to shut me down and
used as a way of saying I'm not going to
listen to your ideas or I'm going to
mischaracterize you in an unfair way if
that's every experience I've had with
this idea is in that category then that
person is going to have a really really
difficult time
listening and paying attention with a
clear enough mind to really understand
this important idea and to be in such a
sense making cluster you do have to be
willing to sort of go deeper even when
you're going to encounter some pathology
along the way like you're going to read
a book and it's going to have some
really great ideas mixed with things
that are pathological in the way that is
hostile to you or in the in a way that
is not not good thinking to go deep in
these ideas both you have to commit to
okay I'm willing to put up with a little
bit of pathology to get to the
interesting ideas and that idea cluster
but also I'm willing to set aside the
use of certain words that are convenient
that are great representations of my
ideas because I understand that those
ideas have been weaponized in a way that
makes the conversation harder across
difference


## Keywords:
