---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zC-_VaKgCeo
---

# Video
Why Socialists CAN Have Nice Things (TMBS 57)
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zC-_VaKgCeo)

## Transcript:

let's start with some breaking news
Matt if I may have the board socialists
wear fashionable clothes
own homes and even receive salaries all
this in we have three discrete pieces of
evidence including Bernie Sanders
wearing a warm coat during the winter
owning two homes and Jeremy Corbyn
receiving I think humid Lee since the
1980s a government salary of three
million pounds because shockingly even
though he claims to be a socialist he
still drew a salary as a member of the
United Kingdom's Parliament now I am as
shocked as the rest of you by these
unbelievable portrayals of socialist
value in principles and it just gets
worse from here here is FoxNews exposing
Alexandria Acacio Cortes shocking she
has the right to do in a free country
and this is what she said
the Socialists from the Bronx she said
hey go ahead get alright doesn't seem to
understand the concept of magazine
shoots B you don't get to keep the
clothes duh and see I don't pretend to
fight for a living wage or Medicare for
all I do it D get used to me slang looks
because I'm an excellent thrift shop tur
we should just say that she's responding
to a crappy charlie Kirk tweeted that's
big how we'll get will be yeah we'll get
to it but basically she did a photo
shoot for Vogue I believe according to
urban dictionary calm a an outfit that
you put extra care into so my look today
is a $50 Ross Dress for Less we've
dropped a dress for Less outfit so I'm
gonna be slaying these looks to wow she
is slaying the $3,500 I bet you that's
not the average cost of a dress on fox
news I'm gonna be very comfortable with
not taking up that bet because there's
almost no chance that you're wrong about
that so what
is all this reveal it reveals that the
latest track and by the way thank you
Fox News for doing more incredibly good
coverage of Alexandria Kazuya Cortez
showing her being fashionable funny
relatable and of course advocating for
policies that would make almost all
Americans lives immeasurably better
thanks a lot Fox News consider it
continues to be a great PR shop for the
promising young socialist politician in
addition to that this whole meme which
is trotted out by the far right it's
trotted out by brain-dead Hillary
neoliberal types that socialism somehow
means an act of personal sacrifice an
act of putting on a hairshirt
moral pen penance some people with great
politics make this mistake too they
think that socialist politics is a sort
of question of one self-cleansing ones
moral posturing we do see this on
everywhere from unfortunate woke Twitter
tirades to an obsessive attention to
details with one's own consumer
purchases unfortunately it's actually
quite the opposite
rather fortunately it's rather quite the
opposite what we're trying to do as
socialists is democratize access to the
goods of society so that more people can
live an abundant comfortable materially
secure and even materially enjoyable
lifestyle and we also know that while of
course people's personal decisions and
there's nothing wrong with being mindful
and making choices about which companies
you support on a relative scale some
companies are more flagrant abusers than
others and where your dollars can
intervene practically you should let
them but we also know that we are
ultimately not consumers making choices
that drive politics we are actually
ultimately political beings trying to
democratize an economy so that we can
all have a more robust democratized and
fully lived life these silly ridiculous
retrograde memes play on some left-wing
mythology in the United States that
leftist politics is a church that it's
an act of spiritual cleansing immoral
self-righteousness not a collective
endeavor for robust engagement in
material advancements and real concrete
solidarity across all lines and it also
plays into some of the most lazy
pathetic right-wing tropes that somebody
can't advocate for everybody to have
health care for everybody to have a
living wage for everybody in fact to own
their own economic destinies and enjoy
nice sneakers speaking about myself
incredibly high-grade ganja um-hmm super
producer and leather jackets and beer
all of us actually this meme has to die
and we can laugh at the people on the
right and the people in the neoliberal
Center pushing the Spartan fantasy but
we have to root out our own ideas that
politics is an act of moral self
cleansing and moral posturing it's an
act of concrete advancement that we
unite across class boundaries on and by
the way if we look at the Middle East or
Africa and great socialist anti-colonial
movements there was actually a lot of
great strategy that was devised an
emancipatory political vision that was
generated by people smoking hookahs
smoking cigarettes and drinking really
good coffee so we should only do our
best to live up to that version of latte
socialism this is a politics that of
course will remind 'fl of the ecological
burdens which are not about personal
consumption but the extraction of
capitalism wants to put the best cigars
have everybody have access to the best
soccer fields basketball courts tennis
courts even golf courses for everybody
it's not about deprivation it's about
democratization let's drop that myth and
let's keep hoping that Fox is stupid
enough to keep running segments where
aoc and other socialists are charming on
the right side of the issues and
being good while you apparently think
that only aging sexual harasser x' and
other predators should have health care
and retirement savings you know if you
raise taxes high enough owning things
becomes patriotic indeed like if let's
say you had to pay just if bernie on a
second house right it was just a huge
amount good on the second house i think
that actually would help he employed a
lot of people he actually did the thing
that they're always banging on about
which is the infamous nonsense
trickle-down but look if you spend your
whole life working to deliver rights to
people and you want to build an extra
cabin for your family awesome well there
this is not the issue there is yeah
exactly like if we are working for
people right right generally if you're
in the purest sense of terms you want to
be you you want to be delivering for
people that that would be you know met
by some success in the marketplace is
not a complete surprise like you have to
keep it in in within you know limits
button well I think what would I'm more
interested in than anything is that on
the Left we know we need to be much more
serious about being way more fun and if
way more if look at the history of you
know even like going back to Karl Marx
you know he was you know in many senses
like a complete drunker and enjoyed very
nice wines and good cigars and that goes
all the way through the socialist
tradition and it's only I feel like you
know in a lot of these newer us
movements that there's this kind of
rigidity and this kind of like moral
sentiment of like taking like the worst
possible food and drink I said no like
socialism should be social and the
critique of things that are you know too
expensive and are out of reach for most
working people isn't that nobody
shouldn't have them is that we should
make sure that all these things are
available to everybody and a large
amount of spirit and abundance
incidence of everybody doing well
because thrift it's really a middle
class virtue and talking from my for
myself as someone who grow very poor
poor people would throw epic parties all
the time and they would have nice
when they could afford it because you
never know when the next time you're
going to have the opportunity for it and
we shouldn't you know take on with us
this kind of more middle-class version
of thrift and instead take on the kind
of revolutionary laboratory spirit of
fun and excess which is socialism in its
best sense Imams out


## Keywords:
