---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ZHZeFdn2Rs
---

# Video
Why Most Americans Say They Want to Overhaul the System
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ZHZeFdn2Rs)

## Transcript:
as we turn to the issue of uh the
elections here in the United States and
that is Mr Walter maleric who's the
editor of Liberation news Walter thanks
for being back with
us thank you very much for having me
back well we're glad glad to have you
back as always uh a lot of discussion
this week of course about Joe Biden and
Donald Trump to some degree but mainly
Joe Biden because of the New York Times
poll I guess it came out on Monday I
can't remember now um but that plus a
number of other polls showing Biden
being very far down so maybe before we
get too deep into the implications of
This Walter maybe just give us just at
least a rough indication of what some of
this polling has been showing about
Biden versus Trump and and other parties
and individuals who are in the
race yeah that's right well this is not
good news for Joe Biden not not good
news at all um you know under the US
electoral system there are some states
that count and other states that do not
count and if you're lucky enough to live
in the states that actually matter the
so-called swing States then you know you
get a voice in this democracy so uh if
you look at those States right what are
the swing states that are actually in
contention um you know their their
Electoral College votes are are actually
you know a tossup between the two
candidates either could realistically
get it um in essentially all of those
with maybe the exception of Minnesota
Donald Trump is up uh in some states
he's up by a lot like in Georgia he's up
by a lot Nevada North Carolina I mean
these are states that the Democrats
would hope to be like highly competitive
in Donald Trump is leading essentially
every professional poll in those States
um and then you uh move to the so-called
blue wall states in the Upper Midwest
Minnesota Wisconsin Michigan and
Pennsylvania and in those States it's a
little bit closer but Trump is leading
uh in in essentially all of them there's
an odd poll here or there in
Pennsylvania Minnesota sometimes in
Wisconsin uh that CHS Biden up by by a
point or two but essentially in order
for Biden to get an Coral College
majority he needs to win all four of
those States unless he can pull off
what's now looking like a very
improbable victory in one of the other
ones he needs to win all four Minnesota
Michigan uh Pennsylvania and Wisconsin
uh and and he might not win any if the
if the current polling especially this
Monday report from Sienna and New York
Times is is accurate so uh the Biden
Administration the Biden campaign people
the Democratic party uh are are I think
or should be in a state of panic over
this Donald Trump is leading uh in every
single important
poll well Walter I want to ask you about
some of the specifics here um in this
amazing democracy that we have where
people only a handful of States matter
in terms of their vote uh for these
pre-approved candidates what are they so
upset about I mean isn't America in the
world great right now Walter like what
are these people whining about that they
don't want to vote for President Biden
or in some cases Trump
yeah okay so that that is like actually
the public relations strategy of the
democratic party right now like like
isn't that remarkable that's their
messaging like everything is fine um
it's it's really easy to get a job you
should be so happy about the economy uh
everything is wonderful and if you don't
get that then uh maybe you don't read
enough or you're just ignorant or you
know there's something else going on I
mean it's like so completely out of
touch with the reality uh that people
are dealing with I mean that's true just
sort of in an objective sense right like
uh prices are really really high uh
wages are not high enough uh rent
especially is skyrocketing uh and then
and then there's all the broken promises
that that Biden uh said he would carry
through uh follow through on but but did
not um the expansion of social programs
free Community College Universal prek um
the proa to make it much easier to form
a a union um cash payments monthly cash
cash payments for working-class families
I mean things that would really
alleviate some of these things and Biden
said he would do he did not do any of
them and in fact presided over the roll
back of supports for poor and
workingclass and middle class people
like the free on student loan repayments
for instance so there's a great amount
of Justified anger uh when you look at
the situation in the United States and
certainly the situation internationally
is decisive as well when it comes to
Biden's well-deserved unpopularity first
and foremost the genocide in Gaza so
many people are absolutely Furious that
billions of dollars of our tax money is
being used to fund a a massacre a
killing spree where tens of thousands of
innocent people are being bombed or
being shot uh all with Weaponry produced
by the United States and paid for with
our tax dollars uh Biden is 100%
culpable for that genocide and there are
millions of people who will never
forgive him for that and I think there's
a similar Dynamic playing out in the the
war in Ukraine um you know maybe uh sort
of less of a of a dramatic acute crisis
but people are totally Furious about the
militarism and the waste of resources
there too so on many many many different
fronts Biden has been a complete
disappointment well as you know Bill
Clinton famously said or maybe it was
one of his AIDS famously said it's the
economy stupid obviously the economy is
always the number one issue in every
single election for obvious reasons
because in capitalism you must have
money to survive uh a lot of issues
around the economy swirling around here
as you mentioned Democrats saying it's
good but one of the other elements of
the poll the New York Times Sienna
College Philadelphia inquir poll that
many people were pointing to was large
numbers of people saying that they were
in fact thinking that the economy needed
major changes or needs to be completely
torn down talk about that element of of
of that report if you could which has
made some
waves yeah I think this is this is just
as interesting or more interesting than
the Biden versus Trump numbers uh
because it shows the the real opinion
the real State of Mind of I I think the
the clear majority of people in this
country uh which is that the the choices
being presented to us by this system are
completely inadequate they're they're
insulting they're infuriating the idea
that two of the most unpopular
politicians in the country like those
those are the only choices that you have
uh is is something that's making people
uh leading people to to Really radical
conclusions about Society I think well
well founded ones um so yeah about 69%
of the population according to this poll
thinks that the system the political and
economic system of the United States
needs to either undergo major changes or
be torn down entirely and that was the
language they use torn down right so it
was this sort of you know militant like
fighting kind of spirit um that about
about one in seven respondents agreed
with that right so I think this says
something um both about you know the the
mentality of sort of the the average
voter if you will you know what what is
on the minds of people who are going to
the polls but I think it also says
something even deeper and more profound
about us society which is that there's a
growing desire out there to actually
fight for that change um you know we've
seen it in the streets over and over and
over week after week after week for Gaza
um you know we saw uh mass movements
emerge many times in the you know in
recent years that the 2020 protests
Against Racism um you know environmental
rights protests you know there's this
growing mass movement uh for change for
fundamental change in this society and
there's all sorts of twists and turns
and unanswered questions as that
movement grows but I think that this
poll showed a clear reflection that that
is a large and growing and vibrant
current in American politics seeking
radical change in the political and
economic
system and you know Walter I do want to
ask you you know there there obviously
is a lot of discontent at these as these
polls show over very particular issues
but in moments like these it's an
opportunity for the left of course to
try to organize people it's also an
opportunity for the right um to try to
convince people that the reason you know
the the the the stuff that is actually
wrong with the country is like
immigrants and you know uh poor people
and you know the Browns and other
countries you know that's typically what
the right does I'm curious if you could
talk a bit about how someone like not
just Trump but what he represent
like moments like this because liberals
suck so bad um represent an opportunity
for the farri to really come in and
scoop up that discontent especially
because they have a massive media
apparatus to spread their talking points
too through yeah yeah absolutely I mean
just like Biden benefited so much uh in
2020 from just being not Donald Trump uh
Donald Trump is benefiting this time
around from being not Joe Biden uh
because the the powers that be if it
were right the rul ruling Administration
is from the Democratic party um Trump
can come along and is coming along and
posturing as an outsider an opponent of
the establishment I mean of course this
is all totally ridiculous considering
that you know he was the president he
has been the billionaire for basically
his whole life uh so it's it's nonsense
it's demagog uh but it's something
that's that's a very real uh political
phenomenon something that we see
throughout history where the far can
come along and unlike the liberals who
are saying everything is fine and it's
all in your head uh acknowledge that yes
there are dramatic problems in society
that's making your life uh very very
difficult uh but providing false
Solutions and identifying as you're
saying false enemies right immigrants
lgbtq people unions leftists you know
what whatever there's you know an
endless list of different scapegoats
that the farri uh comes up with um so I
think that is certainly Trump's Playbook
that's what he's trying to do this time
around um maybe with even more you know
militancy than in 2016 and in 2020 in
terms of his calls for revenge for you
know clearing out the system for getting
rid of all the leftists um but but yeah
I think that's essentially his Playbook
posturing as the voice of you know the
Common Man Against The Establishment
while at the same time uh doing things
like giving two trillion dollars of tax
breaks to Wall Street and big
corporations um you know bolstering the
military industrial complex and so
on no it's a it's a good point uh very
very good point you know Walter I want
to ask you just sort of
uh you might not expect this one but I
think it's relevant in terms of how we
view this because you know you're a
lifelong Pennsylvania resident uh you're
very familiar with the city of
Philadelphia and you know obviously
Kensington and the north part of
Philadelphia which you're familiar with
is often presented as sort of like uh
you know the videos of people using
drugs like the decline of America and
and and in a way I was hoping you could
speak about that in the the context of
all of these various different things
that we're seeing in terms of the
election and why people want change and
what people want to see and so on and so
forth because I think it's often just
sort of caricatured like look at the
collapse of America in just sort of like
a random way um but it's not really
contextualized in terms of how these
kind of things actually play out in a
swing state like Pennsylvania that would
lead people to stay home vote for a
third party or just generally not be
engaged with the political
system okay yeah no I think that's
that's a really important way to to
frame it um and actually to to go to
Kensington so I I lived in Kensington
for for a long time um yeah like the the
postered child you know it's always held
up by like right-wing politicians who
make it a campaign stop to be like oh
look how terrible it is here we've
really got to get tough on crime I think
it's it's a perfect example of the type
of uh the type of maneuver that I was
describing there where you identify a
very real very pressing problem that's
being ignored by establishment
liberalism but identify uh false
culprits and offer false Solutions right
so the opioid crisis is terrible it's a
horrific problem
especially in in Kensington uh but it's
a problem because of pharmaceutical
corporations that's who's responsible
for this right I mean the the Sackler
family um you know other owners of chain
pharmacies big uh you know uh yeah the
big Pharma essentially uh made a killing
I mean made hundreds of billions of
dollars uh essentially introducing what
were uh at the time banned opioids into
the market and repackaging them as like
legitimate medicines um this is a very
well documented thing there's been
extensive extensive Court battles over
it like clearly this is the consequence
of the total uh and unchecked greed of
the pharmaceutical capitalist uh Donald
Trump comes along and says well the
problem is uh either people who are
suffering from drug addiction and you
know presenting this as just a purely
individual moral problem or that it's
China's fault uh that somehow you know
Fentanyl and other opioids are flowing
across the the US border flowing into US
ports and it's all coming from China and
it's part of some Chinese plot to
undermine the fabric of us Society like
like no it's not it's not some foreign
enemy it's rich people right here in the
United
States no it's a great great Point yeah
fent all and Military age men those are
the two major issues uh that are there
I'm sorry R go
ahead no no I just it's it's just such a
clown show meanwhile you know this
country that we're supposed to feel so
free in is just you know Homeland
Security stops people when they come
into it and demands to know how they
feel about Hamas I'm just I all it's
just such a ridiculous circus and a very
dangerous one at that well thankfully we
have Liberation news and people like
their editor Walter smic out there
helping us sort through it all Walter as
always we really appreciate you giving
us some of your time here in the freedom
side thank you so much for having me


## Keywords:
