---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source: youtube
mm_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fotQb9M6k2U
---

# Video
Why Greenspan Knew, But Didnâ€™t Act
![](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fotQb9M6k2U)

## Transcript:
I'm here today with Sebastian Mallaby
the paul volcker senior fellow at the
Council on Foreign Relations we're here
to discuss his new book the man who knew
the life and times of Alan Greenspan
published by penguin thanks for joining
us
great to be with you rep the man who
knew brings Mark Twain to mind
immediately it's not the things that you
don't know that gets you in trouble
it's the things you know for sure that
just ain't solve you've been on a deep
dive exploring a very long term that an
individual who was very prominent had as
the Federal Reserve Chairman what did
you learn about what you might call the
context or the structure of information
and the structure of decision-making
that Alan Greenspan how they say
inhabited and shared with you well I
called the book the man who knew because
I think he knew more about financial
instability about market overshoots and
so forth then people realize and so by
studying his life and studying the
history of his thought and reading what
he was saying to his FOMC colleagues
through the transcripts you know in the
in the run-up both of the Nasdaq bubble
and then the subprime bubble you see him
grappling with some of these issues of
financial instability and showing more
knowledge and insight about those more
premonition that they could portend
disaster than anybody realize so what
that leads me to is a question which is
if he was the man who knew why was he
not the man who acted why did he not
prevent the crisis if he could feel it
coming and you'd say he was the man who
knew but he also had a say in his most
recent book particularly emphasizes that
there are unknowable things out in the
future that it's not all which am I
called dynamic programming into an
unknown equilibrium so when you say he
knew yes did he know what he didn't know
yet the same I think that's right part
of the knowledge is the knowledge that
you did everything and one of the quotes
that I include at the start of my book
just as a kind of
taste Iran before the book even starts
is greenspan remarking to his colleagues
that you know this is when he's been Fed
Chairman already for a decade no the
truth is then when you get right down to
it we don't know what we're doing or
words to that effect so he was very
conscious of the limits to forecasting
because he's been a forecaster for so
long he was very conscious of the way
that markets were unpredictable because
he'd been in and around markets for all
his life and so that that that yeah the
limits to knowledge the Hayekian
uncertainty was very much part of his
worldview and so when you say he know he
knew but he didn't act he didn't act to
prevent a crisis what could he have done
that he didn't do well I mean I think
the standard answer would be that the
Fed's policy leading up to 2008 in terms
of monetary policy and interest rates
was fine because look inflation was on
target and then the standard view would
continue to say so the problem in
therefore was with regulation regulation
should have been tougher they should
have clamped down on subprime craziness
and excessive leverage and so forth and
it was a regulatory failure towards
bubble prevention rather than fighting
for price stability that's at the core
of what was missing well we can see that
there were bubbles so Kayle bubble
prevention didn't work they they failed
on that but what I'm saying is that the
the diagnosis of that failure emphasizes
regulatory shortcomings what could they
have done in regulation and one of my
surprises as I did the research was to
discover through Freedom of Information
Act requests that in fact the Fed did
try on regulation more than people think
in 2001 they did pass new rules on
subprime mortgages banning the most
toxic type and so again he was the man
he knew he was the man who saw the
problem and who did actually try
something the problem was that what the
Fed did was supposed to acts out the
worst one-third of subprime mortgages
but when they did a retrospective study
in fact it had only reduced about 1% of
the bad mortgages and what that shows us
is that it's very easy in finance
to tweak your product and get around the
regulation if you're banned from
inserting a ripoff insurance product
into the subprime mortgage you don't do
the insurance product you rip people off
in two other ways that you can easily
dream up it also shows us that you know
the regulatory structure in the u.s. is
balkanized and so the Fed could write
the rule but the implementation of the
rule was up to somebody else and in the
case of subprime mortgages it was you
know was up to the FTC to supervise
non-bank mortgage originators and the
FTC doesn't have any supervisors it's
just an enforcement agency so there were
all these political problems and limits
to what the Fed could do which I think
explain more about why we had a crisis
than the theory of intellectual failure
so it some level he was my straw mm-hmm
and he knew but he didn't have the tools
in our political economic structure to
be able to execute on what he knew and
protect society yes I mean another
example of this is the debate about
derivatives regulation where in 1998
Brooksley born the chair of the
Commodities Futures Trading Commission
suggested essentially that there should
be some consideration of regulation and
the obvious thing to do was to force
derivatives from OTC status to being on
to clearing houses and exchanges and of
course that's what we came to after 2008
so Brooks t-bone was on the right track
now Greenspan resisted and opposed along
with Bob Rubin and Larry Summers who had
the Treasury and the question is why did
they resist right
so the standard view would be to say
well they were stupid you know they
didn't understand the derivatives were
dangerous this just isn't true I mean
they knew perfectly well the derivatives
could be dangerous after all only three
years earlier there had been a
derivatives blow up in Orange County
California where you know the Treasury
operations of Orange County were
discredited by huge losses on
derivatives Proctor and Gamble Gibson's
greetings cards these were companies
that lost huge amounts and derivatives
so everybody had lived through that they
saw the derivatives could be dangerous
but there was a political obstacle to
actually getting regulation
done if they had proposed regulation it
would have gotten stuck in the Congress
there would have been lobbying left and
right and Greenspan Sommers and Rubin
made the judgment that politically it
wasn't going to happen and so I think
again it leads me to this political
explanation for the origins of financial
crises so we should ask ourselves the
question in the current climate
politically in Washington has the
problem gotten better or worse has
politics become more of a constraint or
less of a constraint I think it's hard
to be optimistic on that question know
they used to say money is the mother of
milk of politics it feels like people
are drinking milk from a fire hose and
super PACs and what-have-you so I can
imagine also there being a bit of a
party competition regarding the
questions of how would I say you're a
Democrat like Robert Rubin Treasury
secretary conferring with Larry Summers
if you try to shut that down you may be
producing fundraisers for Republican
politicians yes or even Democrats to
oppose you that could be divisive within
your own party
yes I'm sure those things played in in
fact you know I think you know more
about some of the clear illustrations of
this kind of game being played in the
1980s from your own experience in the
Senate there's a you should never see
sausage or legislation made I had my
innocence taken away but clearly money
in politics was a big factor I mean
another example of this again is the GSE
is the Fannie and Freddie the mortgage
underwriting hold that whole world
and when Greenspan rather belatedly got
his act together to try to do something
about the excessive size of these GSEs
and to rein them in this was about 2004
he made an alliance with the White House
and he went and argued in Congress that
they should have their portfolios capped
that they should not be allowed to take
this much risk since they were
ultimately you know implicitly
backstopped by the taxpayer and so he
was making some headway with this
argument Greenspan he was you know
preparing the case there had been some
Fed research showing why this was
correct and things looked like they were
going in the right direction until the
day of the second hearing and Cong
when they were going to consider this
proposal and on that morning there was a
TV commercial which showed a nice couple
talking about their aspirations to the
American Dream and one of them said to
the other we were hoping to get that new
home but now I hear Congress will stop
us yes said the other one Congress is
going to take away that mortgage we were
counting on and so this was just a shot
across the bars from Fannie and Freddie
that if any member of Congress were so
dumb as to vote for the greenspan reform
guess what they would face in their own
districts so that's money in politics or
whatever again clever marketing yes you
know they always say bubble prevention
is very difficult because both the
borrower and lender want to participate
when you try to stop them yes it's only
later one or the other was saved but
that agitation could be brought up on
the part of borrowers but I mean I like
that that formulation that you made
because then it reminds me that the
classic William McChesney Martin
formulation of the mission of the
central bank and you know that the job
of the central banker is to take away
the punch bowl when the party gets to be
really fun now he was talking about
raising interest rates to check off
inflation right but my argument now is
that this applies to asset bubbles too
as you're saying it does and how I say
you one of one politician who I work for
once said to me those are good ideas but
you can't get in front of a falling
piano so I think there you're exploring
in deepening your understanding of
Greenspan but it's not what you might
call that simple fantasy of just
knowledge that the political economy
yeah it's a very very deep portion of
this let's talk a little bit about
central bank's central bank independence
we have a new president he's been a
little bit rough on the federal reserve
what do you see in light of what you
learned from studying Alan Greenspan
that you would recommend for the
structure or the nature of central bank
independence go
forward well central bank independence
in this country is a convention a habit
it's no law it's not really protected in
any strong way and we know from history
that there have been periods when the
Fed was allowed to be independent so for
example in the Eisenhower administration
even in the Kennedy administration the
Fed could basically do what it wanted it
could set interest rates as it saw fit
then Along Came Lyndon Johnson and he
called William McChesney Martin down to
his ranch in Texas and he shoved him
physically around the room and said boys
are dying in Vietnam and Bill Martin
doesn't care and he pushed the Fed to be
looser and that's where you see the
beginning of the late 60s take up in
inflation Nixon was even more aggressive
towards the Fed there's a story in my
book about how he did this dirty trick
against Arthur burns to force him to cut
interest rates where he leaked a
completely made-up story to discredit
after burns and then he had greenspan go
see burns and say listen you know this
is tough washington is tough if you want
this to stop maybe you should think
about your policy this is something that
greenspan you know never conceded to me
but you know the documentary evidence
from the from the Nixon Library and the
Nixon tapes is so strong that I kept it
in the book so I mean we know from
history that presidents can bully the
fed can take away the independence and I
fear that with a Fed which right now has
seven slots for governor and to a vacant
so Donald trum gets to fill two right
away with his people and on top of that
we've got the likelihood that Janet
Yellen won't be reappointed in January
18 and Stan Fischer in the summer of
2018 as vice-chair will not be
reappointed either probably so Trump can
get the central bank that he wants so I
think to to prepare for that possibility
Janet Yellen would do well to study the
Greenspan playbook of how you respond to
an administration like Greenspan faced
with George HW Bush how did he push back
against bullying how did he resist and
you saw the very mark all
continuous pressured way how Paul
Volcker's strength was taken apart
that's the late part of the Reagan
administration absolutely I mean you
know Paul Volcker was outvoted on
interest rates and tended his
resignation to the Treasury Secretary
Tim Jim Baker was persuaded to stay but
then was again I voted at least twice on
regulatory issues where Volcker didn't
want to unravel glass-steagall but the
Reagan appointees did want to and they
just averted him yes so again it shows
how the Fed Chairman can be encircled by
appointees who are hostile Greenspan
dealt with this by the way in a fairly
forthright fashion he went to his
friends in the Senate and he said do not
confirm this appointment you know he
would do you know he went toe to toe for
example with Bill Clinton on the issue
of whether Felix Raritan should be
appointed vice chair Clinton very much
wanted wrote in Greenspan didn't
Greenspan went to the Senate and guess
who one wrote and never got that job so
I think if you're willing to play
politics
you can descend Fed independence you do
not defend Fed independence by
pretending that politics doesn't exist
right right the technocratic innocence
is not really part of the chessboard
upon which their play you do not get to
hide away in that ivory tower and
pretend the real world doesn't exist you
have to go out into the public square
and fight politically to resist
political intimidation you finished a
book you look back on it there's
probably a paperback edition coming at
some point what's the what's the chapter
you'll write that you haven't written
thus far what's the theme that you say
that should have been part of this
narrative well you know when I wrote the
book it's a long book but it would have
been longer if I hadn't cut 200 pages
out I always do this when he wants to
write it you already did I always do
this with books now I write too much and
you do your readers the respect of
chopping it down and you know by
definition if you cut out the stuff
seems the least pressing the residual
should be better but one thing I cut
which I sadly regret is there was an
interchange in 1999 when the Fed staff
presented a model result and the model
results said you know there is this
issue of the Nasdaq tech stocks are very
high if they fell by a 20% what would it
take in terms of accommodation from
monetary policy to protect the real
economy and they had some number like
hundred fifty basis points would be
adequate to cushion the shock and
Greenspan listened to this model
presentation and he said I just don't
believe it you know I mean no model can
capture what happens in unpredictable
markets he didn't use the word
reflexivity but he meant that's what he
meant that there are interconnections
and feedback loops and once the market
goes down by a fifth you can't model
what's going to happen it's too
difficult and that shows greenspan
understanding what he doesn't know to
your earlier point and it shows him
showing fear of the doctrine that you
can clean up after the bubble bursts
because he's saying well you know we
don't know what it would take to clean
up I wish I'd kept that in well thanks
very much thank you it's lovely to see
ya then congratulations on your book
thank you


## Keywords:
