---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source:
  - - i-have-been-writing-and-rewriting-this-for-three-w.md
---

![[3224389125854783813_3224389118095411539.jpg]]

My heart broke as | watched the news of the October 7th
attack unfold. My heart breaks again and again as |
watch so many Israelis - with some of whom | share
generational trauma instilled by repeated displacements,
pogroms, and the Shoah - openly call for an escalation
of this genocide by calling Palestinians “human animals”
and demanding the army to “flatten Gaza”. Like most of
them, | knew people who were killed and people whose
friends have been taken hostage. | have been oscillating
between feeling sad, numb, anxious, angry, and
depressed.

Having grown up in Switzerland and sitting safely in
Berlin, | am speaking from a position of privilege. My
affectedness and pain do not compare to those Israelis
who grew up in Israel and have nowhere else to go. |
won't pretend that | can ever fully understand the depth
of their fear and trauma. But no amount of pain should
keep us from being able to speak out and call for an end
of the ongoing genocide taking place in Palestine. |
denounce the occupation, and the settler-colonialism
that Israel has subjected Palestinians to for 75+ years.
And | do this with grief and anger, and not despite it.

