---
note_type: metamedia
mm_source:
  - - Run for Something’s 2023 Strategic Plan  by Run for Something  Run for Something  Medium.md
---

![[91284e36bf0d298fe2505e4f2c5de762_MD5.jpg]]

Key Takeaways

2 Regional Director Support

Thevasmartyof espodens
saythatsupportfrom their
Regional Directorwas valuable,
withmany highlightingthe
enam gt G s
wasfollowed by generaladiceand
guidanceon ampaignspeifcs.

Gandidateswholustweremore
likely thantheirwinning
Counterparstosay thatthe
RegionalDiretorsupport wasvery
useful Theywerealsomorelikely
thanthose who'won tosay they
received supporton
communicatonsstrtegyand
fundraising/buiget rom the .

Aminorityof ndidatessid they
eceived litletonoRDsupport.

4 RFSStrengths

Gandidates talkedabout Runfor
ameting s elngther
Gmpaignike nothingelse. One
mentioned howit it th firethat
eptherburing throughout her
campaign Forsome,RFS's support
reateda ‘watershed moment,
opening dsors that ed themaver
e i ne.

Many candidates mention how
significant theerly endorsement
wasfortheircampaign, whie
othersoted how theywished
theyhadreceivedit arer.

Many andidate itedthe feeing
ofbeing‘plugge i t0alarger
networkof andidates nsimilar
drcumstancesasbeing valuable.

