---
title: kp385y5
url: https://www.reddit.com/r/changemyview/comments/1ajlwj2/cmv_parents_have_no_right_to_hit_their_child/
source: reddit
subreddit: changemyview
media: no
---
**r/changemyview** | Posted by u/Plastic-Abroc67a8282 ⬆️ 77 _(2024-02-05 12:20:53)_

## CMV: Parents have no right to hit their child. Spanking a child is a form of physical abuse that requires intervention and counseling by CPS or other authorities.

Original post: [https://www.reddit.com/r/changemyview/comments/1ajlwj2/cmv_parents_have_no_right_to_hit_their_child/](https://www.reddit.com/r/changemyview/comments/1ajlwj2/cmv_parents_have_no_right_to_hit_their_child/)

> It is commonly agreed that denying a child food or medical care constitutes child abuse, because of the adverse impacts on the child's health, physical and emotional development, and wellbeing. We have reached this conclusion based on numerous long term research studies that have demonstrated the adverse impacts of these practices. Drinking while pregnant with your child is similarly considered a form of child abuse, because of its negative effects on child development.
> 
> However, despite decades of scientific research and an overwhelming body of evidence indicating that spanking or corporal punishment in children creates a host of adverse effects on the child, we still accept that parents have the right to punish their children in this manner.
> 
> **What does the research say?**
> 
> * A landmark meta-analysis published in 2002 showed that **of** **27 studies on physical punishment and child aggression,** **all found a significant positive relation,** regardless of the size of the sample, location of study, ages of the children or any other variable. (Gershoff ET. Corporal punishment by parents and associated child behaviors and experiences: a meta-analytic and theoretical review. Psychol Bull 2002;128:539–79)
> * Physical punishment is **associated with a range of mental health problems in children, youth and adults, including depression, unhappiness, anxiety, feelings of hopelessness, use of drugs and alcohol,** and general psychological maladjustment. (Turner HA, Muller PA. Long-term effects of child corporal punishment on depressive symptoms in young adults: potential moderators and mediators. J Fam Issues 2004;25:761–82)
> * Intriguing results are now emerging from neuroimaging studies, which suggest that **physical punishment may reduce the volume of the brain’s grey matter** in areas associated with performance on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, third edition (WAIS-III). (Tomoda A, Suzuki H, Rabi K, et al. Reduced prefrontal cortical gray matter volume in young adults exposed to harsh corporal punishment. Neuroimage 2009;47:T66–71)
> * Physical punishment can cause **alterations in the dopaminergic regions associated with vulnerability to the abuse of drugs and alcohol.** (Sheu Y-S, Polcan A, Anderson CM, et al. Harsh corporal punishment is associated with increased T2 relaxation time in dopamine-rich regions. Neuroimage 2010;53:412–9)
> * Researchers are also finding that **physical punishment is linked to slower cognitive development and adversely affects academic achievement.** (Straus MA, Paschall MJ. Corporal punishment by mothers and development of children’s cognitive ability: a longitudinal study of two nationally representative age cohorts. J Aggress Maltreat Trauma 2000;18:459–83)
> 
> Similarly, research has demonstrated that there is a high correlation between spanking and serious physical abuse.  A large Canadian study found that *children who were spanked by their parents were seven times more likely to be severely assaulted by their parents* (e.g., punched or kicked) than children who were not spanked. In an American study, *infants in their first year of life who had been spanked by their parents in the previous month were 2.3 times more likely to suffer an injury requiring medical attention* than infants who had not been spanked. (Crandall M, Chiu B, Sheehan K. Injury in the first year of life: risk factors and solutions for high-risk families. J Surg Res 2006; 133:7–10)
> 
> This indicates to me that allowing corporal punishment opens the door for other forms of more severe physical violence.
> 
> **To me it's simple: parents have no right to permanently damage their child's brain, whether that's drinking while pregnant or hitting it after it's born. Any action which permanently harms a child's brain development is a form of child abuse that requires intervention. And anyone who spanks their child is a bad parent.** 

💬 ~ 1 replies

---

* 🟩 **[RubyMae4](https://www.reddit.com/user/RubyMae4)** ⬆️ 5 _(2024-02-05 17:06:02)_

	There is research on this. It's been thoroughly addressed [here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8194004/):

	The best way to ensure that physical punishment precedes child outcomes in a statistical model is through a longitudinal design in which spanking is used to predict subsequent child outcomes. Although longitudinal designs meet the temporal precedence criterion, they do not necessarily address selection bias. A particularly important selection factor, as mentioned earlier, is a child effect of children’s initial behavior: Children’s difficult behaviors could elicit physical punishment from their caregivers. If the “true” association between physical punishment and child outcomes is either entirely or partially a child effect, an association between physical punishment and child outcomes could be mistakenly viewed as a parent effect. With this selection concern in mind, nine longitudinal studies have controlled for children’s initial behavior problems. All of these studies determined that parents’ use of physical punishment predicted increases in children’s externalizing behavior problems over time, even after race, gender, and family socioeconomic status had been statistically controlled (e.g., Grogan-Kaylor, 2005; Larzelere, Cox, &amp; Smith, 2010; Olson, Lopez-Duran, Lunkenheimer, Chang, &amp; Sameroff, 2011).

	Even stronger are research designs that model both the longitudinal parent effect (physical punishment to child behavior) and the longitudinal child effect (child behavior eliciting more physical punishment) simultaneously, such that each statistically controls for the other; these are known as cross-lagged panel designs. Using this design, spanking at an initial time point predicted increases in behavior problems from Ages 1 to 3 (Berlin et al., 2009), 3 to 5 (Maguire-Jack, Gromoske, &amp; Berger, 2012), 5 to 8 (Gershoff et al., 2012), and 12 to 14 as well as 14 to 16 (Wang &amp; Kenny, 2014). Three of these four studies used large and nationally representative samples (N = 2,573: Berlin et al., 2009; N = 11,044: Gershoff et al., 2012; N = 3,870: Maguire-Jack et al., 2012).

	These three approaches to determining temporal order effects generally find that spanking predicts a worsening of child behavior over time, with only a few exceptions that find no relation between spanking and changes in child behavior (e.g., Lansford, Wager, Bates, Pettit, &amp; Dodge, 2012). It is important to note that in none of the cross-lagged studies did physical punishment predict a decrease in child problem behaviors over time while controlling for the child elicitation effect. If selection entirely explained the links between physical punishment and children’s behavior, physical punishment would have significantly predicted improvements in child behavior. Longitudinal studies have overwhelmingly found that physical punishment predicts deteriorations in child behavior over time. That said, it is worth noting that in the Gershoff and Grogan-Kaylor (2016a) meta-analysis, the mean effect size for longitudinal studies was not significantly different from the mean effect size for correlational studies, indicating that both methods reached the same conclusion.


