---
source: onlinelibrary.wiley.com
url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview
---

## I. INTRODUCTION

In modern liberal democracies, politically motivated disobedience of the law is generally tolerated as a way of challenging and changing social and legal practices. This paper concerns the role of civility in such political disobedience.[1](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0002_note_1 "Link to note")

In his seminal work on political disobedience, John Rawls identified three characteristics that many philosophers now take to be the crux of civility: openness, acceptance of legal consequences, and nonviolence. While Rawls and others thought that these features play an essential role in the internal logic of political disobedience, today civility faces increasing skepticism from both practitioners of political disobedience and philosophers who theorize about it. Many of the recent examples of political disobedience that have done the most to capture the public's attention, including Edward Snowden's whistleblowing, Extinction Rebellion's road blockades, _Le mouvement des Gilets jaunes_ in France, and the trucker convoys in Canada, have all been decidedly _uncivil_ in some way or another. Mirroring these real-life trends, many philosophers working on political disobedience have also become increasingly skeptical of civility and increasingly supportive of incivility. As Candice Delmas urges, “It is thus time to start thinking about uncivil disobedience—to wit, disobedient acts that are principled yet also deliberately offensive, covert, anonymous, more than minimally destructive, not respectful of their targets, or which do not aim to communicate to an audience the need to reform laws, policies or institutions.”[2](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0003_note_2 "Link to note")

To evaluate this shift in attitude toward civility, we first need to better understand what civility contributes to political disobedience. This, in turn, requires a detailed analysis of the mechanisms by which political disobedience is intended to influence the reasons of others. Philosophers who write on political disobedience have tended to focus on two of these mechanisms, which I will label “drawing attention” and “triggering conditional reasons,” and I will grant that civility is largely unimportant for these mechanisms. However, I will also argue that political disobedience often proceeds by other mechanisms, including the expression of speech acts like demands, requests, and testimony, and that civility is much more important in these mechanisms.

In Section [II](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-sec-0002), I describe the formal characteristics of civility identified by Rawls (openness, nonviolence, and the acceptance of legal consequences), and argue that his account fails to identify a clear mechanism by which political disobedience affects the reasons of its audience. In Section [III](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-sec-0003), I distinguish five mechanisms through which it might affect those reasons: drawing attention, giving testimony, triggering conditional reasons, making demands, and making requests. In Sections [IV.](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-sec-0004), [IX.](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-sec-0009), I discuss these mechanisms in detail and explore the role that civility plays in each of them.

## II. RAWLS ON CIVILITY IN POLITICAL DISOBEDIENCE

One striking feature of the most paradigmatic cases of political disobedience is the civility displayed by their practitioners. In his influential work on political disobedience, John Rawls distinguished several aspects of civility:

1.  _Openness_: This has at least three subcomponents. First, civil disobedience is “engaged in openly with _fair notice_,” so that both its intended audience and legal authorities are aware that it is going to happen before it takes place. Second, it is not “covert or secretive,” meaning that it is not done _anonymously_. Finally, it “takes place in the _public forum_,” so that it presents its audience with an opportunity for response and mutual engagement.[3](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0004_note_3 "Link to note")
2.  _Accepting the legal consequences of one's disobedience_: Civil disobedience requires some degree of cooperation with arrest, participation in any subsequent trial, and refusal to take steps to reduce one's legal punishment (perhaps, for example, not taking a plea bargain).
3.  _Nonviolence_: Civil disobedience “tries to avoid the use of violence, especially against persons.”[4](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0005_note_4 "Link to note") Rawls also writes that it should avoid “interference with the civil liberties of others,” though he is unclear whether he counts action against property as violence.[5](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0006_note_5 "Link to note") I will assume this is also intended to include threats of violence.[6](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0007_note_6 "Link to note")

For Rawls, political disobedience serves to “address the sense of justice of the majority of the community and \[declare\] that in one's considered opinion the principles of social cooperation among free and equal men are not being respected,” with the ultimate goal of “bringing about a change in the law or policies of the government.”[7](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0008_note_7 "Link to note") He suggests that civility assists in these aims in a couple of ways. All three elements of civility help to express “fidelity to law,” which in turn “helps to establish to the majority that the act is indeed politically conscientious and sincere.”[8](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0009_note_8 "Link to note") He also writes that violence is “incompatible” with political disobedience “as a mode of address.”[9](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0010_note_9 "Link to note")

Rawls's account of the role of civility in political disobedience has several weaknesses. The first has already been widely discussed in the literature on political disobedience. His conception of political disobedience is too narrow to account for the great variety of political disobedience present in liberal democratic societies. There are cases of political disobedience which do not seem to address the existing sense of justice in the society, at least as Rawls understands it in terms of the fair terms of cooperation among members of a society. For example, it seems perfectly legitimate to address political disobedience at foreign policy, even though this is not naturally construed as being directly about the fair terms of cooperation among the members of a society. More radically, others have argued that political disobedience often serves as a form of democratic engagement that need not have any direct connection to injustice at all.[10](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0011_note_10 "Link to note") Few would want to consign these examples to the realm of “militant action” or other alternatives to political disobedience—they are unmistakably a form of political disobedience.

Second, while Rawls is clear that political disobedience is “usually done with the aim of bringing about a change in the law or policies of the government,” he is unclear how a declaration of opinion is supposed to bring about that aim.[11](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0012_note_11 "Link to note") Strictly speaking, if political disobedience were to serve _only_ as a declaration of opinion about injustice, it would be reasonable for its audience to respond to a successful act of political disobedience, “Ah, now I see that you have a sincere opinion that the law is unjust. But what follows from that about what _I_ should do?” The declaration of opinion in political disobedience must be part of a more complex mechanism that is intended to ultimately influence the reasons and/or actions of others. Some of Rawls's remarks gesture toward a few possible mechanisms that he might have in mind, but he fails to provide a clear, singular characterization of that mechanism.

Third, some of the individual connections that Rawls draws between the elements of civility and the mechanism that he attributes to political disobedience are unconvincing. He is simply mistaken to suggest that nonviolence is necessary for interpersonal address in general. Violence can often be a spectacularly powerful way of addressing someone. It is also doubtful that violence would always undermine an attempt to have one's expression of belief regarded as sincere. In many contexts, a forceful and even violent outburst will appear to be more authentic than a careful, measured response. Moreover, even if we grant that a protester's openness and acceptance of legal consequences make it more reasonable to regard them as expressing a sincere belief, it is doubtful that this was the whole point of these practices in the paradigmatic cases of political disobedience. Though some contemporaries doubted whether the participants in the civil rights movement were correct about their claims, or denied their standing to make them, the sincerity of those claims was seldom in question.

Altogether, Rawls was not successful in capturing why civility is important in order for political disobedience to impact people and what they have reason to do. To understand the role that civility plays in political disobedience, we must first better understand the mechanisms through which political disobedience is intended to affect the reasons of its audience.

## III. POLITICAL DISOBEDIENCE AND THE REASONS OF ITS AUDIENCE

Most of the time, when we influence others, we try to influence them by appealing to what they have reason to do.[12](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0013_note_12 "Link to note") Likewise, political disobedience will tend to proceed through some mechanism that appeals to the reasons of its audience.[13](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0014_note_13 "Link to note") These may be reasons to believe certain claims or perform certain actions. They may be reasons of self-interest, justice or other moral matters.

I will say that a mechanism in the context of political disobedience consists of a process by which some act of lawbreaking is intended to produce some chain of effects on the reasons of its audience. For example, an illegal traffic stoppage may be done so that it constitutes a demand and resultantly gives its audience new reason to work against some law. When the mechanism achieves its intended effects through the process, I will say that it is _successful_. In this paper, I will distinguish five mechanisms by which political disobedience might appeal to the reasons of its audience:

1.  _Drawing attention_: Political disobedience can draw attention to some argument or issue, with the intended effect of pointing out a reason that already exists or forcing contemplation about the balance of existing reasons.[14](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0015_note_14 "Link to note") For example, when Extinction Rebellion protesters blockade an intersection and prevent traffic from moving through it, they force contemplation of the slogans on their banners and the issue of climate justice.
2.  _Testimony_: Political disobedience can be intended to persuade its audience of some claim in a way that leans on the protester's epistemic credentials rather than a self-sufficient presentation of the underlying evidence for the claim. For example, when small business owners protested the closures of their businesses during the initial waves of COVID-19, they were giving testimony about the suffering caused to them by those closures.
3.  _Triggering reason-giving_: Political disobedience can be intended to manipulate the environment in a way that triggers a conditional reason, with the intended effect of giving its audience new reason to act against some law. For example, a campaign of blowing up pipelines may trigger the conditional reason of voters and lawmakers to {change some environmental policy, if it is economically unsustainable}.[15](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0016_note_15 "Link to note")
4.  _Demands_: Political disobedience can serve to express demands with the intended effect of giving its audience new, strong reasons to act. For example, to the extent that it involves law-breaking and political disobedience, the Black Lives Matter movement seems to express a demand to end racist practices and laws. In some cases of political disobedience, including Black Lives Matter, the efficacy of the demands will depend on whether those demands correspond with justice, while in other cases, like those of persistent minorities, the demands may be content-independent.
5.  _Requests_: Political disobedience can serve to express requests, with the intended effect of giving its audience new discretionary reasons to vote against legislation or otherwise change their behavior. For example, protests against climate change and gun violence by children should be partially understood as (very strong) requests to change the law to address their concerns.

In the rest of this paper, I will describe these mechanisms and examples in more detail. For now, it will be necessary to set the stage with some initial observations and distinctions. First, let me make two general observations about all of the mechanisms. First, a campaign or even individual act of political disobedience will frequently use several of these mechanisms in varying proportions. While I take my main examples to be evocative of these mechanisms, they all undoubtedly involve other mechanisms as well. (That said, I hope to show that it is not entirely a muddle—some instances of political disobedience clearly rely on some mechanisms much more than others, and often exclude some mechanisms entirely.) Second, whether any given act of political disobedience counts as using any given mechanism will always depend at least in part on the intentions of the protesters. The most important source of evidence for these intentions is the language used by protesters—the slogans they use on their signs, their choice of language in interviews, and so on.

One aim of this paper is simply to describe these mechanisms and to show that political disobedience at least sometimes uses each of them. But my main motivation for distinguishing them is to show that civility plays a different role in each of them. Here, it will be useful to introduce some further distinctions.[16](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0017_note_16 "Link to note") Recall first that a mechanism consists of a process in which some act of lawbreaking is intended to produce some chain of effects on the reasons of its audience. The overall success of the mechanism in producing those effects is determined by a variety of conditions (which, as will see, sometimes include conditions of civility). Some of these conditions will determine whether the action of lawbreaking occurs, while others will relate to whether lawbreaking produces its intended effect, and yet others will relate to _how_ lawbreaking produces its intended effect. Some of these conditions may be _necessary_ or _sufficient_, but most will merely be _facilitative_: they serve to amplify its intended effect or render it more probable.[17](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0018_note_17 "Link to note") It will sometimes be useful to distinguish a condition being facilitative and being _on balance_ facilitative. Sometimes the same condition may facilitate a mechanism in one way but hinder it in another way. For example, suppose that political disobedience is simply intended to make the audience believe that the protester has a sincere belief. In this case, if people who practice political disobedience do so openly, this may help their audience to believe that they are sincere, but at the same time, this may prevent them from getting their message received in the first place, if it makes it more likely that they will get arrested. Civility in this case will facilitate the intended effect but not necessarily on balance. These distinctions can be used to help rank the different mechanisms in terms of how important civility is to each of their success—for instance, some facilitative conditions contribute more than others in amplifying the intended effect of political disobedience, and so are more important to it.

Finally, I want to qualify my argument in two ways before turning to the individual mechanisms in detail. First, even when a condition of civility is facilitative on balance for some mechanism, this does not necessarily provide a decisive, all-things-considered reason for a protester who uses that mechanism to be civil in that respect. As I have defined the mechanisms, the intended effect always concerns the more proximate _reasons_ of the audience, rather than the more distal _actions_ that they will hopefully take in light of those reasons. It is thus possible that a condition of civility may make it more _reasonable_ for the audience to take some action yet make it less likely that its audience will _act_ in that way. Now I certainly do not mean to imply that people who practice political disobedience are unconcerned with or should be unconcerned with how their audience will ultimately come to act. However, for reasons of conceptual clarity, I think it is important to define each mechanism and its intended effect in this proximate way, so we can more clearly distinguish between failures of reason generation and failures of uptake (as well as other forms of failure). Moreover, not infrequently the intention of protesters _is_ limited to just affecting the reasons of their audience, like when one makes a request but does not expect it to be acted on.

Second, I am not claiming that civility's contribution to the mechanisms of political disobedience is the _only_ role that it plays. There may be other reasons to be civil that I do not consider here. For example, there may be independent moral requirements that entail some or all of the individual elements of civility, such as a general moral duty to be nonviolent which entails that political disobedience should be nonviolent.[18](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0019_note_18 "Link to note") Likewise, if there is a moral duty to obey the law or otherwise show fidelity to the law, this may entail moral obligations corresponding to some of the dimensions of civility. I will not weigh in on these arguments in this paper, but they lead me to stop well short of saying that I am giving a complete account of the role of civility in political disobedience.

## IV. DRAWING ATTENTION

Political disobedience often serves to draw attention to things. It is worthwhile to distinguish between two potential objects of attention. On the one hand, it might draw attention to a particular _reason_ or _piece of evidence_, like a descriptive fact about the world (e.g., by standing next to a segregated space when the television cameras are filming) or a moral argument about injustice (e.g., by presenting a banner with a moral argument against climate change). It might be that the reason was not previously known to the audience or was already known to them but not salient in their deliberation. On the other hand, political disobedience might draw its audiences' attention to the _issue_ itself, without necessarily pointing out any particular evidence or reasons, and challenge them to form or reform an overall judgment about what to do about the issue, perhaps overcoming previous cognitive dissonance.[19](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0020_note_19 "Link to note") For example, when Extinction Rebellion blockades an intersection and prevents traffic from moving through it, it seems intended to produce both these effects: it forces contemplation of the reasons on their banners (e.g., “No Nature No Future”) and the issue of climate justice more broadly. The protesters might hope that their audience will be led to think, “Oh, I hadn't thought of that!,” “That wasn't really at the forefront of my mind, but now it is,” or “I guess I am going to have to give this issue more thought.” In many cases, the audience of political disobedience will already be aware of an issue, but unaware of exactly how serious it is. In these cases, those who practice political disobedience might aim to lead people to pay more attention to it or point out other descriptive evidence or moral arguments that support the seriousness of the issue.

Whether political disobedience draws attention to a reason or forces contemplation of an issue, it _causes_ people to pay attention to something, sometimes even against their will, rather than just giving them reason to pay attention to it (though it may do that too). This is perhaps the significance of Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.'s observation that political disobedience “seeks to dramatize the issue so that it can no longer be ignored.”[20](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0021_note_20 "Link to note")

Is civility in political disobedience necessary or facilitative for some act of law-breaking to draw attention to some object? Perhaps the most useful part of civility for this is the fair notice condition, since if a protester gives fair notice, this will typically increase the number of people who might pay attention. However, this will not always be the case. It is not hard to imagine cases where on balance giving fair notice leads to fewer people paying attention to the object, like when the participants get arrested before they can protest in the first place. Thus, even fair notice is often not on balance facilitative for achieving this effect. The other components of civility will typically not facilitate drawing attention at all, let alone on balance. One can equally draw attention to something anonymously or not. Violence typically draws more attention than nonviolence, and restrictions of someone's liberties (e.g., by forcing them to wait in traffic) may well be the most effective way of forcing them to contemplate an issue. Finally, since drawing attention is an effect realized strictly in the present, it is typically irrelevant to its success whether the protester accepts the legal consequences in the future (unless accepting consequences is itself the means of drawing attention).

Altogether, civility plays little role in the mechanism of drawing attention to something itself. The main role that civility plays in this vicinity is not to facilitate drawing attention to something, but instead to address the more distal concern of whether the audience ultimately does what they have been shown that they have reason to do. For example, incivility may well risk angering the audience so that they act contrary to their reasons.

## V. TESTIMONY

Political disobedience sometimes plays an epistemic role that is not straightforwardly captured in terms of drawing attention to things: it provides _testimony_. Someone who gives testimony relies on their epistemic credentials to persuade someone of the claim in question, in a way that requires some trust on the part of the listener, rather than relying on a self-sufficient presentation of underlying evidence. In some cases, these credentials come from unique acquaintance with the claim in question, like eyewitness testimony or introspection. In other cases, these credentials consist of a reliable capacity to judge evidence, like technical or moral expertise.

It will be useful to distinguish two objects of testimony. Some testimony concerns _descriptive_ facts, like the extent of suffering experienced by self or others. Consider one example of such testimony in political disobedience. In 2020, during the second wave of COVID-19, restaurant owner Adam Skelly briefly became well-known in Canada for illegally and publicly keeping his restaurant open during public health closures.[21](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0022_note_21 "Link to note") He did so to pressure the government to allow small businesses like his own to remain open. Some of his protest was simply aimed at drawing attention to the closure of his business, as when he illegally removed the padlock placed on his restaurant door. Yet some of his protest seemed to involve testimony about how the closure impacted him and his family.[22](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0023_note_22 "Link to note")

Other testimony concerns _moral_ facts, like the injustice of a particular policy. In these cases, rather than drawing attention to a moral argument, drawing attention to descriptive evidence that a law is unjust, or giving descriptive testimony about that evidence, the practitioner hopes that their expressed assessment of the law is unjust by itself will give the listener additional reason to believe that it is unjust. Members of the civil rights movement often described their aims in terms of giving moral testimony. In “Letter from Birmingham Jail,” Martin Luther King Jr. compares himself to the Apostle Paul, in that his goal was to “carry the gospel of freedom beyond his hometown.”[23](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0024_note_23 "Link to note") It is fair to say that in the Gospels, Paul was not simply drawing attention to already appreciable facts or giving arguments; instead, he was giving testimony about what he understood to be revelation from God. It is striking that King suggests that he is doing something similar with respect to the injustice of segregation. While claims that moral expertise exists and that people would be entitled to rely on it as testimony are controversial, one possible source of such testimony is the unique epistemic standpoint that the oppressed have in virtue of being oppressed.[24](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0025_note_24 "Link to note")

It might seem surprising that someone practicing political disobedience would ever engage in testimony, when they could instead proceed by pointing out existing reasons, which does not assume anything about the practitioner's epistemic qualifications. But sometimes it is not possible to produce the reasons or arguments in support of a proposition, and even when that is possible, testimony can offer an additional reason to believe the proposition beyond evidence that has already been presented.[25](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0026_note_25 "Link to note") Such testimony seems especially appropriate when the moral matters are “rock-bottom” moral facts, which in turn can be helpful for showing others the extent of an injustice even when they already appreciate the descriptive facts about it.

Unlike the mechanism of drawing attention, the success of testimony is partially determined by epistemic factors. The same features that make testimony epistemically compelling also imply that civility facilitates testimonial political disobedience.

First, though one can in principle give testimony anonymously and without fair notice, testimony is much less effective under these conditions. The force of testimony depends significantly on one's credentials. If testimony is anonymous, it is difficult to evaluate those credentials. Moreover, people who engage in testimonial reason-giving should seek to be open to dialogue and questions. Rejecting opportunities for dialogue, or failing to answer questions about one's testimony, ordinarily diminishes the force of that testimony. Openness thus facilitates political disobedience as testimony. Notice that this doesn't holds true of drawing attention, since one does not need any credentials to draw attention to some issue or argument, and once the evidence has been pointed out, there is no need for further dialogue or questions.

Second, the acceptance of legal consequences facilitates testimony. Law-breaking in this mechanism is a cost to the protester that signals their certainty about the injustice of some law or policy, and so the acceptance of the legal consequences facilitates this mechanism. When someone is willing to pay a significant fine or even go to prison, they profoundly signal their certainty in their beliefs. As King writes in _Why We Can't Wait_, “When, for decades, you have been able to make a man compromise his manhood by threatening him with a cruel and unjust punishment, and when suddenly he turns upon you and says: “Punish me. I do not deserve it. But because I do not deserve it, I will accept it so that the world will know that I am right and you are wrong…”[26](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0027_note_26 "Link to note")

There is another way that the acceptance of legal consequences facilitates testimony in political disobedience. In general, people who engage in testimonial reason-giving should not evade, and in fact should even seek out, public forums that challenge and verify their testimony. This implies that people who practice political disobedience should seek out, if not exactly legal punishment, at least the opportunity to confront a court. As Piero Moraro notes, courts enable those who practice political disobedience to answer for their conduct before others.[27](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0028_note_27 "Link to note") This is particularly true when they are tried before a jury, so they can explain their reasoning to their peers, and when they face questioning by both the prosecution and defense. Following Martin C. Loesch, I grant that most legal systems presently do not give protesters a formal channel to discuss their reasons for protesting with the courts.[28](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0029_note_28 "Link to note") However, even general cross-examination gives them some opportunities to challenge and verify the force of their testimony.[29](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0030_note_29 "Link to note")

The connections I have drawn so far between testimony and civility apply equally to descriptive and moral testimony. However, there is a marked difference between descriptive and moral testimony with respect to nonviolence: moral testimony is usually less effective when it is violent. In general, people who engage in testimony should _avoid actions or expressions that would potentially discredit it_. Part of a person's credentials to engage in testimony is their track record in getting other relevant matters correct. For example, if I am to trust your answer to a complex arithmetic problem that I cannot reliably do in my own head, you should be accurate with respect to the simple arithmetic problems whose answers I can verify for myself. In the case of moral testimony, one's track record consists in part of one's previous and concurrent actions, and those who engage in moral testimony should thus avoid actions that break or appear to break other moral duties as much as possible. Even when violence is justified, it is very likely to risk this appearance. Notice how this is different from saying that violence in political disobedience is wrong simply because violence is wrong. It is the typically public character of political violence, the readiness of people to judge that it is morally wrong, and the difficulty of evaluating its legitimacy, that make violence particularly inadvisable for those who practice political disobedience with testimonial goals. As King writes, “I'm concerned about a better world. I'm concerned about justice; I'm concerned about brotherhood; I'm concerned about truth…And when one is concerned about that, he can never advocate violence.”[30](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0031_note_30 "Link to note") Altogether this suggests that nonviolence typically facilitates testimony.

Moreover, we often think that performing supererogatory actions provides positive evidence for moral expertise. Though it is possible that people may sometimes be morally required to defend themselves or others with violence, we often think it is supererogatory to intentionally forsake violence when such violence would be morally permitted but not required—the “turn the other cheek” ideal. Likewise, since it seems plausible that members of the civil rights movement would have been morally permitted (but not required) to respond to segregationist police violence with violence of their own, their decision to choose nonviolence was supererogatory, which in turn facilitated their moral testimony.

Altogether, testimonial effects through political disobedience are facilitated by openness, acceptance of the legal consequences, and avoidance of violence (at least when giving moral testimony).

## VI. TRIGGERING REASON-GIVING

In many cases, those who practice political disobedience may not expect that epistemically guiding their audience through drawing attention to reasons or testimony will give them sufficient reason to act as hoped. In those cases, they may wish to pursue a different mechanism, one that uses law-breaking to create _new_ reasons for its audience to act against the law or policy in question.

One general way in which actions create new reasons is through what David Enoch terms “triggering reason-giving.”[31](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0032_note_31 "Link to note") In general, triggering reason-giving occurs when an action triggers another person's conditional reason. This conditional reason is a reason to perform some specified action if another person performs some other action. These conditional reasons serve to succinctly state how it is possible to change someone's reasons by manipulating the underlying circumstances that generate those reasons either causally or constitutively. We see triggering reason-giving at work in many cases of political disobedience. Consider two initial examples. First, in a campaign of blowing up pipelines may trigger a voter or legislator's existing conditional reason to {change an environmental policy, if someone blows up a series of pipelines}, a reason they possess since blowing up the pipelines would make the environmental policy economically unsustainable.[32](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0033_note_32 "Link to note") Second, political disobedience may work through what is called the “radical flank effect,” in which an intervention on behalf of a radical option may increase support for a less radical (but still previously politically unfeasible) alternative to it, like how militant political disobedience by the Black Panther Party and others is sometimes thought to have pushed people to support the agenda of moderate organizations like the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.[33](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0034_note_33 "Link to note") The radical flank effect might be understood as triggering the conditional reason of legislators and voters {to vote for a less radical alternative, if an intervention on behalf of a radical option occurs}.

What role does civility play when political disobedience is intended to give someone new reason to act by triggering their conditional reason? We can only answer this question on a case-by-case basis, because the answer will depend entirely on the specific conditional reason and specific triggering action in question.[34](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0035_note_34 "Link to note") In the pipeline case, violence is partly constitutive of the triggering action.[35](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0036_note_35 "Link to note") Moreover, in order to facilitate a sustained campaign of blowing up pipelines, it is better to be anonymous, to not give fair notice, and to not accept the legal consequences of doing so. In contrast, in the radical flank effect, violence is typically not necessary to count as performing the triggering action. Nonetheless, violence would likely facilitate achieving its intended effect, since the added fear of violence would likely drive people toward supporting the more moderate option. We might make the same point about anonymity, fair notice, and accepting the legal consequences.

It is difficult to make universal claims that cover the whole space of conditional reasons, but these examples help to motivate two rough generalizations. First, as we have seen, triggering reason-giving proceeds by manipulating a person's circumstances in a way that changes their reasons. Very roughly, the more drastic that manipulation, the more it will tend to change their reasons. Thus, more drastic means like violence will tend to better facilitate triggering reason-giving. Second, when action is secretive and anonymous, and when the protesters do not submit to the legal consequences of their protest, it is more difficult to stop them from performing the action in question in the first place. Thus, avoiding openness and the acceptance of legal consequences will tend to facilitate the triggering of conditional reasons.

However, these generalizations have many exceptions. There are at least some cases of triggering reason-giving in which civility is almost always facilitative on balance and in fact even necessary. To take one example, consider the case in which the mechanism of political disobedience relies on the prospect of arrest and jail. This might occur when thousands of well-coordinated protesters are arrested for breaking the law, which in turn would overwhelm the justice system, which can trigger a reason for legislators or voters to accede to their demands. In this example, openness and the acceptance of legal punishment are necessary for the mechanism to succeed, and arguably nonviolence is usually on balance facilitative, since people are typically much less reluctant to keep violent protesters in jail.

## VII. CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE AND SPEECH ACTS

The mechanisms discussed so far roughly reflect Ronald Dworkin's influential classification of political disobedience into persuasive and non-persuasive forms. Persuasive political disobedience “hopes to force the majority to listen to arguments against its program, in the expectation that the majority will then change its mind and disapprove of that program,” which seems tantamount to drawing attention to an argument.[36](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0037_note_36 "Link to note") (This might include testimony as well, if we understand “argument” in a very broad way.) Non-persuasive political disobedience, in contrast, “aims not to change the majority's mind, but to increase the cost of pursuing the program the majority still favors, in the hope that the majority will find the new cost unacceptably high,” which covers many cases of triggering reason-giving.[37](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0038_note_37 "Link to note")

Dworkin's classification was intended to be exhaustive, yet he (and many others) fail to notice a wide range of political disobedience that does not neatly fit into either category.[38](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0039_note_38 "Link to note") Political disobedience is also sometimes a way of expressing a _speech act_ in the Austinian sense, particularly speech acts intended to have perlocutionary effects on what people have reason to believe or do, in the manner of demands or requests. When political disobedience expresses such a speech act, it does not involve making arguments, yet does not change the cost of a law or policy either. It can bring new reasons into existence without making any significant material changes to the world.[39](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0040_note_39 "Link to note")

In _How To Do Things with Words_, J. L. Austin describes the different ways in which such speech acts may fail, which he describes as breaches of “felicity conditions” or “infelicities” for short.[40](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0041_note_40 "Link to note") Sometimes, when certain conditions are not met, a speech act may “misfire” and fail to count as a speech act of the relevant type at all.[41](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0042_note_41 "Link to note") Other times, a speech act may be “abused” and thus be “hollow,” for instance in the case of an insincere promise. We might add to Austin's analysis that there are also facts about how one performs many speech acts that affect their degree of success in virtue of being better or worse ways of performing these speech acts, even when they don't count as a misfire or abuse: call these _internal norms_ of these speech acts.[42](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0043_note_42 "Link to note") These internal norms can be causal or constitutive conditions on any part of the process of a mechanism. They should be distinguished, however, from external causal conditions that may prevent or render possible the making of speech acts, since one can say, for example, “That demand should give its audience reason to act, but it was a shame that no one was listening.” They should also be distinguished from social conventions (e.g., of politeness) about how speech acts should be expressed, since one can say, for example, “That demand should give people reason to act, but it's a shame that it was stated so impolitely.”

In the rest of this paper, I will argue that political disobedience often serves to express two speech acts: demands and requests.[43](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0044_note_43 "Link to note") The internal norms of those speech acts imply that civility is important for their success, albeit to varying degrees.

## VIII. DEMANDS

To the extent that philosophers have understood political disobedience as expressing a speech act, they have typically focused on the cases in which it expresses demands.[44](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0045_note_44 "Link to note") Following Stephen Darwall, I will use “demand” in a somewhat narrow way that excludes threats and instead involves the creation of new reasons. A mugger's demand for money is not a demand in the sense I mean here. Demands are rooted in the rights of the person making the demand and, despite originating in the will of the demanding party, are nevertheless consistent with their target's autonomy. The reason is created directly by means of speech act rather than changing someone's material circumstances. Consider Darwall's example of a person who is stepping on another person's foot without their permission and causing them pain.[45](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0046_note_45 "Link to note") It seems clear that when the latter person says, “Get off of my foot!,” they are not just pointing to an existing reason (like their pain or the injustice of having their foot stepped upon). Their demand is also an expression of their will and authority to give their addressee _additional_, non-discretionary reason to remove their foot, one rooted in their right to their body and their right to not have pain arbitrarily inflected on them.

In performing political disobedience, why choose to use a demand rather than some other mechanism? First, as with triggering conditional reasons, when someone makes a valid demand, they give their audience _additional_ reason to perform as demanded, even when there was already independent reason to conform to it, and moreover a strong and often binding one. Thus, if the audience of political disobedience initially did not see themselves as having sufficient reason to vote against some law, the demand may shift the balance of reasons. Second, anyone can attempt to make a demand, so it is a means of influence that is accessible to people who are not positioned to trigger relevant conditional reasons. Finally, the making of demands is closely connected to the assertion and recognition of respect. To make a valid demand and then have that demand acknowledged in the appropriate way by its target affirms respect for self and other in a way not achieved by pointing out an existing reason or triggering a conditional reason.

It will be useful to distinguish between two kinds of demands. In the first, content-dependent kind of demand, the validity of that demand is linked to the validity or correctness of what the demand is telling its audience to do. For example, if one person demands, “Stop talking!” when their addressee was having a conversation at an appropriate volume, their demand would have no normative effect, because no one has a right to complete silence in most public spaces. In contrast, the second, more content-independent sense of demand has more in common with a command, insofar as its force is independent of the content of what is being demanded.

A very large number of cases of political disobedience, including paradigmatic cases like the civil rights movement, serve at least in part to express this first, content-dependent kind of demand, where the validity of the demand is to be judged against an independent standard of justice. When one has standing to do so, one can demand that others take steps against injustices, particularly (but not only) when that standing comes from being affected by those injustices. In these cases, the audience will likely already have reason to act against the unjust law, and the valid demand will give a further, new will-dependent reason to act against it. Interpreting the Black Lives Matter movement, Michael Randall Barnes suggests that “The call of ‘Black lives matter’ is not put forth as a claim to be contested, as if it were a premise in an argument in a seminar room.”[46](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0047_note_46 "Link to note") Instead, “Black Lives Matter” seems to serve as a demand to end unjust practices. King, too, uses the language of demands, and acknowledges their content-dependence when he writes, “We will win our freedom because the sacred heritage of our nation and the eternal will of God are embodied in our echoing demands.”[47](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0048_note_47 "Link to note")

In contrast, political disobedience that makes content-independent demands appears to be much rarer. It seems difficult to see how someone practicing political disobedience would ever be able to validly demand that others vote differently, independently of the justice or other merits of the legislation under scrutiny. Despite this presumption against content-independent demands, I think that one increasingly prominent form of political disobedience is intended to make precisely this kind of demand. This is political disobedience by persistent minorities under majority rule. Following Arash Abizadeh, I will describe a persistent majority a group whose members have preferences that are “positively correlated—and negatively correlated with those of a persistent majority—over a broad range of issues over time.”[48](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0049_note_48 "Link to note") Even when persistent minorities have the same rights as the majority and are otherwise treated generally justly by the law, they may often feel, correctly or not, that they are treated unfairly under majority rule. I will now suggest that some of their political disobedience is intended to express their demands that others vote in a way to compensate them for their persistent disadvantage under majority rule—a content-independent demand.

Consider the 2022 convoy protests in Canada. For weeks, truckers illegally occupied key intersections in Ottawa and blared their horns in a way that made the city almost unbearable to live in. The protests were initially sparked by a single issue: the Canadian Parliament passed legislation that prevented unvaccinated truck drivers from traveling across the Canada-US border, leaving them with the choice of getting vaccinated or losing their jobs. This legislation had the support of all the major parties in Parliament but was hated by some fraction of Canadians. These protests soon became a magnet for a large range of related positions that were not represented by any major political party, but which were typically held by the same small group of people, perhaps 5–10 percent of the population. A quick survey of photographs of the protests readily reveals placards like “We are the fringe,” “We the fringe,” and “We are Canadians.” Another example is the Gilet Jaune protest movement in France, which began as a weekly protest about fuel prices but grew to express broader discontent with the choice of positions represented in mainstream French politics, one that drew in many people who were not previously politically engaged. One representative placard reads “Notre avis compte aussi” (Our opinions also count!).[49](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0050_note_49 "Link to note") French president Emmanuel Macron, in responding to the petition raised by the protesters, acknowledged the state of “democratic malaise” in France.[50](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0051_note_50 "Link to note")

How should we understand the intended force of these illegal protests? I think that their description of themselves as “fringe” tells us that they saw themselves as a bloc that did not enjoy effective or proportionate political representation. Despite this, they gave little indication that they objected to the institution of majority rule itself. Instead, I suggest that they believed that their status as persistent minorities violated their right to equal political representation, which in turn served as a basis for making content-independent demands on others to vote in line with their wishes. These demands could not plausibly be intended to be decisive for all voters on all issues, but it seems that they are intended to tilt the balance of reasons for some voters at least some of the time or to provide currently seated legislators with additional reason to take their preferences into account in voting on legislation. This would allow their views to play some role in the law that is ultimately enacted.

It would require a much deeper engagement with democratic theory to assess whether the convoy protesters and the Gilet Jaunes are in fact persistent minorities, let alone whether such demands by persistent minorities are ever valid, but my only aim here has been to make sense of how political disobedience could be _intended_ to serve as a vehicle for these demands. To conclude this section, I will argue that the norms governing demands have implications for the role of civility in political disobedience that expresses them.

Note first that the recipients of demands must be able to evaluate the standing or credentials of the person issuing the demand in order to determine whether it is reason-giving for them, and anonymity is ordinarily a substantial (though not insurmountable) obstacle to doing so. Moreover, unlike in the case of testimony, avoiding anonymity tends to enhance the _dialogical_ power of demands. If I step on someone's foot, and they are disguised by a mask, of course they can still make a quite effective demand that I remove my foot from their foot. Yet the dialogical character of their demand would be improved if they removed their mask and confronted me directly and personally with their demand. The demand of someone who intentionally dons a mask, when they were not disguised before, seems dialogically even weaker than this. I take it that these points are not merely psychological or sociological claims about how people respond to demands but are instead linked closely to the moral sentiments around demands. Correspondingly, it is better to avoid anonymity when one intends to use political disobedience to create reasons by addressing valid demands.

Second, demands are typically less effective as demands when they do not leave their audience appropriate time to think about how to respond to them, since doing otherwise risks having the recipient respond to them in a way that does not actually acknowledge the speaker's authority to make the demand. Though it is sometimes necessary to make demands suddenly, like in the foot stepping case, and it is frequently appropriate to insist that the audience of a demand make up their mind more quickly, it is against the spirit of a demand to use suddenness as a _means_ for getting someone to acquiesce to it. One who does so may indeed still change their audience's behavior, but only because the audience was confused or even acting against what they thought they had reason to do, not because the speaker was able to generate a new, will-dependent reason and have their audience act according to it. Thus, providing fair notice tends to facilitate political disobedience in addressing demands.

Third, there is an inherent tension between making a demand and _violence towards the target of the demand_.[51](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0052_note_51 "Link to note") In most cases when such violence accompanies a demand, the violence can reasonably be interpreted as a coercive threat, and that coercive threat crowds out both the effect of the demand and the prospect that it will be accepted in a way that recognizes the authority of the speaker to make the demand. Consider a variation of Darwall's foot-stepping case: suppose now that instead of making a demand to their tormenter, they credibly threaten to break their arm. If so, the tormenter now has two reasons to remove their foot: a moral reason and a reason coming from the threat. In this case, once we add the demand back into the equation, on top of the threat, I doubt that it would add a _third_ reason to remove the foot. And even if they did, it would be unclear whether they were responding to the threat or the demand.

Even when the listener can be certain that the initial act of violence will not be followed by further violence, there is another reason that violence is in tension with the character of a demand. It will help to first note a more straightforward case of what I have in mind: a _slur_ cannot serve as a vehicle for a demand in the sense considered here. A slur shows deep disrespect for its target and dehumanizes them, and because of that, any attempt to express a demand using a slur would backfire. While not to the same degree, I think we may make an analogous point about violence: violence typically shows disrespect for its targets' autonomy and their capacity to consider a matter on the basis of independent reasons. It treats them as a thing rather than a person.[52](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0053_note_52 "Link to note") This is perhaps Rawls's intended meaning when he writes that “to engage in violent acts likely to injure and to hurt is incompatible with civil disobedience as a mode of address.”[53](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0054_note_53 "Link to note") While there is some sense in which it is possible to violently or harmfully “address” another person, his remark is much more plausible if we interpret him as saying that any attempt to violently address _demands_ to another person would backfire.[54](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0055_note_54 "Link to note")

Overall, we can say at a minimum that nonviolence tends to facilitate political disobedience to address demands and may even approach a necessary condition for doing so. That said, there is a narrow role for violence in this vicinity: it can often be an effective means of _calling attention_ to a demand that has been ignored. For example, if I make a valid demand of my listener, and they refuse to acknowledge it at all, it could be appropriate for me to slap them.[55](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0056_note_55 "Link to note") But even here I think it is important to proceed with caution. Once the target is fully paying attention, the slap begins to look more like a credible threat and interferes with the demand.

Finally, I find little in the internal norms of demands that corresponds to _a need to accept legal consequences_. The force of a demand does not seem to be _enhanced_ by paying the price of accepting legal consequences, since even if there are dialogical requirements that govern how the demand should be addressed, the force of a demand is not a function of the intensity of the wishes (expressed or otherwise) of the person making it. If I have a right that you do not step on my foot, I don't have to work to show you how badly I want you to remove your foot—I can just insist on it. Nor are demands typically _undermined_ by a failure to accept legal consequences. In general, it seems there are relatively few actions that the person whose foot is being stepped upon could perform that would undermine their right to make an effective demand that their listener remove their foot. In fact, even if they break a moral duty, that does not ordinarily deprive them of their standing to make demands about the infringement of their moral rights or the moral rights of others. So even if people making demands through political disobedience do not accept the legal consequences of doing so, I think that the force of their demands is retained. (As we will see, this is one respect in which demands and requests differ.)

## IX. REQUESTS

I have understood demands as involving a _right_ to create a non-discretionary reason for another person. For example, if you are stepping on my foot, my valid demand that you stop is rooted in my bodily and other rights. Often, however, the protesting party might desire to give its audience new reasons even when they cannot invoke any right, either because they do not have that right, or because they doubt that it will be acknowledged that they have it. In these cases, the protesters may instead use political disobedience to express _requests_.

A request involves an attempt to give someone a new and discretionary reason to perform some action. Micha Gläser has identified several features that requests plausibly possess. First, they can themselves be reasons for action. They do not simply serve to point out existing reasons that speak in favor of doing what is requested; someone could in principle draw attention to their need without requesting that someone assist them. Requests can themselves serve as reasons to do what is requested, independent of arguments or reasons that speak in favor of the content of the request.[56](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0057_note_56 "Link to note") (As Elizabeth Bennet puts the point to Fitzwilliam Darcy in _Pride and Prejudice_, “A regard for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason one into it.”[57](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0058_note_57 "Link to note")) Second, unlike a valid demand, the recipient of a request has discretion over whether to accept or decline a request.[58](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0059_note_58 "Link to note") Third, while the audience has discretion whether to accept or decline a request, ordinarily the request-maker would be entitled to be resentful if the audience declined a request without good reason, in proportion to the strength of the relationship between them.

I claim that political disobedience sometimes serves to express requests concerning the political activity of fellow citizens. Perhaps the clearest example is the political disobedience of children, who are unable to vote and thus must rely on adults to politically represent them. Consider the way that Greta Thunberg violated truancy laws to protest climate change, or the school walkouts led by March For Our Lives to change gun laws in response to school shootings.[59](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0060_note_59 "Link to note") Despite there being strong arguments that their rights were infringed by climate change and gun violence, the protesters might reasonably anticipate that their audiences would not recognize demands rooted in those rights—in part because their rights concern matters of deep public disagreement, and in part because it might not seem appropriate for children to make political demands on the basis of those rights. Indeed, one important hint that they are not invoking these rights is that they instead explicitly appeal to their status as children—they are saying, “it's _because_ we are children that you should listen to us.” Thus, I think we should see Thunberg and March For Our Lives as making particularly powerful requests about the political activity of adults in their societies. Other examples of political disobedience that express strong requests include illegal strikes protesting harsh job conditions and illegal protests by fishers and hunters against environmental harvesting quotas when they earn their livelihoods from those industries. While these protests undoubtedly invoke other mechanisms as well, they also express urgent requests that others respond to their difficulties with political action, at least in the latter case as long as their law-breaking does not involve illegally continuing to harvest those resources.[60](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0061_note_60 "Link to note")

It may sound strange to say that these cases count as “requests” given their forcefulness. Yet requests often reach such intensity that we have another name for them: _pleas_.[61](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0062_note_61 "Link to note") Note also that people can often double down on a request in a more forceful form if that request is initially declined without wronging their addressee. After their request is initially declined, the requester might follow up by saying, “Hey, I _really_ need this from you,” accompanied by some kind of gesture to drive home the point, perhaps breaking some positional duty in the relationship.[62](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0063_note_62 "Link to note") This is distinct from simply calling attention to the original request, for it increases the force of the request. Note also that when someone makes a second, more forceful request, the previously described requirements that apply to the requester and his audience seem to apply more strongly than before. The requester must have a stronger reason for making the request, it must be clearer that they cannot fulfill it themselves, and the audience would be expected to present a more compelling explanation for refusing it, and greater resentment would be entitled in case of breaches of these conditions.

In the rest of this section, I will argue that the earlier arguments that connected demands and civility are even stronger when applied to requests. Note that I will interpret the facilitative conditions of request more broadly to include not only those conditions that increase the strength or likelihood of the discretionary reason, but also those conditions that increase the burden on the listener to accept the request by increasing the degree of resentment that the speaker would be entitled to feel upon the decline of that request.

First, the earlier arguments that openness facilitates demands apply even more strongly to requests. Avoiding anonymity greatly assists the listener in evaluating the requester's credentials (which are typically even more specific to the individual than with demands). It is also important dialogically, and unlike with demands, it is also important for the sake of a future reciprocal response. Likewise, it is important for those who make requests to give time to their audience to consider the requests. This is both important for giving their audience time to evaluate their credentials, but also important to show respect for the audience's autonomy, for their right to consider the request and accept or decline it on the basis of reasons. Fair notice, then, facilitates political disobedience when it serves to make a request.

Second, if a request were expressed through violence, it would appear to be a threat rather than a request. When a panhandler asks someone for money, but threateningly kicks a trash can at the same time, it is more natural to interpret their alleged request as a threat rather than a demand in the sense considered above. Violence undermines request-making in the same way that it undermines demand-making.

Unlike demands, when political disobedience expresses a request, this is facilitated by the acceptance of legal consequences or undermined by a failure to do so. At some minimal level, while anyone can make a request of another person and are perhaps even entitled to have it heard out, the reason-giving power of a request is enormously dependent upon the standing that the requester has in their relationship with the requestee. Recall my earlier claim that breaking a positional duty within a relationship can be one way of insisting on a request that has been previously declined. Ordinarily when someone doubles down on a request in this way, they are required to break as few positional duties as necessary to do so. This includes the second-order duty to be accountable for the breaking of positional duties and to compensate the other party for those breaches. Indeed, if someone were to break a positional duty as a means of doubling down on a request, but at the same time insist that they would not later be accountable for the breaking of that positional duty, it seems clear that that would substantially or even entirely diminish the force of the request.

To see how this might extend to political disobedience, we must specify the salient relationship between the disobedient person and their audience to determine the relevant positional duties that hold between them. When political disobedience is intended as a request or plea, it is typically addressed at other people _qua_ fellow citizen. In the relationship of fellow citizen, the relevant set of positional duties are legal duties and the second-order duties to be accountable to legal punishment for breach of those duties. Notice that this does not require that these duties have any moral weight, just that they be positional duties that people in a relationship hold one another accountable for performing.[63](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0064_note_63 "Link to note") Thus there is some additional obligation to avoid breaking this duty when one engages in political disobedience. I grant that this does not translate into the complete acceptance of legal consequences advocated by King and Gandhi, for someone who has doubled down on a request and broken a positional duty does not need to put themselves fully at the mercy of their friend's judgment about the appropriateness and remedies for breaking the positional duty—they remain partners in determining the appropriateness of their actions. If so, it seems that people who practice political disobedience that is intended to realize requests must submit themselves to legal consequences but may appeal their case, take plea bargains, and so on.

Altogether, we can see that civility is equally or even more important when political disobedience expresses a request than when it expresses a demand. Nonviolence is strongly facilitative (and perhaps necessary) for political disobedience when it proceeds by expressing a request. Moreover, openness and the acceptance of legal consequences are quite strong facilitative conditions: they strongly tend to increase the force of the request.

## X. CONCLUSION

In this paper, I have provided a typology of five mechanisms by which political disobedience addresses or changes the reasons of its audience. Two of these mechanisms—drawing attention and triggering conditional reasons—are already very well-known, and we have seen that civility plays a limited role in facilitating these mechanisms. Three of these mechanisms—testimony, demands and requests—are much less well-known, and we have seen that civility tends to facilitate these mechanisms in a surprisingly diverse range of ways.

One might be tempted to conclude that if my argument is sound, it leaves civility in a somewhat improved position vis-à-vis its skeptics. However, I would reject even this limited implication for civility until more progress has been made on three related questions. First, though I have shown that civility facilitates some of the mechanisms by which political disobedience proceeds, how often does it facilitate each of those mechanisms _on balance_, particularly given the risk that even if it contributes to reason-giving force, it might backfire for empirical reasons (like causing the arrest of the participants)? Second, how should we view the relative importance of (i) the proximate role of civility in affecting people's reasons, (ii) its distal role in affecting people's actions (and not just their reasons), and (iii) its direct contribution to the permissibility of political disobedience?[64](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/papa.12258?campaign=wolearlyview#papa12258-note-0065_note_64 "Link to note") Third, what is the comparative ubiquity and permissibility of the mechanisms discussed here? I believe that these questions are fruitful topics for future investigation.

## NOTES ON THE CONTRIBUTOR

Steve Coyne is an Assistant Professor of Philosophy and Computer Science (Teaching Stream, CLTA) at the University of Toronto. His research explores how people can give one another reasons, particularly in the political context, as well as ethical questions in computing and artificial intelligence.
